THE CODE OF GLENNVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2005 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: June 7, 2005 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GLENNVILLE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jean Bridges   
Mayor 
____________ 
Willie O. Bland   
Randy King   
Gail Rogers   
Dennis H. Strickland   
City Council 
____________ 
Hugh McCullough 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Teresa Pazderski 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GLENNVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Chris Roessler 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dorothy Berry 
Dennis Strickland 
Tammy Waters 
Bernie Weaver 
City Council 
____________ 
Amy Murray 
City Manager 
____________ 
Hugh McCullough 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Brenda Ellison 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Glennville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the ordinances included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of David G. Poucher, Code Attorney, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Hugh McCullough for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Glennville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Glennville, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Glennville, Georgia. 2005. 
ORDINANCE NO. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF GLENNVILLE, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GLENNVILLE, GEORGIA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Glennville, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 62, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 3, 2004, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment not exceeding six months. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 3, 2004, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Approved ____________ this 7 day of June , 2005 . 
By: 

ATTEST: 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the mayor and council of Glennville, Georgia, held on the 7 day of June, 2005. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this City of Glennville, Georgia Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED 
AN ACT [506] 
To provide a new charter for the City of Glennville; to provide for boundaries and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, election management, terms, vacancies, compensation, expenses, qualifications, prohibitions, conflicts of interest, and suspension and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for oaths, organization, meetings, quorum, voting, rules, and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for a mayor and mayor pro tempore and certain duties, powers, and other matters relative thereto; to provide for administrative affairs and responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city manager, city attorney, a city clerk, and other personnel and duties, powers, and other matters relating thereto; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof and other matters relative to those judges; to provide for the court's jurisdiction, powers, practices, and procedures; to provide for the right of certiorari; to provide for elections; to provide for taxation, licenses, fees, and collection of delinquent taxes and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for auditing, accounting, budgeting, and appropriations; to provide for city contracts and purchasing; to provide for the conveyance of property and interests therein; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for prior ordinances and rules, pending matters, and existing personnel; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to provide a specific repealer; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city as set forth by 2018 Ga. Laws Act No. 506. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, as appears in the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Name and corporate powers. 
(a)  The City of Glennville, heretofore incorporated under the laws of Georgia, shall, from and after the passage of this Act, be known by the corporate name of the "City of Glennville," and by that name be and is hereby invested with all the rights, powers, and privileges incident to municipal corporations in this state. 
(b)  The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. 
(c)  The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
(d)  All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city and its officers, agencies, and employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
(e)  The powers of the city shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, fire safety, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of storm water and establishment of a storm-water utility, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, trash collection and disposal, and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(15)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(16)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(17)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(18)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(19)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, storm-water management, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(20)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(21)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(22)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(23)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(24)  Public hazards: removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(25)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(26)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(27)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on, public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(28)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(29)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan and other employee benefit plans and programs for officers and employees of the city; 
(30)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(31)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(32)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers and the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials; the use of lighting and heating equipment; and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; to license and tax professional fortunetelling, palmistry, and massage parlors; and to restrict adult bookstores to certain areas; 
(33)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(34)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(35)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(36)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed, to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(37)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(38)  Water and sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; to levy a fee, charge, or water tax as necessary to ensure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of wells, storage tanks, and a water system and to levy on those to whom water services are made available a water service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the water system; to provide for manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a water connection fee; and 
(39)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 2. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City of Glennville shall be as follows: Beginning at the center of Barnard Street at the point where Caswell Street intersects said Barnard Street and extending three-fourths of one mile in every direction from said central point, making a complete circle. The map of the corporate limits of the City of Glennville shall be available for public view inside city hall. 
Sec. 2A. - Added territory. 
In addition to that territory presently embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Glennville pursuant to Section 2 of this charter, the limits of such city shall also embrace all that territory and land lying and being in the 1432nd G.M. District of Tattnall County, Georgia, same adjoining and completely surrounding, but not including, the land presently within the city limits of the City of Glennville, Georgia, and being more particularly described on the perimeter as follows: Beginning at a point 10,875.5 feet from a line N 57° 21' W from the center of the intersection of Caswell and Barnard Streets in the City of Glennville, Georgia; thence running in a straight line N 84° 46' E 12,400 feet to a point; thence running in a straight line S 21° 19' E 12,753 to a point; thence running in a straight line S 77° 30' W 11,650 feet to a point; thence running in a straight line N 32° 30' W 11,137 feet to a point; thence running in a straight line N 5° 30' E 3,897 feet to the point of beginning; the interior boundary lines of said territory to be annexed as described above being the present city limits of said City of Glennville; said territory and land being shown on a plat thereof prepared on January 29, 1970, by Joe P. Davis, Georgia Registered Surveyor No. 1436, for the City of Glennville, Georgia. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter to the contrary, the property and all owners thereof located within the territory added to the corporate limits of the City of Glennville by this section shall not be subject to any ad valorem taxation until the City of Glennville shall provide within said territory essentially equivalent services as are enjoyed by the residents and property owners of that territory set forth in Section 2 of this Act. 
Sec. 2B. - Added territory (Recreation Park). 
In addition to any other territory lying within the corporate limits of the City of Glennville, such corporate limits shall also include the following: All that certain tract or parcel of land, situate, lying and being in the 1432nd G. M. District of Tattnall County, Georgia, containing 53.6 acres of land and bounded as follows: North by lands of Carlyle Harrison, East by land of the City of Glennville, South by lands of T. K. F. Farms, Inc,. and West by lands of T. K. F. Farms, Inc., and Carlyle Harrison. Survey begins at iron spike, run of branch (North end of property) at land that joins Carlyle Harrison. S72° 00' E, 445.0 feet; thence S 19° 00'E, 304.3 feet; NE 0° 00'E, 390.1 feet; thence N65° 00'E, 347.8 feet; thence SE 1° 35'E, 83.2 feet; thence S65° 37'W, 780.9 feet; thence S4° 36'E, 965.2 feet; thence W79° 44'W, 2525.0 feet; thence N 13° 26'E, 205.0 feet; thence N29° 13'E, 147.5 feet; thence N74° 13'E, 925.0 feet; thence N56° 32'E, 992.1 feet to beginning of survey. 
Sec. 2C. - Added territory (Pond, Recreation Park). 
In addition to any territory lying within the corporate limits of the City of Glennville, such corporate limits shall also include the following: All that certain tract or parcel of land, situate, lying and being in the 1432nd G. M. District of Tattnall County, Georgia, containing 9.48 acres, more or less, and bounded as follows: Northerly by lands of A.C. Harrison, Easterly and North-Easterly by lands of A. C. Harrison; Easterly and Southeasterly by lands of the City of Glennville, upon which is located Glennville Recreation Center and Westerly by a county unpaved road. Beginning at the run of a branch on the eastern edge of a county unpaved road where the Southern boundary line of the lands herein and the Western boundary line of the lands of the City of Glennville adjoin a county unpaved road, thence along the Eastern edge of said county unpaved road N 24° 49' E for a distance of 206 feet, thence N 16° 17' E for a distance of 195.8 feet, thence S 75° 13' E for a distance of 380.4 feet, thence N 49 44' E for a distance of 621.4 feet, thence N 37° 36' E for a distance of 860.9 feet, thence S 37° 53' E for a distance of 339 feet to the run of a creek, thence S 54° 25' W [for] a distance of 41.7 feet to the center of an earthen dam, thence S 49° 12' W for a distance of 1261.7 feet, thence N 26° 4' W for a distance of 21.6 feet, thence S 50° 40' W for a distance of 154.2 feet, thence N. 65° 20' W for a distance of 54.7 feet, thence S 70° 10' W for a distance of 78.3 feet, thence S 68° 39' W for a distance of 98.1 feet, thence S 62° 22' W for a distance of 171.9 feet, thence S 71° 57' W for a distance of 96.6 feet, thence S 42° 56' W for a distance of 32.3 feet, thence N 89° 4' W for a distance of 113 feet, to the point of beginning. 
Sec. 2D. - Added territory (Oak Ridge Subdivision). 
In addition to any territory lying within the corporate limits of the City of Glennville, such corporate limits shall also include the following: All that certain tract or parcel of land, situate, lying, and being in the 1432nd G. M. District of Tattnall County, Georgia, containing 22.99 acres, more or less, and bounded as follows: North by other lands of Jack L. Rogers and City of Glennville; Southeast by lands of Burney An Mann Scales; and Westerly by lands of Ms. Corene Smith and lands of N. R. Griffin Estate. Beginning at an iron spike on East end of property along City of Glennville Limits and running S37° 23'W for a distance of 1899.11 feet, thence N15° 40' W for a distance of 591.97 feet, thence N08° 33' W for a distance of 652.91 feet to City of Glennville Limits. Beginning back at point of survey S78° 30'40" W for a distance of 1438.94 feet running along City of Glennville Limits to an iron spike. 
Sec. 2E. - Added territory (Smith State Prison). 
In addition to any territory lying within the corporate limits of the City of Glennville, such corporate limits shall also include the following: All that certain tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in the 1700th G.M. District of Tattnall County, Georgia, containing 243.834 acres, more or less, and bounded as follows: North by lands of Dr. J. Troy Rahn, lands of Larry Banks, and lands of the Luther Durrence Estate; East by the north prong of Beards Creek which separates this tract of land from lands now or formerly of Jimmy Rockmore and lands of the Wallace Knight Estate; South by the south prong of Beards Creek, lands of Freddie Kicklighter, and by lands of ITT Rayonier; and West by lands of Dr. J. Troy Rahn. BEGINNING on the eastern edge of U.S. Highway 301 where the northwesterly boundary line of Freddie Kicklighter adjoins the land herein described, said point being a distance of 5,650 feet along the eastern edge of U.S. Highway 301 from the existing city limits of the City of Glennville; THENCE, S 70° 50.46' E a distance of 2,188.85 feet along the lands of Freddie Kicklighter; THENCE, S 3° 24' W a distance of 693 feet along the lands of Freddie Kicklighter to the run of the south prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, S 58° 46' E a distance of 392.48 feet in the south prong of Beards Creek; THENCE S 76° 9.22' E a distance of 453.15 feet in the south prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 9° 19' E a distance of 390.19 feet from the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 48° 3' W a distance of 215.34 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE N 5° 20' E a distance of 357.21 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 36° 27' W a distance of 549.37 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 3° 52' E a distance of 384.81 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 72° 17' E a distance of 354.69 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE N 68° 19' E a distance of 719.76 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 3° 4' E a distance of 223.35 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 12° 0' E a distance of 327.48 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE N 23° 54' E a distance of 140.40 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 16° 10' W a distance of 374.20 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 32° 55' W a distance of 290 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 56° 44' E a distance of 104.90 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 36° 16' W a distance of 134.20 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, N 30° 16' W a distance of 168.64 feet in the north prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, S 67° 18' W a distance of 1,484 feet along the lands of the Luther Durrence Estate; THENCE, N 7° 58.47' W a distance of 2,638.72 feet along the lands of the Luther Durrence Estate; THENCE, S 79° 58.15' W a distance of 236.48 feet along the lands of Larry Banks; THENCE S 4° 53.44' W a distance of 902.42 feet along the lands of Larry Banks; THENCE, S 5° 32.25' W a distance of 828.79 feet along the lands of Larry Banks; THENCE, N 83° 53.34' W a distance of 2,214.80 feet along the lands of Larry Banks; THENCE, S 31° 43.55' W a distance of 495.46 feet along the lands of Dr. J. Troy Rahn; THENCE, N 72° 50.52' W a distance of 1,578.34 feet along the lands of Dr. J. Troy Rahn; THENCE, S 32° 15' W a distance of 281.24 feet along the lands of Dr. J. Trov Rahn to the run of the south prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, S 60° 31.52' W a distance of 206.27 feet in the run of the south prong of Beards Creek; THENCE, S 83° 9.16' E a distance of 1,548.92 feet along the lands of ITT Rayonier; THENCE, N 88° 54.56' E a distance of 385.88 feet along the lands of ITT Rayonier; THENCE, S 49° 53.08' E a distance of 282.56 feet along the lands of ITT Rayonier; THENCE, S 74° 21.31' E a distance of 225.47 feet along the lands of ITT Rayonier; THENCE S 77° 36.07' E a distance of 251.30 feet along the lands of ITT Rayonier; THENCE, S 49° 28.33' E a distance of 125.85 feet along the lands of ITT Rayonier; THENCE S 14° 59.57' E a distance of 285.19 feet along the lands of ITT Rayonier; THENCE, S 12° 34.22' W a distance of 123.15 feet along the lands of ITT Rayonier, THENCE, S 63° 32.54' E a distance of 569.35 feet along the lands of ITT Rayonier and traversing U.S. Highway 301 to the eastern edge of U.S. Highway 301; THENCE, S 14° 10.01' W a distance of 693.16 feet along the eastern edge of U.S. Highway 301; THENCE, S 17° 34.31' W a distance of 191.56 feet along the eastern edge of U.S. Highway 301 to the point of BEGINNING. 
Sec. 2F. - Added territory (Veterans Cemetery). 
In addition to any territory lying within the corporate limits of the City of Glennville, such corporate limits shall also include the following: All that certain lot, tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in the 1432nd G. M. District of Tattnall County, Georgia, containing 42.621 acres, more or less, and being more particularly described on a plat of survey prepared by John O. Parker, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor Number 1850, dated July 10, 2003 and recorded in Plat Book 22, Page 116 in the Office of the Clerk of Tattnall Superior Court. Said plat is incorporated herein by reference for descriptive and all other purposes. Said property is bounded now, or formerly, as follows: On the North by lands of Wayne Durrence, lands of Kenneth Brian Nall, lands of Robert P. Hallman, lands of Timothy J. Strickland, lands of Edgar Allen and Rose DeLoach, lands of Susan C. Linnander, lands of Michael A. and Sandra L. Moody, lands of Delta Gamblin, lands of Mrs. P. Maloy Odum and lands of Kenneth R. McDowell, Sr; On the Southeast by the right of way of U. S. Highway 301 and lands of Ricky E. Wilson, et al.; On the Southwest by lands of Timothy O. Bland and Larenda S. Bland; and On the West by lands of Weitzel E. Beck, lands of Kathleen Fate, et al., and lands of Steven R. & Bertraud Harris. Said lands described hereinabove are inclusive of the road bed that was formerly identified as County Road 405 and which traverses the lands described herein. Said road was closed by a resolution of the Tattnall County Board of Commissioners dated September 13, 2004 subsequent to the preparation of the plat referenced in this section. Said land is the same as that conveyed by the Development Authority of the City of Glennville by General Warranty Deed to the State of Georgia dated October 2, 2003 which deed is of record in the Office of the Clerk of Tattnall Superior Court in Deed Book 466, Page 639. 
Said property is more accurately depicted by a plat by Joe P. Davis, Georgia Registered Surveyor 1436, dated February 5, 1990, reference being made hereto for descriptive and all other purposes. 
Sec. 2G. - Added territory (Waste-Water Treatment Plant). 
In addition to any territory lying within the corporate limits of the City of Glennville, such corporate limits shall also include the following: All that certain tract or parcel of land, situate, lying, and being in the 1432nd G. M. District of Tattnall County, Georgia, containing 200.385 acres, more or less, being irregularly shaped and described by metes, bounds, courses and distances as follows: Beginning at a point that is the southwest-most corner of lands owned by Pinnacle Towers, Ind., where the same joins lands of Lyndal A. Rogers, on the existing City Limits of the City of Glennville at a concrete marker, thence running along a line S 54° 24' 29" E, a distance of 911.12 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 40° 29' 32" E, a distance of 887.81 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 24° 58' 49" E, a distance of 164.52 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 40° 22' 15" W, a distance of 239.37 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 35° 33' 42"E, a distance of 844.42 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N39° 58' 44" E, a distance of 231.07 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S71° 23' 34" a distance of 175.88 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 45° 35' 21" E. a distance of 156.47 feet; Thence turning and running along a line S 27° 44' 16 E, a distance of 209.67 feet; thence turning and running along a line S 13° 31' 12", a distance of 145.17 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 17° 02' 06" E. a distance of 135.40 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 29° 35' 55" E., a distance of 152.70 [feet] to a point; thence turning and running along] a line S 11° 49' 19" E, a distance of 124.79 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 30° 00' 20" R, a distance of 187.73 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 05° 29' 46" E, a distance of 164.70 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 46° 27' 41 E, distance of 251.45 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 04° 09' 03" W, a distance of 138.20 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 14° 42' 07" W, a distance of 167.04 feet to a point, thence turning and running along a line S 10° 38' 16" W, a distance of 123.15 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 33° 15' 01" E, a distance of 311.94 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S24° 48' 47" E, a distance of 133.12 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 22° 29' 27"E. a distance of 304.14 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 09° 20' 47" E, a distance of 325.00 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 23° 15' 47" E, a distance of 316.59 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 16° 53' 47" E, a distance of 229.45 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 06° 44' 47" E, a distance of 281.85 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 36° 41' 47" E, a distance of 163.25 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 09° 08' 13" W, a distance of 153.15 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 86° 35' 13"W, a distance of 339.34 feet to point; thence turning and running along a line S 84° 07' 13" W, a distance of 943.50 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 01° 28' 27" W, a distance of 91.60 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 84° 38' 37" W, a distance of 640.82 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 03° 10' 51" E, a distance of 91.60 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 84° 37' 52" W, a distance of 517.36 feet to a point thence turning and running along a line N 04° 42' 16" E, a distance of 735.72 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 88° 40' 29" w, a distance of 175.02 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 79° 08' 29" W, a distance of 125.66 feet; thence turning and running along a line N 69° 39' 10", W, a distance of 264.26 feet; thence turning and running along a line N 30° 01' 26" E, a distance of 240.81 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 55° 48' 16" E, a distance of 1416.72 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 81° 54' 59 E, a distance of 300.79 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 82° 26' 36" E, a distance of 114.83 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 56° 12' 58" W. a distance of 1803.27 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 33° 47' 02" E. a distance of 250.92 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 56° 12' 58" W a distance of 250.00 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 44° 33' 07" W for a distance of 256.95 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line S 66° 19' 08 W, for a distance of 80 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 38° 07' 42" W, for a distance of 268.77 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 52° 34' 32" W, a distance of 940.32 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 49° 51' 40" W, a distance of 58.08 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 35° 45' 42" E, a distance of 1116.50 feet to the point of beginning. 
Sec. 2H. - Added territory (Industrial Development Authority). 
In addition to any territory lying within the corporate limits of the City of Glennville, such corporate limits shall also include the following: All that certain tract or parcel of land, situate, lying and being in the 1432nd G. M. District of Tattnall County, Georgia, containing 93.79 acres, more or less, being irregularly shaped and described by metes, bounds, courses and distances as follows: Beginning at a point marked by a PK nail that is driven into the center line of Georgia highway 144 at the point where the centerline of County Road No. 321 intersects the centerline of Georgia Highway No. 144 and travels generally southeasterly direction along a line that is S 05E 09' 38" E for a distance of 1,331.76 feet to a spike set in the center line of County Road No. 321 which is THE POINT OF BEGINNING; thence turning in a easterly direction and running along a line that is S 79E 49' 21" E a distance of 1,972.47 feet to a point; thence turning in a northwesterly direction and running along a line N 42E 20' 11" W a distance of 251.81 feet to a point; thence turning northerly and running along a line N 28E 54' 52" W a distance of 390.76 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 21E 31' 54" W a distance of 377.97 feet to a point; thence turning and running along a line N 43 E 04' 52" E a distance of 31.03 feet to a point; thence turning and running to a point marked by rebar; thence continuing along a line N 43E 04' 52" B a distance of 133.30 feet to a point where said line intersects with the Glennville City Limits; thence turning in a south easterly direction and running along a line S 35E 36' 16" E a distance of 2,768.05 feet to a point; thence turning in a westerly direction and running along a line N 78E 42' 14" W a distance of 481.99 feet to a point; thence turning in a westerly direction and running along [a] line N 77E 04' 14" W a distance of 384.12 feet to a point; thence turning and running westerly and running along a line N 81E 08 14" W a distance of 97.68 feet to a point; thence turning westerly and running along a line N 77E 19' 14" W a distance of 352.44 feet to a point; thence turning northwesterly and running along a line N 70 E 17' 14" W a distance of 290.40 feet to a point; thence turning westerly and running along a line N 71 E 42' 31" W a distance of 85 feet to a concrete monument; thence turning and running in a southerly direction and running along a line S 29E 23' 50" W a distance of 10,040.41 feet to a concrete monument; thence turning and running in a westerly direction along a line N 85E 58' 33"W a distance of 355.07 feet to a point; thence turning westerly running along a line N 72E 06' 19" W a distance of 102.53 feet to a point; thence turning in a southwesterly direction and running along a line W 65E 29' 20"W a distance of 130.48 feet to a point; thence turning westerly and running along a line N 82E 15' 26" W a distance of 304.45 feet to a metal spike set in the centerline of County Road No. 321; thence turning in a northerly direction and running along] a line N 02E 21' 02" W a distance of 880.24 feet to a spike set in the center line of County Road 321; thence running in a northerly direction along a line N 05E 43' 38" W a distance of 155.58 feet to a point; thence turning northerly running along a line N 07E 42' 58" W a distance of 280.48 feet to a spike set in the center line of County Road No. 321; thence turning in a northerly direction and running along a line N 04E 07' 39W a distance of 754.75 feet to THE POINT OF BEGINNING. 
Sec. 3. - Mayor and council; operations. 
(a)  The government of the City of Glennville shall be vested in a mayor and four council members, one council member to be elected from and live in each of the wards of such city. 
(b)  The city council shall, at the first meeting after election and qualification, elect one of their members as mayor pro tem, who shall, in the absence of the mayor and in case of his or her disqualification, be the presiding officer of the city council, and shall be allowed to vote on all questions, and who, in the absence or disqualification of the mayor, may and shall exercise all the duties, powers, rights, and privileges conferred by this charter upon the mayor, in the absence of the major or when the mayor, from sickness or from other reasons, is unable to act. 
(c)  The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their service as provided by the pay scale and compensation plan approved by resolution. 
(d)  The City of Glennville shall operate as a city manager form of government. 
Sec. 4. - Elections; qualifications for office; terms. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal election biennially in the odd-numbered years on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  There shall be elected the mayor and two councilmembers from Wards 1 and 2 at one election and at every other regular election thereafter. The remaining city council seats, Wards 3 and 4, shall be filled at the election alternating, in the year following a presidential election, so that a continuing body is created. 
(c)  Terms shall be for four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. 
(d)  The city shall be divided into four wards within boundaries of this city, existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law: 
(1)  The wards of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Ward Map of the corporate limits of the City of Glennville, Georgia"; 
(2)  Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description; and 
(3)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map, by ordinance, to reflect lawful changes in the ward boundaries, and a redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map, or maps, which it is designated to replace. 
(e)  (1)  For the purpose of electing members of the council, the City of Glennville shall be divided into four wards which shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as 'Plan: glennville-import-2013 Plan Type: local Administrator: glennville User: bak'. 
(2)  For the purposes of such plan: 
(A)  The term "VTD" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and 
(B)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Any part of the City of Glennville which is not included in any district described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(4)  Any part of the City of Glennville which is described in paragraph (1) of this subsection as being included in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(f)  The mayor shall be elected by a plurality of the consolidated vote of the qualified electors of the entire city. 
(g)  The councilmembers shall be elected by a plurality of the consolidated vote of the qualified electors voting within their respective wards. 
(h)  In cases where two or more candidates for any city office shall receive the same number of votes, thereby resulting in a tie, a runoff shall be held by the Tattnall County Board of Elections in accordance with the election laws of this state. 
(i)  (1)  No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor unless said person has been a resident of the City of Glennville for 12 months immediately preceding the mayoral election. The mayor shall continue to reside within the City of Glennville during the period of service. 
(2)  No person shall be eligible to serve as a councilmember unless such person has been a resident of the City of Glennville for 12 months immediately preceding the election of the councilmember. A councilmember shall reside within his or her respective council ward for a minimum of 12 months immediately preceding the election and for the duration of the period of service. 
(3)  No person's name shall be listed as a candidate on the ballot for election for either mayor or councilmember unless such person shall file a written notice with the Tattnall County Board of Elections that he or she desires his or her name to be placed on said ballot as a candidate, either for mayor or councilmember. 
(j)  Candidates for office shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(k)  At any election, all persons who are qualified under the Constitution and laws of Georgia to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia and who are bona fide residents of the city shall be eligible to qualify as voters in the election. 
(l)  All municipal elections shall be nonpartisan and without primaries. 
(m)  All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with applicable state law. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
(n)  Persons elected to municipal office shall take office on the day of the first council meeting in January following their election. 
(o)  The mayor and council shall meet in the city hall or council chamber and there severally take before some officer of this state authorized to administer oaths the following oath of office: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly demean myself as mayor (or councilmember, as the case may be) of the City of Glennville for the ensuing term and faithfully enforce the charter and ordinances of the city to the best of my skill and knowledge without fear or favor, so help me God." 
(p)  Should any councilmember-elect or mayor-elect be absent from such meeting, the oath of office shall be taken as soon as possible thereafter. 
Sec. 5. - Election management. 
All elections held under the provisions of this charter and all elections in which a subject or question submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Glennville shall be superintended and managed, pursuant to the authorities of state law, by the Tattnall County Board of Elections. The Tattnall County Board of Elections shall be responsible for furnishing all personnel who are required by law or deemed necessary for the efficient and lawful conduct of such elections. Such election personnel shall open the polls at all elections held in the city at the place named and designated by the mayor and council, and such polls shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., at which time they shall be closed; and such personnel shall proceed to tally the balance, consolidate the returns of such election, and certify the same. All election personnel shall take and prescribe an oath before some officer of such city and county qualified to administer oaths substantially as follows: "We, and each of us, do solemnly swear that we will faithfully and impartially conduct this election, and prevent all illegal voting to the best of our skill and power, so help us God." 
Sec. 6. - Vacancies; filling. 
(a)  In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, caused by death, resignation, removal from the city, a change in residency outside of the city, or otherwise, the city council shall proceed at once to call a special election for the purpose of electing a mayor to fill the unexpired term if the remaining period of the term is 12 months or more, under the same rules in which general city elections are held. 
(b)  During the time such vacancy may exist, the mayor pro-tem shall discharge the duties incumbent upon the office of mayor. 
(c)  In case of a vacancy in the office of councilmembers, caused by death, resignation, removal from the city, a change in residency outside a councilmember's respective ward, a change in residency outside of the city, removal from office, or otherwise, such vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms by special election if the vacancy occurs more than 12 months before the expiration of the councilmember's term and by appointment of the mayor and council if the vacancy occurs less than 12 months before the expiration of the councilmember's term. No person shall be appointed to serve on the council without meeting residency and ward requirements as set forth in this charter. 
Sec. 7. - Removal of mayor and councilmembers for cause. 
(a)  The mayor or councilmembers may be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Declared medical incompetence or misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a felony or conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating any expressed prohibition of this charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. 
(A)  In the event an elected official is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice; 
(B)  The city council shall provide by ordinance the manner in which such hearings shall be held; and 
(C)  Any elected officer sought to be removed from office herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Tattnall County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Tattnall County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the city of Glennville. 
(A)  A resident seeking removal of the mayor must be a resident of the City of Glennville; or 
(B)  A resident seeking removal of a councilmember must be a resident of the respective ward of the councilmember for which removal is sought. 
Sec. 8. - Meetings of council. 
(a)  The city council shall be presided over at its meetings by the mayor or, in the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem and a majority of the council shall be necessary to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business: 
(1)  A quorum shall be defined as three councilmembers and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council; 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion; and 
(3)  In the event of a tie, the affirmative vote of two council members and the mayor shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance or resolution passed by the council. The council shall cause to be kept in a well-bound book an accurate record of all its proceedings, bylaws, acts, orders, ordinances, and resolutions, which shall be open for public inspection. At such meetings of the city council, the proceedings of the last meeting shall be read and corrected, signed, and approved as corrected, and declared to be the official minutes of the meeting. 
(c)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or at least three members of the city council. 
(1)  Notice of special meetings shall be served on all other members by personal service, by telephone service, or by e-mail, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. 
(2)  Such notice shall state the purpose of the special called meeting. 
(3)  Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. 
(4)  Only the business stated for the special meeting may be transacted. 
(5)  Presence of the mayor and council at the special called meeting shall be deemed a waiver of any defect in the notice. 
(d)  Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal. 
(e)  Any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. 
(f)  No member of the city council shall abstain from voting on any matter properly brought before the council for official action except when such councilmember has a conflict of interest which is disclosed in writing prior to or at the meeting and made a part of the minutes. Any member of the city council present and eligible to vote on a matter and refusing to do so for any reason other than a properly disclosed and recorded conflict of interest shall be deemed to have acquiesced or concurred with the members of the majority who did vote on the question involved. 
(g)  Executive sessions of the council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by applicable state law. Where a meeting of the council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. 
(1)  No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the city council taken in a public meeting; 
(2)  The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session, and the specific reasons for the executive session; 
(3)  Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the clerk of the city council upon a majority vote of the council; and 
(4)  Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the council may be delayed only until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
Sec. 9. - Duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(4)  Vote on matters before the city council in the event of a tie vote and not be counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember; and 
(5)  Have the authority to appoint a designee for the signing of other documents related to departments within the city. 
Sec. 10. - Appointed officials. 
(a)  The city council shall have power to appoint a city attorney, city clerk, city manager, city fire chief, city police chief, public works director, municipal judge, and such other officers as to the council may seem necessary and proper. The terms of office of such officers shall be for one year, and each appointed official shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council: 
(1)  The mayor or a councilmember may recommend the removal from office for cause of any appointed official; 
(2)  The appointed official shall continue to receive his or her respective salary until the effective date of a final resolution or removal; and 
(3)  For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
(b)  (1)  The city manager shall supervise and discipline the other appointed officials, with the exception of the city attorney and the municipal judge, but shall not have the authority to hire or fire any appointed official. 
(2)  The city manager shall have the authority to hire and fire any other city employees not considered appointed officials. 
(3)  The city manager shall report to the mayor. 
(4)  The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. 
(c)  (1)  The mayor and council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. 
(2)  The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records, shall maintain city council records required by this charter and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the city council, the city manager, and the job description. 
(d)  (1)  The mayor and council may appoint a city attorney and shall provide for the payment of such attorney for services rendered to the city. 
(2)  The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the position as city attorney. 
(e)  (1)  The mayor and council shall appoint a municipal judge and shall provide for the payment of such judge for services rendered to the city. 
(2)  The municipal judge shall meet the qualifications provided in Code Section 36-32-1.1 of the O.C.G.A. 
(3)  The judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. 
(4)  The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
(5)  Fees and fines shall be set by the judge in accordance with state law. 
Sec. 11. - Arrests. 
It shall be lawful for the chief of police of the city, or any regular or special policeman, to arrest without a warrant any and all persons within the corporate limits of said city who are at the time of such arrest or before that time have been guilty, in such limits, of any violation of the ordinances or laws of the city and to hold such persons so arrested until a hearing of the charge can be had before a proper officer; and to this end, the arresting officers are authorized to imprison and confine any person arrested by them in the Tattnall County Jail. To effect an arrest, in case it may be necessary, the police or any arresting officer shall have authority to call to his or her assistance the sheriff of Tattnall County within the parameters of the intergovernmental agreement with the Tattnall County Sheriff's Office. 
Sec. 12. - Taxation. 
The city council may have power and authority each year to act as tax assessors. It shall be the duty of such tax assessors, when they are not satisfied that all returns of property have been made at a fair valuation thereof, to value the real estate and personalty in such city for taxation and to scrutinize carefully each return of property, real and personal, by any taxpayer of the city; and if, in their judgment, they shall find the property embraced in any return to have been returned below its true value, they shall assess the value thereof within 60 days after the time for making tax returns has expired; and whenever they shall raise the valuation at which the taxpayer has returned his property, they shall give him or her notice in writing of their assessment. Then, it shall be the taxpayer's privilege, if dissatisfied with the assessment, to have the matter submitted to three disinterested persons, all residents of the city, of whom one shall be selected by the taxpayer and one by the tax assessors and the other by these two selected; and the majority of these shall fix the assessment, which shall be final. All tax assessors shall be a freeholder in the city. The city council of the City of Glennville is authorized to enter into contracts with firms, individuals, or corporations for the employment of persons, firms, or corporations to assist and make recommendations in the mapping, platting, cataloging, indexing, and appraising of all the taxable property, both real and personal, within the city; to make recommendations of the evaluation of such taxable property to the city council; and to search out and appraise unreturned properties in the city, subject to approval of the city council. The city council may hire persons, firms, or corporations to aid and assist in making a cadastral survey and a field book system for real property identification and evaluation. 
Sec. 13. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 14. - Sales tax. 
The city council, in its discretion, shall have the power and authority to levy and collect a tax upon the gross sales of every merchant or other vendor of goods, wares, merchandise, etc., in the city. 
Sec. 15. - Business tax and occupational tax. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. 
(1)  Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed; and 
(2)  The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes. 
Sec. 16. - Business licenses. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and to pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Sec. 17. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year as determined by the city financial policy approved by the mayor and council. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by general state or federal law. 
Sec. 18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The mayor and city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due to the city by whatever reasonable means not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fa's; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 19. - Millage rate. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time at which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the due date. The schedule shall run concurrent with the millage rate cycle of Tattnall County. 
Sec. 20. - Municipal bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds shall be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 21. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways; parks; public grounds; cemeteries; markets; market houses; public buildings; libraries; sewers; drains; sewage treatment; water works; electrical systems; gas systems; airports; hospitals; and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the city; and to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes, property may be taken under applicable state law, as now or as may be provided in the future. 
Sec. 22. - Regulations concerning use of streets. 
The city council shall have the right and power to regulate the use of all sidewalks, crosswalks, and bridges, over or under the same, to require the owners or occupants of any premises to keep the sidewalks in front of or along the same free from obstruction of any kind, to regulate and prevent the throwing of ashes, filth, dirt, offal, garbage, or any offensive matter into any street, lane, alley, sidewalk, or public place, within the city limits, or into any stream of water adjacent to the city, and to prevent any injury to the streets, sidewalks, lanes, or avenues or to any of the public grounds or buildings of the city. In addition, the council shall have the right and power to regulate or prohibit the use of the streets and public grounds for signs, signposts, awnings, and posting of advertisements; to prohibit the scattering on and over the streets and sidewalks of waste, and the like; and to regulate and provide for curbs and gutters that flow into the streets or on the sidewalks of the city. 
Sec. 23. - Fire limits. 
The city council may by ordinance establish fire limits and enlarge or reduce the same as the safety of the city requires. When fire limits are established, it shall be lawful to prohibit the erection of any structure therein of any substance except incombustible material, or such as may be allowed by ordinance. 
Sec. 24. - Utilities. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. 
Sec. 25. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, assessments, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 26. - Franchises. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys and for the purpose of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years, and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. 
(c)  The mayor and city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book to be kept by the clerk. 
(d)  The mayor and city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 27. - Churches and cemeteries. 
(a)  The city council shall have power to protect places of divine worship and all other lawful assemblages. They shall have the right to control and exercise supervision of cemeteries, and to that end may acquire, by purchase or gift, lands either within or without the city limits for the purpose of establishing a place for the burial of the dead. 
(b)  They may by ordinance prevent the burial of the dead at any place in the city that they so desire. They may prescribe where the dead shall or shall not be buried. 
(c)  Should any cemetery be established under this section, either within or without the city limits, the city council shall have the right to keep up a street or streets to such cemetery, or walks, lawns, or roads within the same, and to regulate the method of burial therein, and to do all and everything necessary for the health and safety of the citizens. 
Sec. 28. - Licenses revocable. 
The mayor, council, city manager, city clerk, police chief, or another designee of the mayor and council shall have the right to revoke any license at any time that may be or may have been granted by them under provisions of this charter whenever it is sufficiently shown to them that the person or persons to whom said license was granted is abusing the same, or when it is to the best interest of the city to do so. 
Sec. 29. - Salaries of officers and employees. 
The salary of all officers and employees of the City of Glennville shall be fixed by the mayor and council according to the position classification and pay plan approved by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 30. - Mayor and councilmembers not to be interested in any municipal contracts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the mayor or any member of the city council to be interested, either directly or indirectly, in any contract with the City of Glennville having for its object the public improvement of the city, or any part thereof, or the expenditure of its money. Any violation of this section by any member of the council, or the mayor, shall subject such person to removal from office, and such person shall be punished in the courts of competent jurisdiction as for a misdemeanor. 
(b)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he or she is engaged without proper legal authorization, or use such information to advance his or her financial or other private interest or that of others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(c)  Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest; such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he or she shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such government for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(e)  Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by such government or any agency thereof during the term for which he or she was elected. 
(g)  No appointive officer or employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office for the City of Glennville. 
(h)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her office or position. 
(i)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his or her office or position as described in subsection (h) of this section shall be ineligible for appointment or election to, or employment in, a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 31. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 32. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The mayor and city council, with a vote of three or more, may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 33. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance shall not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. 
(b)  An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. 
(c)  An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers present shall be required for adoption. 
(d)  Such emergency ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. 
(e)  Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. 
(f)  An emergency ordinance may also be repealed in less than 30 days by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 34. - Contracts, rights and liabilities, properties. 
All legal contracts heretofore entered into by the City of Glennville or the corporate authorities thereof, shall be good and valid for or against the City of Glennville incorporated under this charter, to the same extent as if this charter had not passed. All the rights and liabilities of the City of Glennville under the former acts shall accrue and survive to and against the City of Glennville incorporated under this charter. All property and rights thereof now held and owned by the City of Glennville under former acts shall be and become the right and property of the City of Glennville incorporated under this charter. Contracts not specifically outlined in this charter shall be governed according to the city financial policy. 
Sec. 35. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Glennville in the County of Tattnall, approved August 21, 1911 (Ga. L. 1911, p. 1228), is repealed in its entirety, and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
Sec. 36. - General repealer. 
All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this charter are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of any amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from 2018 Ga. Laws (Act No. 506). 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of Glennville, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
City. The term "the city" shall mean the City of Glennville in the County of Tattnall in the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council. The term "city council" or "the council" shall mean the city council of the City of Glennville, Georgia. 
Code. "Code" shall mean The Code of Glennville, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Tattnall, State of Georgia, as applicable. 
Gender. Terms importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Glennville" were added to such name or title. 
Nontechnical and technical terms. Terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical terms and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or adjacent open space, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments and anything permanently attached thereto. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office, which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined by the city council. 
Seal. The term "seal" shall mean the city seal. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Tattnall County, Georgia, as applicable. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct or bridge and their approaches within the city. 
Tenant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code since they would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained in the ordinance, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance that repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(10)  Any fees and charges. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or adopting any subdivision regulations. 
(12)  Any ordinance concerning alcoholic beverages. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(16)  Any erosion control ordinance. 
(17)  Any ordinance dealing with ethics. 
(18)  Any ordinance regarding employee policies and benefits. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part of such chapters, sections and subsections, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Glennville, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered, which section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions of pages, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city or county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding six months, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
State Law reference— Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
Sec. 1-12. - Information technology fee. 
In every case in which the municipal court of the city shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any offense against a city ordinance, there shall be imposed an additional fee to be used for information technology. This fee will not exceed $10.00 per case. 
(Ord. of 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 1-13. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement of Codes, City of Glennville are outlined in the chart below: 

 
(Res. No. 14-21, 3-4-2014) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Res. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-101. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the charter. 
(Res. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-102. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Res. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-103. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Glennville nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the City of Glennville on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Glennville. 
(Res. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-104. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Res. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-105. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  The board of ethics of the city shall consist of three residents of the city, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the city council, and the third appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority of the city council. 
(b)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(c)  All members of the board of ethics shall serve a four-year term. 
(d)  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(e)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(f)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(g)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(h)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age. who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the City of Glennville. 
(i)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(j)  Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the city governing authority. 
(Res. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-106. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the city clerk, who will give it to the mayor and council. The mayor and council may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city council. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the city clerk or the clerk's designee shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)  The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints. notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)  Findings of the board of ethics shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(h)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(Res. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-107. - Service of complaint. 
The city clerk or board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall have also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section of the ordinance [from which this article derives] shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Res. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-108. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Tattnall County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersede as. 
(Res. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 2-109. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Res. No. 14-15, § 1, 11-12-2013) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-34, adopted Jan. 8, 2008, added Chapter 4, §§ 4-1—4-28. In keeping with the numbering style of this Code these sections have been renumbered as herein set out. See Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Drinking in public, § 30-7. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverages Code, O.C.G.A. § 13-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be referred to as the "Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance of the City of Glennville". 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-1, 1-8-2008) 
Secs. 4-2—4-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE 

Sec. 4-51. - Purposes and authority. 
(a)  The mayor and council of the city shall issue retail licenses for the distribution of alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the city, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law; 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons; 
(3)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks and other institutions; and 
(4)  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(5)  To the maximum extent permissible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the city, rather than a right. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-2, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-52. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, the following terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits or wine, from whatever source or whatever process produced. 
Church building is defined as a free-standing structure, originally built for use as a church and does not include a commercial or retail building or space that has been converted for occupancy by a church or for religious purposes. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, malt beverages, distilled spirits, wine and fortified wines defined in this section. 
City means the City of Glennville and when used in a geographical sense means the territorial limits of the City of Glennville. 
City clerk means the City Clerk of the City of Glennville. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
Licensed premises includes not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, but also the entire building in which such room is located, and any adjoining storage, office, toilet, and other similar rooms shall constitute the "licensed premises." 
Licensee includes an individual licensee and in the case of a partnership or corporation includes both the partnership or corporation and the named licensee. 
Majority stockholder means the person, if any, who owns more than 50 percent of the voting stock of a corporation; if no person owns more than 50 percent of the voting of a corporation, the "majority stockholder" is the person owning more of the voting stock than any other person; and if two or more persons each own the same amount of the voting stock of a corporation and each own more of the voting stock than any other person, then anyone of such persons may act as the "majority stockholder." 
Malt beverage means fermented beverage made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented substance. 
Mayor and city council means the mayor and city council of the City of Glennville. 
Named licensee means the person acting as such for a partnership or corporation. 
Person includes a corporation, partnership, association, club or institution. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. 
(b)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. Tit. 3. 
(c)  As used in this chapter, the singular, and plural shall each include the other, the masculine and feminine shall each include the other, and any verb tense may include any other verb tense. 
(d)  As used in this chapter, the term "may" is permissive and the term "shall" is mandatory. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-3, 1-8-2008; Res. No. 09-05, § 4-3, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 16-42, 6-7-2016) 
Sec. 4-53. - Violations—Civil and criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person and/or business which violate any provision of the chapter shall be subject to being punished as provided in this Code, which may include a civil penalty (fine), a criminal penalty (fine), and/or imprisonment. Any such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
"Person" as referenced above refers to any individual and/or group of individual which violate any provision of this chapter. "Business" includes any individual owner, group of owners, and/or entity which has an interest in the establishment that employed the individual who violates any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be grounds for fines, suspension, or revocation of any retail license issued hereunder. If an employee of the business violates a provision of the chapter, the employer is liable for the employee's actions and this penalty shall be imposed upon the business employing said employee. 
(1)  For the first violation there shall be a $1,000.00 fine. 
(2)  For the second violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any 24-month period of the first violation, there shall be a $1,000.00 fine and a 30-day suspension of the license privileges. 
(3)  For the third, and any subsequent violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any 24-month period of the first violation, there shall be a $1,000.00 fine and a 90-day suspension of license privileges. 
(4)  For any fourth or subsequent violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any 24-month period of the first violation, the license may be revoked at the discretion of the mayor and city council. 
(5)  Any suspension or revocation of a license shall first require notice to the license holder of the grounds for potential suspension and revocation and shall entitle license holders to file an appeal which must be done within 72 hours and shall be entitled to due process hearing before the mayor and city council which appeal shall be heard within ten working days. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(6)  A license holder who receives a suspension or revocation of his license may not be an officer, director or shareholder of any succeeding entity that holds a license from the city during his period of suspension. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-4, 1-8-2008) 
Secs. 4-54—4-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSING 

Sec. 4-81. - Licensing, required classifications, etc. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Pay schedule. License fees shall be payable in advance for an entire year beginning January 1 and ending December 31. If an initial fee is paid on or after July 1 of the year of application, the license fees for the remainder of the year shall be 50 percent of the license fee imposed for the entire year. Any administrative fees will not be reduced. The suspension or revocation of any license granted pursuant to this article shall not entitle the licensee to a return of any portion of the license fee. 
(c)  Classification. Classes of licenses issued under this chapter, activities permitted and regulated there under, and the annual license fees shall be set by city from time to time. 
(1)  Retail licenses. Package sales for off-premises consumption of beer and wine, and sales of beer and wine for on-premises consumption: $1,500.00/year. 
(2)  Wholesale licenses. Resident wholesale dealer's license: wholesale of beer and wine beverages by a wholesale dealer having a place of business in the city: $1,000.00/year. 
(d)  Penalties. All fees set forth in this section are due on January 1 of each calendar year. All fees which are not paid by January 10 of each calendar year will be subject to a ten percent per month late charge or penalty and shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(e)  Payment of fees. An applicant shall pay the annual license fee at the time the application is filed; and in such event the license applied for is not issued, the annual license fee shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-5, 1-8-2008; Res. No. 09-05, § 4-5, 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 4-82. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  A license issued to an individual shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation; and such majority stockholder or officer shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises; and such officer or employee shall be the named licensee. 
(b)  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall join as an applicant for the license and each partner must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided herein. 
(c)  In the case of a corporation having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages, the majority stockholder and each principal officer of the corporation shall join as applicants for the license; and each such person must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee. 
(d)  In the case of a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, the officer or employee who is to be the named licensee shall be the applicant and must meet the qualifications of an individual licenses, as provided herein; provided, however, that the mayor and city council may require fingerprinting and investigation of officers and shareholder of the corporation if they deem it necessary in making their investigation. 
(e)  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. In the case of a corporation, the corporation shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-6, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-83. - Qualifications for a new applicant. 
(a)  A licensee must be at least 21 years of age, of good moral character. 
(b)  A licensee shall not have been convicted within the past five years of any felony or, misdemeanor, or violation of city alcohol ordinances within the past two years, or at any time of any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, taxes or gambling. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, and other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. The mayor and city council may at their discretion waive the conviction of a misdemeanor for a nonalcoholic offense for purposes of this subsection if the mayor and city council determines that the misdemeanor does not have a bearing on the applicant's fitness for a license. 
(c)  A licensee shall not have been denied or had revoked, within the five years next preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-7, 1-8-2008; Res. No. 09-05, § 4-7, 8-5-2008) 
Sec. 4-84. - Application procedures. 
(a)  Application for a license for the retail sale of beer and malt beverages in the city shall be filed with the city clerk upon forms prescribed by the city and made available at city hall. The application shall be subscribed by the application under oath and fully completed and executed. The city clerk shall deliver the application to the mayor and city council. 
(b)  There shall be attached to the application a bank money order, certified check or like remittance of the application. The city shall publish a notice stating an application has been applied for, the applicant's name, the name and location of the business and the type of license being applied for. The notice shall run two weeks in the legal organ of Tattnall County. The applicant will be billed for the advertising cost. 
(c)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall visit the Glennville Police Department for fingerprinting. The police department will process the fingerprints through Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) for determination of any past criminal activity. The police department will provide the city results of investigation. 
(d)  Failure to fully complete and execute an application for a license or to furnish accurately all data, information and records required by the application form as well as failure to accompany the application with the payment of the prescribed fee shall be deemed just cause for denying the application with prejudice. 
(e)  Upon proper completion of the application and payment of fees, the city clerk shall refer the application to the chief of police for such investigation and hearings thereon as deemed necessary under this article. The chief of police may seek the advice of additional law enforcement officers and state prosecutors during it consideration of the application. 
(f)  After its investigation, the mayor and city council shall grant or deny the license applied for. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-8, 1-8-2008; Res. No. 14-13, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 4-85. - Renewal. 
On renewal, the licensee shall be administered and take the oath specifically contained on the application form. Making any false statements will be grounds for automatic revocation of license. The mayor and city council may within its discretion require fingerprinting and a full background check on any renewal at any time. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-9, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-86. - Transfer. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no license shall be transferable to any other person or location. 
(b)  If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensee's premises to another place within the city, application shall be made as for an original license. 
(c)  In the case of death of an owner of a license or financial interest therein, such license or interest therein may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or adult heir or heirs of the deceased unless the mayor and city council determines that it would otherwise violate this chapter. If the transferee cannot meet all the requirements of this chapter when the time comes to renew the license, it shall not be renewed. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership from retiring there from in favor of one or more of the other partners; provided such withdrawal shall not without application for an issuance of a new license introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business. 
(e)  Where a license is issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, a change in the named licensee may be permitted by the new named licensee meets the requirements of new license applicants. 
(f)  In the circumstances described in subsections (c), (d) and (e), of this section, the license may be revoked if the mayor and city council determines that the change results in a failure to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-10, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-87. - Change in business ownership. 
(a)  If any licensee withdraws from, sells or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall within two days, notify the city clerk and surrender the license. 
(b)  In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, a new application shall be made as for an original license. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-11, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-88. - Temporary license. 
(a)  A temporary license may be issued by the mayor and city council if, in their judgment, the denial or a temporary license would create an undue hardship such as the closing of an existing business. 
(b)  A temporary license may be revoked, with or without cause, by the mayor and city council at any time, and the grant or denial of a temporary license shall not affect or have any bearing upon the grant or denial of a permanent license. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-12, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-89. - Suspension—Revocation. 
(a)  Upon final disposition of a case by any court of competent jurisdiction, a license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council for any violation of this chapter and/or other city ordinances, for any violation of state or federal law, for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license, or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for license. 
(b)  The mayor and city council, by resolution, may direct the chief of police of the city and his lawful officers to remove the license from any place of business of any licensee upon determination by the chief or his lawful officers that any provision of this chapter or the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages has been violated. Upon removal of the license as provided above, it shall be illegal for the licensee to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages until such time as the license has been reinstated as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Upon removal of a license as provided above, the city within three days, shall give written notice to the licensee of the reasons for such removal and as to any suspension or revocation of such license. The licensee may within ten days from receipt of the aforesaid notice from the city, make written application to the mayor and council for a hearing on the matter of suspension or revocation, including the right of the licensee to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Failure of the licensee to request a hearing within the allowed period shall constitute a waiver of any right of further appeal of city decision regarding revocation of suspension. In the event of a hearing is requested as provided above, the same will be held within ten days from receipt by the city of the request. The city, after hearing evidence, shall reach its decision and advise the licensee of the same. In the event the city determines, with or without a hearing, that a license shall be instated, the same shall be immediately returned to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-13, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-90. - Automatic revocation. 
A license shall be automatically revoked by the operation of law if: 
(1)  The licensee's state alcoholic beverage license is revoked, suspended, canceled or not renewed. 
(2)  Payment of the annual license fee is not received by the city within 14 days after notification that the approval to issue a license has been made by the mayor and city council. 
(3)  Operation of the licensed activity is not commenced within six months after the license is issued. 
(4)  Operation of the licensed activity is commenced and then discontinued for a period of 30 days unless extended by the mayor and city council for good cause. 
(5)  The licensed business declares bankruptcy or receivership, is the subject of levy or legal process, or fails to properly account for, file, report and pay any excise tax levied under this chapter. 
(6)  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and maintain any records or remit any license fee imposed or taxes required under this chapter. 
(7)  Payment of the annual renewal license fee is not received by the city within the time prescribed. 
(8)  The named licensee is convicted of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(9)  Any false statement in the application or renewal process by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-14, 1-8-2008) 
Secs. 4-91—4-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOCATION 

Sec. 4-121. - Proximity restrictions. 
No license shall be issued under this article where the entrance to a place of business or premises for the serving and/or [sale] of, or the offer to serve and/or sell beer, malt beverages or wine within 100 yards of the entrance to any church building or the property line of any school, school grounds or college campus. 
If multiple entrances exist to place of business or church building, distance shall be determined by the entrance closest to the physical address as assigned by municipality. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-15, 1-8-2008; Res. No. 16-42, 6-7-2016) 
Sec. 4-122. - Measurement of distances. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements to determine distances as required by this chapter relating to the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses, shall be measured by the most direct route of public travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the entrance as defined in section 4-121 in which alcoholic beverages are served and/or sold or offer to serve and/or sale; 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
(4)  To the front door (main entrance) as defined in section 4-121 of the building (church) or to the nearest portion of the grounds (schools, college campus), whichever is more appropriate under the applicable section. 
(Res. No. 16-42, 6-7-2016) 
Secs. 4-123—4-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SALES 

Sec. 4-151. - Responsibility of named licensee. 
The named licensee shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-16, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-152. - Display of license. 
Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-17, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-153. - Knowledge of chapter provisions. 
Every licensee shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself or herself with the provisions of this chapter and an application shall constitute a certification by the applicant that he has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of the ordinance from which this chapter derives on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale of handling of alcoholic beverages on the relevant provisions of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-18, 1-8-2008) 
Secs. 4-154—4-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROHIBITED SALES 

Sec. 4-201. - Sales to underage persons prohibited. 
Furnishing to, purchase of or possession of (by) persons under the age of 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages shall be controlled by state law O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-19, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-202. - Days of sales prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or any time when such sales are prohibited by state law. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day. 
(d)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on city, county, state, or national election day during polling hours (7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.). 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-20, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-203. - Sales to intoxicated persons. 
No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeable intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-21, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-204. - Container, storage, illumination. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises only in the original container and only in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler). Alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
(b)  A retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by an authorized agent of the city. Any alcoholic beverages found in a retail licensee's stock which was not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-22, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-205. - Cleanliness of premises—Inspections. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by authorized agents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-23, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-206. - Sales to and by underage persons. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c), below, no retail dealer shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not sell or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit persons 16 years of age or older from selling or handling alcoholic beverages in grocery stores or supermarkets. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-24, 1-8-2008) 
Sec. 4-207. - Activity in grocery stores. 
For the purposes of this article, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store or similar establishment shall not constitute handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-25, 1-8-2008) 
Secs. 4-208—4-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BREAKING PACKAGE 

Sec. 4-251. - Breaking package or drinking on-premises. 
(a)  Off-premise consumption. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed only for sale of alcoholic beverages by package for off-premise consumption. 
(b)  On-premise consumption. No alcoholic beverages may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except in eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen which will consist of a four-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and a refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the county health department and city fire department, prepared to serve food every hour they are open and where these establishments are permitted to seat 50 or more persons pursuant to the applicable building, fire and safety codes in effect for the city. Establishments shall derive a minimum of 60 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance with these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-26, 1-8-2008; Res. No. 09-05, § 4-26, 8-5-2008) 
Secs. 4-252—4-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 4-301. - Wholesale licenses, excise tax on alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Required issuance. Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provision applicable to retail licensees. 
(b)  Tax imposed in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-80, 3-6-60 and 3-4-80. 
(1)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the city as follows: 
a.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate of all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
b.  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale of wine in the city at a rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
c.  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-27, 1-8-2008) 
Secs. 4-302—4-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADDITIONAL RULES 

Sec. 4-351. - Additional rules, regulations and enforcement. 
(a)  All the provisions of this chapter are and shall be subject to the regulations hereinafter prescribed by ordinance of this body as the same may from time to time be amended, setting forth the rules, terms and conditions upon which such licenses may be issued; the annual license fees; the qualifications of licensees; the hours of operation of such licenses; the control of customers doing business with licenses; and any other matters that this body may deem advisable to put forth for the proper control and regulations of the sale of alcoholic beverages in the designated area of the city; and all such licenses as may be hereafter issued shall be expressly subject to the provisions of such ordinance and regulations as may be then or thereafter in force; and all such licenses shall be nontransferable except with the express approval of the city, and shall convey to the licensee no property right but only a privilege, which may be revoked by this body at any time by written notice to the licensee with the reasons stated therefore. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The city, by resolution, may direct the chief of police of the city and his lawful officers to remove the license from any place of business of any licensee upon a determination by the chief or his lawful officers that any provision of this chapter or the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages have been violated. Upon removal of the license as provided above, it shall be illegal for the licensee to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages until such time as the license has been reinstated as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  Upon removal of a license as provided above, the city within three days, shall give written notice to the licensee of the reasons for such removal and as to any suspension or revocation of such license. The licensee may, within ten days from receipt of the aforesaid notice from the city, make written application to the mayor and council for a hearing on the matter of suspension or revocation, including the right of the licensee to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Failure of the licensee to request a hearing within the allowed period shall constitute a waiver of any right of further appeal or the city's decision regarding revocation or suspension. In the event a hearing is requested as provided above, the same will be held within ten days from receipt by the city of the request. The city, after hearing evidence shall reach its decision and advise the licensee of the same. In the event the city determines, with or without a hearing, that a license shall be reinstated the same shall be immediately returned to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 08-34, § 4-28, 1-8-2008) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 22; dead animals, § 38-165. 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III(a)(3); livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to run at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; dangerous dog control law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7; dog fighting, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37; sale of dog meat for human consumption prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-160; Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq.; inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4; wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 37-5-4 et seq.; fish, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 18-17, adopted Feb. 6, 2018, repealed the former Art. I, §§ 6-1—6-23, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1982, §§ 1-102—1-104; an ordinance adopted Feb. 4, 2003, §§ 1-201—1-213, 1-215, 1-216, 1-223—1-225; and Res. No. 10-18, adopted Jan. 5, 2010. 

Sec. 6-1. - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter shall be referred to as the "Domestic Animal Control Ordinance of the City of Glennville". The purpose is to provide for the humane treatment of domestic animals by regulating the case and control of animals within the city and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. This chapter sets forth necessary controls on the unrestrained activities of animals which threaten the safety and pleasantness of street, parks, sidewalks, yard and all areas of the city; and the lack of knowledge or intent is not a defense in the violation of this chapter. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Animal means any living creature, both domestic and wild, except humans. The term "animal" also includes fowl, fish and reptiles. 
Animal control officer means any individual designated by the city as an enforcement official for this chapter and shall include, but not be limited to, the city manager, city code enforcement officer and officers within the city police department. These officials shall have the authority to act on behalf of the city in investigating complaints, impounding, issuing citations and taking other lawful action as required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with enforcement official in the performance of their duties. 
At large means off the premises of the owner's property and not under the control of the owner, a member of his immediate family, or some other person, either by leash, cord, chain or other holding device. 
Dangerous animal means any wild mammal, reptile or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature, or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or if not properly kept or maintained in a safe manner or is securely quartered, and any domestic mammal, reptile, or fowl which, because of its size, vicious propensity, or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or securely quartered. 
Dangerous dog means any dog, according to records of the appropriate authority, inflict a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property or aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Dogs or cats running at large means any public nuisance dog or cat causing a disturbance while not on a leash or in the vicinity of the owner and obedient to that person's commands. A dog or cat is not running at large when it is confined within the limits of its owner's property. 
Fowl includes chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons, and similar fowl. 
Enclosures means any covered, uncovered parcel of land where animals or fowl are kept. 
Fence means any structure of wire, wood, stone or other material, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. A fence must be sufficient to prevent the animal from being able to jump, dig or escape confinement. 
Nuisance means whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome. 
Owner means any natural person or legal entity including, but not limited to a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody of an animal. 
Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, for enjoyment of life or property. 
Under restraint means that an animal is secured by a leash, lead under the control of a person physically capable or restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, at heel, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's property. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-3. - Nuisances. 
The owner of animals and fowl shall be responsible for correcting or abating any nuisance that may arise from the keeping thereof. No person shall own or possess or harbor any animal or fowl which howls, barks, or emits audible sounds that are plainly audible or disturbing and which are of such character. Intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. For the purpose of this article, "barking dog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of ten minutes or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time day or night regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" for purposes of this regulation, if at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the dog is situated or for any other legitimate cause which teased or provoked the dog. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-4. - Violations. 
(a)  An animal control officer, code enforcement officer or police officer is authorized to issue and serve citations for appearance before the municipal court for violations of the provisions for the animal control ordinances of the city. 
(b)  An animal control officer, code enforcement officer or police officer of the city is further authorized to investigate and report to the proper officials for appropriate prosecution, any violations of the code of the city relating to cruelty to animals or any violations of the Georgia Animal Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq., 1986 Supplement). 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-5. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of the animal control ordinance shall, upon conviction of the municipal court, City of Glennville, be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-11 of the Code of the City of Glennville. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Secs. 6-6—6-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 18-17, adopted Feb. 6, 2018, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 6-51—6-55, 6-81—6-86, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1982, §§ 1-201—1-205; and an ordinance adopted Feb. 4, 2003, §§ 1-217—1-222. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-10. - Inoculation and registration required. 
(a)  Generally. All dogs kept, harbored, or maintained by their owner in this city shall be required to be inoculated. 
(b)  Tag and collar. Each dog shall wear a collar containing a badge, showing the fact of their inoculation. 
(c)  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to apply to dogs whose owners are non-residents temporarily within the city, nor to dogs brought in to the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show, nor to seeing eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons when such dogs are actually being used by blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from place to place. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-11. - Animal cruelty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to refuse or fail to provide such dog with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, humane care, potable water adequate shelter (24 hours, seven days a week) and treatment needed to prevent suffering. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or custodian of any dog to permit or cause unsanitary, offensive or dangerous conditions by virtue of the size or number of dogs maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of the facilities. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to willfully abandon such animal on any street, lanes, alleys, public place or private property in the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person to allow any dog in their possession or under their control to run at large upon the streets, lanes, or alleys of the city. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put any poison within the city for the killing of any dog or other domestic animal. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-12. - Tethering of dogs. 
(a)  The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this code section, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Proper enclosure means any structure or device used to restrict a dog to a limited amount of space such as a fenced area, electronic animal confinement system, building, house, pen or other device or structure out of which a dog cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape. Proper enclosures must have an adequate space for exercise based on a dimension of at least 100 square feet per each dog that weighs fewer than 20 pounds and at least 200 square feet per each dog that weighs more than 20 pounds. Proper enclosures shall also contain appropriate shelter of sufficient size to allow each dog to stand up, turn around, and lie down. 
Direct point chaining means a dog attached to a stationary object by a chain, cable or similar device commonly used for the size and type of dog involved. 
Electronic animal confinement system shall mean a commercially produced, functioning electronic fence which utilizes an invisible electrically generated perimeter, in which the animal within the perimeter wears an electronic collar that produces an electric shock when the animal approaches or exceeds the perimeter. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a dog to ensure that the dog is securely and humanely enclosed within a proper enclosure as a means of primary restraint. Such enclosure must be securely locked and any time the dog is left unattended. When outside the proper enclosure but on the owner's property, it shall be the duty of every owner of a dog to ensure that the dog is humanely secured by a leash or lead and under the control of a responsible and competent person; or off leash but under the direct control of a responsible and competent person who is physically present with the dog, provided that such dog is obedient to that person's command. 
(c)  Any dog that is housed outside of its owner's house shall be housed in a proper enclosure that complies with the provisions of this Code. 
(d)  Direct point chaining of a dog is prohibited. 
(e)  As a secondary means of restraint to a proper enclosure, a dog may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system providing that: 
(1)  Only one dog may be attached to each running cable line or trolley system; 
(2)  Cables attaching the dog to the running cable line or trolley system must be made of a substance which cannot be chewed through by the dog and shall not weigh more than 25 percent of the body weight of the dog tethered; 
(3)  A running cable line or trolley system must have a swivel installed at each end and be attached to a stationary object that cannot be moved by the dog; 
(4)  The running cable line or trolley system must be at least ten feet in length and positioned at sufficient distance from any other objects to prohibit the tangling of the cable/lead line; must not extend over an object or an edge that could result in injury of strangulation of the dog; and must be of sufficient distance from any fence as to prohibit the dog from access to the fence; 
(5)  The length of the lead line from the running cable line or trolley system to the dog's harness should allow access to the maximum available exercise area and allow the animal free access to food, water, and shelter. In no event shall the length of the lead line allow for access to less than the square footage required within a proper enclosure as defined in subsection (a) above; or 
(6)  The lead line must be attached to a properly fitted harness not used for the display of a current rabies tag and other identification. Collars are prohibited for the purpose of securing a dog to a running cable line or trolley system. 
(f)  If an electronic animal confinement system is used to confine a dog, it shall provide a properly fitted and working signal device that will be worn by the dog to be enclosed. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-13. - Dog bites. 
Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of such animal shall immediately notify the city's code enforcement officer or chief of police and the Tattnall County Health Department, who shall order the animal held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded at the owner's expense for a period of 14 days. The dog shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again, at the end of 14-day period. This cost will be paid for by the owner or custodian. If at the end of 14 days, a veterinarian is convinced that the dog is then free from rabies, the dog shall be released from quarantine or from the pound as the case may be. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-14. - Number of dogs allowed; distance of enclosures from buildings. 
(a)  The number of dogs allowed is three over 90 days old. 
(b)  Any enclosure used for keeping of dogs outside of a building shall be kept at a minimum distance of 100 feet from any occupied building, except the dwelling unit of the owner. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Secs. 6-15—6-24. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 6-25. - Investigation by local authorities; notice of classification. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the city, the code enforcement officer or the Glennville Police Department shall make such investigations and inquiries with regards to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(b)  When code enforcement officer or police officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the code enforcement officer or police officer shall notify the dog's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be completed upon its mailing. 
(c)  As used herein, the term "potentially dangerous dog" shall mean any dog which without provocation bites a human being on public or private property. As used herein, the term "dangerous dog" shall mean any dog, according to records of the code enforcement officer or police officer, that inflicts a severe injury on human beings without provocation on public or private property; or aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of human beings without provocation after the dog has been classified a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Sec. 6-26. - Procedures for classification as dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs; notice; hearing. 
(a)  As applied to the owners of potentially dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section must be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this article against such owners. As applied to the owners of dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this article. 
(b)  When a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog is classified as such, the code enforcement officer or police officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. 
(c)  The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the code enforcement officer or police officer's findings that formed the basis of the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the code enforcement officer or police officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the city's municipal court. 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the code enforcement officer or the police officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The municipal court shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail on the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the address of the dog owner shown on the request for hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the court shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the court may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the code enforcement officer or police officer's classification of the dog. 
(d)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the court shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which the determination is effective, provided that said effective date shall be not less than ten days after the date of this order. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-27. - Requirements for possession. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Subject to the additional requirements of subsection (c) of this section for dangerous dogs, the code enforcement officer or police officers in the city in which an owner possesses a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of such dog if the owner presents to the code enforcement officer or police officer sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; and 
(2)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a potentially dangerous dog on the property. Such sign shall prominently display the dangerous dog symbol designed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the city code enforcement officer evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the minimum amount of $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog: or 
(2)  A security bond in the amount of $50,000.00 or more issued by a surely company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the city code enforcement officer or chief of police within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is confined, has attacked a human, has died or has been sold, donated, or disposed of. If the dog has been sold, donated or disposed of, the owner shall provide the city code enforcement officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(e)  The owner of the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the city code enforcement officer or chief of police if the owner is moving from the city. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the city shall register the dog as required in this section within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
(f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the city does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in subsection (b) and (c) of this section were met or are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(g)  The code enforcement officer or police officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-28. - Restrictions on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs to be outside proper enclosure. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(c)  A chain or leash shall not be required if the potentially dangerous dog is housed in a kennel that has been approved by the code enforcement officer. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-29. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds, disposition. 
(a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the Tattnall County Dangerous Dog Animal Control Unit if the: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure or maintain the liability insurance or bond required by section 6-27(c)(1). 
(2)  The dog is not validly registered as required by section 6-27(a). 
(3)  The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure, or 
(4)  The dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 6-28(a) and (b). 
(b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is; 
(1)  Not validly registered as required by section 6-27(a). 
(2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(3)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 6-28(a). 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with provisions of this article and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs including the boarding at a rate (current rate set by Tattnall County Animal Control), per day, plus a pickup fee of $50.00 and the current cost of rabies vaccination if the animal's owner does not produce proof of a current rabies vaccination. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within the 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Secs. 6-30—6-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK AND FOWL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 18-17, adopted Feb. 6, 2018, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 6-121—6-123, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1982, §§ 1-303—1-305. 

Sec. 6-40. - Livestock and fowl cannot run at large or be kept in public place. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any livestock or domestic fowl to permit the same to run at large within the corporate limit of the city or to keep the same in any manner in any public street or other public place. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-41. - Keeping of hogs prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to retain or keep hogs within the corporate limits of the city with the exception of areas zoned agriculture. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-42. - Keeping of animals; sanitation. 
Any housing or enclosure used for the keeping of animals or fowl shall be well-drained, free from accumulation of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-43. - Distance of animal enclosures from buildings. 
(a)  Any enclosure used for the keeping of livestock or fowl outside of a building shall be kept at the following minimum distance from any occupied building, except the dwelling unit of the owner. 
(1)  Livestock, dogs and fowl, number allowed and distance. 
Up to five cattle, sheep, goats and similar animals: 100 feet. 
Up to five rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters and similar animals over 90 days old: 100 feet. 
Up to 12 fowl (no roosters): 100 feet. 
(2)  Horse stables (not enclosures or fences) shall be a minimum of 100 feet from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-44. - Livestock and fowl running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any livestock or fowl to run loose or at large on the streets, commons or unenclosed places within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-45. - Operating pens for sale of livestock or fowl. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate within the corporate limits of the city any stock pen for the sale of livestock or fowl. 
(Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Secs. 6-46—6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HONEY BEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 18-17, adopted Feb. 6, 2018, renumbered art. IV, §§ 6-151—6-154 as art. IV, §§ 6-51—6-54. 

Sec. 6-51. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Apiary means the assembly of one or more hives of bees at a single location. 
Beekeeper means a person who owns or has charge of one or more hives of bees. 
Hive means an aggregate of bees consisting principally of workers, but having, when perfect, one queen and at times many drones, including brood, combs, honey and the receptacle inhabited by the bees. 
Hobby beekeeping means a beekeeper that is not required to be licensed under the provisions of the Georgia Bee Law (O.C.G.A. 2-14-40). 
(Res. No. 15-18, 3-3-2015; Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-52. - Nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any beekeeper to keep any hive or hives in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any unhealthy condition, interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others or interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of a public property or property of others. 
(Res. No. 15-18, 3-3-2015; Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-53. - Hobby beekeeping. 
Hobby beekeeping may be permitted provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Requirement for commercial beekeepers. The Georgia Bee Law (O.C.G.A., § 2-14-40) requires that all beekeepers selling bees, queens, nuclei, etc., commercially be licensed. All other beekeepers (e.g., hobbyists, pollinators, honey producers) are not required to be licensed. 
(2)  The raising and keeping of honey bees for personal pleasure or utility on a lot which contains the dwelling of the property owner of the honey bee hive boxes provided that the lot is at least 10,000 square feet in area and that the honey bee hive boxes are located in the rear yard and no closer than ten feet to any property line and provided that no nuisance is created as defined under other sections of this Code. 
(3)  Hive densities. Two hives shall be permitted for the first one-quarter acre and one additional hive for each one-quarter acre thereafter. Hives are prohibited on parcels having an area of less than one-quarter acre. 
(4)  Water. Each beekeeper shall ensure that [a] convenient source of water is available to the bees at all times. The water shall be in a location that minimizes any nuisance created by bees seeking water on neighborhood property. 
(5)  Africanized honey bees. The African species of bees or any hybrid involving the African species is prohibited. 
(Res. No. 15-18, 3-3-2015; Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 6-54. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 15-18, 3-3-2015; Res. No. 18-17, 2-6-2018) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 22; floods, ch. 26; unsafe buildings, § 30-111 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 38; hazardous refuse and building materials, § 38-85; building materials, § 38-166; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 46; construction contractors, § 50-201 et seq.; utilities, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 62; building inspector, § 62-44; building or placement permits, § 62-45; non-conforming uses, § 62-141 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Numbering of houses and buildings. 
Standards for numbering houses and buildings: 
(1)  Each existing house, building or business not displaying building numbers (assigned street address numbers) is required to display the assigned building number within 30 days after receiving notification of noncompliance by the city. 
(2)  All new houses, buildings or business must display within 30 days of receiving notification of the house number assignment, the owner, occupant or agent of each house, building or business shall display the assigned number on the structure. 
(3)  The property owner, occupant or agent of each house, building or other structure, shall pay for the cost and installation of the numbers. 
(4)  Residential numbers shall not be less than three inches in height. Business numbers shall not be less than six inches in height. All numbers shall be made of durable, clearly visible material and shall contrast with the color of the house, building or other structure. 
(5)  All numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the appropriate door so that the number is clearly visible from the street. In cases where the building is situated more than 50 feet from the street, the building number shall be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to the building, or upon the mailbox, gatepost, fence or other appropriate place so as to be clearly visible from the street. 
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefore, shall be subject to section 1-11. Each day of continued violation after conviction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 8-1-2006(1)) 
Sec 10-2. - Exterior structures. 
(a)  General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipping paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints, the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
(c)  Structure members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(d)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plum and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent entry of rodents and other pests. 
(e)  Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
(f)  Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(g)  Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, sighs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(h)  Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable or supporting the imposed loads. 
(i)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(j)  Enforcement; penalty. This division shall be enforced by the office of the city building inspector. Citations for noncompliance may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city and subject to provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, 11-13-2007) 
Secs. 10-3—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12). 

Sec. 10-31. - Adoption by reference. 
The following technical building and construction codes are adopted by reference and may be amended for later editions as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25: 
(1)  International Building Code with State of Georgia Amendments, current edition. 
(2)  International Fuel Code with State of Georgia Amendments, current edition. 
(3)  International Mechanical Code with State of Georgia Amendments, current edition. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code with State of Georgia Amendments, current edition. 
(5)  National Electrical Code with State of Georgia Amendments, current edition. 
(6)  International Fire Code with State of Georgia Amendments, current edition. 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code with State of Georgia Amendments, current edition. 
(8)  International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings with State of Georgia Amendments, current edition. 
(9)  International Property Maintenance Code with State of Georgia Amendments, current edition. 
(Ord. No. 08-01, 7-10-2007; Res. No. 15-11, 2-3-2015) 
Secs. 10-32—10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLUMBING FIXTURE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-61. - Findings of fact. 
The city council finds that an adequate supply of clean drinking water is a precious and essential resource upon which life depends. The city council further finds that the average annual per capita consumption of potable water due to indoor water-using activities in the United States exceeds 18,000 gallons and that the demand for clean water supplies continues to increase despite the limitations of availability and affordability of such supplies. The city council further finds that technology is available to improve the efficiency of plumbing products. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(8-2-1), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 10-62. - Purpose of article. 
The purposes of this article are as follows: 
(1)  To promote greater efficiency in residential and commercial water use and preserve the natural resources of this city; 
(2)  To reduce consumer water and energy costs by reducing indoor water use, reducing the need for new water supplies and treatment facilities, lowering operation and maintenance costs for water and sewer utilities, and reducing the amount of energy used to heat, treat, and transport water; and 
(3)  To generate consumer awareness of the need to save water and of the savings that can result from the use of efficient plumbing products. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(8-2-2), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 10-63. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, shower head, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(8-2-3(A)), 6-5-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-64. - Prohibited equipment. 
(a)  After July 1, 1991, there shall not be initiated within this city the construction of any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flush meter-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, that this section shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(b)  On and after July 1, 1992, there shall not be initiated within this city the construction of any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsection (a)(1)—(5) of this section. 
(c)  The requirement of subsection (a) of this section shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes the replacement of toilets or showers, or both. 
(d)  The city is authorized and directed to provide by ordinance for exemption to the requirements of subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section, relative to new construction and to the repair or renovation of an existing building, under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets, or shower heads within such existing building; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets, or shower heads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  When such system is well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  When units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
The ordinances adopted by the city pursuant to this subsection (d) shall provide procedures and requirements to apply for the exemption authorized by said subsection. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to any construction of a residential building the contract for which was entered into prior to July 1, 1991, and shall not apply to any construction of a commercial building the contract for which was entered into prior to July 1, 1992. 
(f)  Any person who installs any toilet, faucet, urinal, or shower head in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(g)  Before July 1, 1991, the city shall adopt and enforce the provisions of this section in order to be eligible to receive any of the following grants, loans, or permits: 
(1)  A water or wastewater facilities grant administered by the department of natural resources or the department of community affairs; or 
(2)  A water or wastewater facilities loan administered by the state environmental facilities authority. 
(h)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the city from adopting and enforcing ordinances which provide requirements which are more stringent than the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(8-2-3(B)-(J)), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 10-65. - Location of full-open valves. 
Full-open valves shall be installed in the following location: 
(1)  On the building water service pipe from the public water supply near the curb. 
(2)  On the water distribution supply pipe at the entrance into the structure. 
(3)  On the discharge side of every water meter. 
(4)  On the base of every water riser pipe in occupancies other than multiple-family residential occupancies that are two stories or less in height and in one-family and two-family residential occupancies. 
(5)  On the top of every water down-feed pipe in occupancies other than one-family and two-family residential occupancies. 
(6)  On the entrance to every water supply pipe to a dwelling unit, except where supplying a single fixture equipped with individual stops. 
(7)  On the water supply pipe to a gravity or pressurized water tank. 
(8)  On water supply pipe to every water heater. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(606.1), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 10-66. - Location of shutoff valves. 
Shutoff valves shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  On the fixture supply to each plumbing fixture in other than one-family and two-family and multiple-family residential occupancies, and other than in individual guestrooms that are provided with unit shutoff valves in hotels, motels, boarding houses and similar occupancies. 
(2)  On the water supply pipe to each sillcock. 
(3)  On the water supply pipe to each appliance or mechanical equipment. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(606.1), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 10-67. - Thermal expansion control. 
A means of controlling increased pressure caused by thermal expansion shall be provided where required in accordance with sections 10-68 and 10-69. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(607.3), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 10-68. - Pressure reducing valve. 
For water service system sizes up to and including two inches (51 mm), a device for controlling pressure shall be installed where, because of thermal expansion, the pressure on the downstream side of a pressure reducing valve exceeds the main supply pressure. A pressure reducing valve with an integral bypass check valve or other device shall be installed to satisfy this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(607.3.1), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 10-69. - Prevention of cross connection. 
A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner so as to prevent contamination from nonpotable liquids, solids or gases being introduced into the potable water supply through cross connections or any other piping connections to the system. Backflow preventer applications shall conform to law. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(608.1), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 10-70. - Hose connection. 
(a)  Generally. Sillcocks, hose bibbs, wall hydrants and other openings with a hose connection shall be protected by an atmospheric-type or pressure-type vacuum breaker or a permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
(b)  Exception. 
(1)  This section shall not apply to water heater and boiler drain valves that are provided with hose connection threads and that are intended only for tank or vessel draining. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to water supply valves intended for connection of clothes washing machines where backflow prevention is otherwise provided or is integral with the machine. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(608.15.4.2), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 10-71. - Connections to lawn irrigation systems. 
The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure- type vacuum breaker or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 1(608.16.5), 6-5-2001) 
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42. 

Sec. 14-1. - Management and supervision. 
The responsibility for the management, operation, maintenance and general supervision of all municipal cemeteries shall be vested in the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 3-101) 
Sec. 14-2. - Superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(a)  Appointment. The city council shall appoint a superintendent of municipal cemeteries, which officer shall be subject to removal at any time by the city council. 
(b)  Duties. The superintendent of municipal cemeteries shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To look after and take proper care of all municipal cemeteries and see that no lot in any cemetery is used or occupied in violation of this chapter or of any rule or regulation promulgated by the mayor and council; 
(2)  To keep full and detailed accounts of the receipts and expenditures on account of the municipal cemeteries, and at least once a month to turn over to the city treasurer all monies collected on such accounts; and 
(3)  To see to the digging of graves and to the proper entering of the dead when called upon to do so. 
(Code 1982, § 3-102) 
Sec. 14-3. - Purchase and conveyance of lots. 
(a)  Lot valuation. The mayor and council shall place a value upon all unsold lots in the municipal cemeteries, and shall record such valuations on an official map or plan of each cemetery, which maps shall be kept on file, open to public inspection, in the office of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(b)  Method of purchase. Any person desiring to purchase an easement in a particular lot, for the purpose for which it is intended, shall be permitted to do so upon payment of the price fixed for such lot or upon making arrangements, according to rules and regulations that may be established by the mayor and council, for the purchase of such lot or lots on an installment plan. There shall be no discrimination in the sale of lots on any basis. 
(c)  Manner of conveying. Conveyances of burial lots shall be executed in the name of the city by the mayor and city clerk and have affixed thereto the seal of the city. Such conveyances shall not convey fee simple title, but shall convey to the purchaser of each burial lot an easement for the exclusive right of interment and sepulcher in such lot; shall state the maximum number of graves allowed on each such burial lot as shown by the plat; and, by reference therein made, shall convey each lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter as fully as if set out in each such conveyance. 
(d)  Recordation of deed. At the time the city conveys any burial lot, the city clerk, in addition to collecting the purchase price thereof, shall collect from the purchaser an amount sufficient to have such conveyance recorded in the clerk's office, the county superior court, and shall have such conveyance so recorded before delivery thereof to such purchaser. No sale or transfer of any such burial lot or any right therein, nor any subdividing of any burial lot by any purchaser or those claiming under him, shall be valid unless approved in writing by the city or until the deed of transfer and such written approval are recorded in the clerk's office of the county superior court. 
(e)  Records of ownership. The city clerk shall keep full and complete records of the ownership of all lot easements in the municipal cemeteries, of the burial capacity of each lot, of the location of each grave, of the names and ages of the persons buried in each grave that has been or shall hereafter be used, and of the date of burial of each. 
(f)  Sale or transfer by owner. Owners of lots shall not be permitted to sell or transfer lots without the written consent and approval of the city clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 3-103) 
Sec. 14-4. - Rules for interment. 
No deceased person shall be interred in any municipal cemetery until the superintendent of municipal cemeteries has found: 
(1)  That the lot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for; 
(2)  That the person arranging for such burial has the right to the use of such lot; 
(3)  That such lot is not used beyond its capacity; and 
(4)  That proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person and of the exact location of the grave. 
(Code 1982, § 3-104) 
Sec. 14-5. - Restrictions on use. 
(a)  Enclosures. No fencing, or enclosure of any sort shall be erected on, in or around any burial lot in the cemetery, but the city reserves the right to erect curbing along the walks and driveways if it so desires. 
(b)  Plantings. The planting of flowers and shrubs or any other effort to improve or beautify any lot within a municipal cemetery shall be done only after the plans for such work shall have been submitted to the city manager and approved thereby. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the decoration or adornment of any grave site with potted or cut flowers or plants. 
(c)  Stones and monuments. Owners of cemetery lot easements shall have the right to erect proper stones or monuments marking the burial site. 
(1)  Headstones shall not exceed two feet in height above the ground and 18 inches in width and shall be set in a solid concrete foundation. 
(2)  Monuments of cut stone or marble shall not exceed ten feet in height and the erection of same must be authorized and supervised by the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(d)  Mausoleums. Mausoleums may be placed on the burial lots designated on the plat of a municipal cemetery as "memorial lots," by the holders thereof, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Before erecting any mausoleum, the holder of such lot shall furnish complete plans and specifications to the city clerk, for submission to the city manager, together with an application for permission to construct; and no mausoleum shall be erected until such application is approved. 
(2)  A mausoleum shall be situated from the front line of the lot on which it is placed at a distance not less than the depth of the structure itself, and from all other sides of the lot at a distance equal to the greatest height of the structure. 
(3)  No bodies shall be placed in any such mausoleum except in sealed caskets and in hermetically sealed compartments. 
(Code 1982, § 3-105) 
Sec. 14-6. - Regulations generally. 
(a)  Trees and shrubs. No tree or shrub shall be planted, removed, cut down or destroyed within the borders of any burial lot, walks, or lawn spaces, without the consent of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(b)  Injury to monuments. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface, or in any manner injure any monument, enclosure, mausoleum, or ornament thereof within any municipal cemetery. 
(c)  Discharging firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any gun, pistol, or other firearm within any municipal cemetery except at a funeral ceremony. 
(d)  Depositing offensive matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any part of any cemetery or any land adjoining it any dead carcass or any putrid or offensive matter whatever. 
(e)  Disorderly conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself in a boisterous or disorderly manner within the perimeter of any municipal cemetery. 
(f)  Entering cemeteries at night. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any municipal cemetery or walk upon or across any such cemetery between sunset and sunrise without the written consent of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(g)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to post any advertisement or sign, or to solicit any work in a municipal cemetery. 
(h)  Unauthorized interments. It shall be unlawful for any person to inter any dead body in any part of a municipal cemetery without the express authorization of the superintendent of municipal cemeteries. 
(i)  Disinterment. 
(1)  Disinterment shall be made only when authorized by the mayor and council and the Tattnall County Board of Health (A copy from the Tattnall Board of Health's approval must be submitted to the city). 
(2)  Prior to disinterment a permit must be provided by the Probate Judge, Tattanll County. A copy of this permit must be provided to the city. 
(3)  After disinterment, the head stone, slab, vault and any other items directly related to the disinterment must be removed and the void backfilled with clean compacted fill dirt. 
(4)  A certificate of disposal must be provided to the city for all items removed and disposed of during disinterment. 
(5)  The permit holder shall comply with all current federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including environmental laws and regulations as they currently exist, and shall comply with any additions or changes subsequently made thereto. Further, the permit holder shall indemnify and hold the city harmless for any violations of said laws and/or regulations. 
(6)  The permit holder shall provide the city with proof of a commercial general liability policy in effect for the period of time necessary to complete the disinterment process. 
(7)  The city must approve final restoration of the abandoned grave site. 
(Code 1982, § 3-106; Ord. No. 08-38, 3-11-2008) 
Sec. 14-7. - Authority of the city to regulate. 
(a)  The mayor and city council of the city reserve to themselves and their successors in office the right to alter, amend, modify or add to the rules, regulations, conditions, and restrictions herein set forth at any time it is deemed advisable so to do in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  There shall be no liability whatsoever, either tort or contractual, on the part of the city, or its officials or officers (or their successors in office), or its agents or employees, to any purchasers of any lots in the cemetery, or to any person holding under them or to the family or relatives of any person buried in the cemetery, or to any monument, marker, or mausoleum therein, by reason of any act or acts, thing or things, omission, negligence, or otherwise relating to the cemetery. In accepting any conveyance of any burial lot, each purchaser agrees that all provisions of this chapter are valid and that he and his heirs and assigns shall hold such lot subject to all the provisions of this chapter and subject to all amendments hereto made by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-107) 
Chapter 18 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTERPRISE ZONE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-88-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-31. - Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ad valorem tax means property taxes levied for state or county operating purposes but does not include property taxes imposed by school districts or property taxes imposed for general obligation debt. 
Business enterprise means any business that is engaged primarily in manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, processing, telecommunications, tourism, and research and development industries. 
Enterprise zone means the geographic area designated in section 18-33 for a period of ten years beginning January 1 (year to be established), and ending December 31, for a ten-year period. 
Full-time job equivalent means a job with no predetermined end date, with a regular workweek of 30 hours or more, and with the same benefits provided to similar employees. 
Low-income and moderate-income individual means a person who, at the time of hire, is: 
(1)  Unemployed or unemployed for three of the six months prior to the date of hire; 
(2)  Homeless; 
(3)  A resident of public housing; 
(4)  Receiving temporary assistance to needy families or who has received temporary assistance to needy families at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
(5)  A participant in the Job Training Partnership Act or who has participated in the Job Training Partnership Act at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
(6)  A participant in a job opportunity where basic skills are required or who has participated in such a job opportunity during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
(7)  Receiving supplemental social security income; or 
(8)  Receiving food stamps. 
Municipal building permit fees are established for enterprise zones at a reduced rate, and are not subject to year/month restrictions. 
New job means employment for an individual created within an enterprise zone by a new or expanded qualified business or service enterprise at the time of the initial staffing of such new or expanded enterprise. 
Qualified or qualifying service enterprise means an entity that meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-88-1 et seq. (including O.C.G.A. § 36-88-4) and section 18-34(b). 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 10-3-2000; Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-32. - Purpose and scope of article. 
It has been found by the mayor and council that there is a need for revitalization in certain areas of the city. Revitalization will improve geographic areas within the city which are suffering from disinvestments, underdevelopment, and economic decline and will encourage private businesses to reinvest and rehabilitate such areas. This article should be liberally construed to accomplish these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 2, 10-3-2000; Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 18-33. - Boundaries of enterprise zone. 
The mayor and council have determined that the area contained in the enterprise zone delineated below satisfies three of the four criteria set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6. More specifically, it is determined that there is evidence of adverse economic conditions brought about by significant job dislocation within the area delineated below, there is evidence of general distress within the area other than poverty and unemployment, and there is evidence of underdevelopment within the area showing that the level of development in the nominated area is at least 20 percent lower than the development activity within the city as a whole. The enterprise zone created herein shall have the geographic boundaries shown on Exhibit "A" attached to [Resolution No. 17-02 and incorporated herein by reference.] 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 3, 10-3-2000; Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Editor's note— Exhibit "A" to Ordinance No. 17-02 is not printed herein but is on file in the clerk's office. 
Sec. 18-34. - Qualifications and tax exemptions. 
(a)  In order to encourage revitalizations within the designated enterprise zone, the following exemptions from state and county ad valorem taxes are available to qualifying business and service enterprises: 
(1)  One hundred percent of the state and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the first five years; 
(2)  Eighty percent of the state and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next two years; 
(3)  Sixty percent of the state and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next (eighth) year; 
(4)  Forty percent of the state and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next (ninth) year; and 
(5)  Twenty percent of the state and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the last (tenth) year. 
(b)  A qualifying business or service enterprise is an enterprise which increased employment by five or more new full-time job equivalents in the enterprise zone designated in section 18-33 and which enterprise provides additional economic stimulus in such enterprise zone. The quality and quantity of such additional economic stimulus shall be determined, on a case-by-case basis, by the mayor and council or its designated agent. Such business or service enterprise may be a new business or service enterprise, an expansion project for an existing business or service enterprise, a reinvestment into an existing business or service enterprise, or a successor to such business or service enterprise. At no time shall this article be construed to apply to a business or service enterprise's land, buildings, equipment or other property that existed at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived unless such business or service enterprise qualifies under subsection (d) of this section. Whenever possible, ten percent of the above-described new full-time job equivalents shall be filled or staffed with low-income or moderate-income individuals. 
(c)  For a qualifying business or service enterprise located within the enterprise zone designated herein, the schedule provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall begin in the calendar year of said enterprise's designation as a "qualifying business or service enterprise" by the mayor and council or other designated agent. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as giving any business or service enterprise or property owner a vested right to be designated as a qualifying business or service enterprise. A minimum of five new jobs must be created and maintained for a qualifying business or service enterprise to maintain eligibility for the tax exemption provided in this article. Evidence of the creation and maintenance of all new jobs within the enterprise zone shall be submitted to the mayor and council or its designated agents by the qualifying business or service enterprise at such times as required by said mayor and council or its designated agents, and no less frequently than annually. The qualifying business or service enterprise shall submit a form, substantially similar to that attached to Ordinance No. 00-15 as Exhibit "B" to the mayor and council or its designated agent. Annually, qualifying business or service enterprise will submit an "annual job retention worksheet and certification" on a form substantially similar to Exhibit "C" attached to Ordinance No. 00-15 to the mayor and council or its designated agent. 
(d)  If a project within the designated enterprise zone consists of rehabilitation and improvement of an existing structure and the value of said improvement exceeds the value of the accompanying tract or parcel of land by a ratio of five to one, then the exemption schedule in subsection (a) of this section shall also apply whether or not the rehabilitation project is carried out by a qualifying business or service enterprise. The tax exemptions pursuant to this subsection shall commence in the year following designation of the project by the mayor and council or other designated agent as a qualifying project under this subsection. 
(e)  In no event shall the value of the property tax exemptions granted within the city as a whole exceed ten percent of the value of the property tax digest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 4, 10-3-2000; Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 17-02, adopted Aug. 2, 2016, changed the title of § 18-34 from "Qualifications and incentives" to read as herein set out. 
Note— The exhibits referred to in this section are not printed herein but are on file in the clerk's office. 
Sec. 18-35. - Other available incentives. 
(a)  Incentives for reduction of municipal building permit fees are available for qualifying business with planned construction of facility(s) in excess of 10,000 square feet. 
(1)  Permit cost of $0.20 per square foot for the first 10,000 square footage of building; 
(2)  Permit cost of $0.15 per square foot for next 10,001 to 20,000 square footage of building; 
(3)  Permit cost of $0.05 per square foot for 20,001 and above square footage of building. 
(Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 18-36. - Duration. 
The area designated as an enterprise zone shall remain in existence for ten years from the first day of the calendar year immediately following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Ad valorem tax exemptions available to a qualified business or service enterprise in the enterprise zone herein created shall remain in effect for the full ten-year period established in section 18-34(a) regardless of the termination of the designation of an enterprise zone. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 5, 10-3-2000; Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 17-02, adopted Aug. 2, 2016, amended the Code by redesignating §§ 18-35—18-40 as §§ 18-36—18-41. 
Sec. 18-37. - Administration. 
The mayor and city council, together with any other designated agent, shall administer and enforce this article for the purpose of determining the applicability of the exemptions as provided herein. A copy of this article shall be furnished to the county tax assessor, and copies of all applications for tax abatement shall also be furnished to the county tax assessor concurrent with the applications to the mayor and city council or other designated agent. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 6, 10-3-2000; Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 18-36. 
Sec. 18-38. - Application. 
(a)  Each enterprise desiring designation as a "qualifying business or service enterprise" must apply to the city as well as any other designated agent on behalf of the city. In addition to the other information requested by the city the application should be accompanied by the following items: 
(1)  A description of the business conducted by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone. 
(2)  Documentation reflecting the number of full-time job equivalents maintained by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone as of the date of application, as compared to the number of such full-time job equivalents maintained as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(3)  The name and address of each employee occupying each new full-time job at the subject location within the enterprise zone, and a determination of whether each employee was a low-income or moderate-income individual as of the date of hire for the new full-time job. 
(4)  A description and documentation of any additional economic stimulus provided within the enterprise zone by the applicant. 
(b)  For those enterprises applying for exemption under section 18-34(d), the application to the city shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A description of the business conducted by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone; 
(2)  Documentation reflecting expenses of rehabilitation of the existing structure; 
(3)  An appraisal or appraisals reflecting the value of the structure both before and after rehabilitation; 
(4)  An appraisal or appraisals reflecting the value of the accompanying tract or parcel both before and after rehabilitation of the structure; and 
(5)  Photographic documentation of the structure both before and after rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 7, 10-3-2000; Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 18-36. 
Sec. 18-39. - Separate business locations. 
Where a business is operated at more than one location, only a location within the enterprise zone shall be eligible for the tax exemptions provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 8, 10-3-2000; Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 18-36. 
Sec. 18-40. - Record of exemption to be maintained. 
Any locations for which tax exemptions provided in this article have been granted shall maintain documentation relating to the grant of said exemptions at the address for which the exemptions were approved. Said documentation shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer of the city when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 9, 10-3-2000; Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 18-36. 
Sec. 18-41. - Contractual agreement. 
As a condition of receiving the tax exemptions provided in this article, a qualifying business or service enterprise shall consent to enter into a contractual agreement that outlines the tax exemptions offered to such business or service enterprise and that further provides guidelines for the recapture, revocation or reimbursement of taxes should terms of the contractual agreement, this article or the Georgia Enterprise Zone Employment Act of 1997 be violated by the business or service enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 10, 10-3-2000; Res. No. 17-02, 8-2-2016) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 18-36. 
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 18; floods, ch. 26; parks and recreation, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 38; hazardous refuse and building materials, § 38-85; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR QUALITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Air quality control for LI industrial districts, § 62-393. 

Sec. 22-31. - Emissions of gases, vapors, and odors. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, or allow any emissions of gases, vapors, or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as is or is likely to be injurious to the public welfare; to the health of human, plant, or animal life; or to property; or which interfere with the enjoyment of life and property. 
(b)  Detectable odors emitted from the following sources of emission are declared to be objectionable per se: 
Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture. 
Asphalt manufacture or refining. 
Bag cleaning. 
Blood processing. 
Celluloid manufacture. 
Coal tar products manufacture. 
Compost heaps. 
Crematory. 
Creosote treatment or manufacture. 
Disinfectants manufacture. 
Distillation of bones, coal, or wood. 
Dyestuff manufacture. 
Fat rendering. 
Fertilizer manufacture and bone grinding. 
Glue or gelatine manufacture. 
Incinerator or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, or refuse. 
Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture. 
Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture. 
Rubber or gutta percha manufacture. 
Sauerkraut manufacture. 
Shoe-blacking manufacture. 
Soap manufacture. 
Stockyards. 
Sulphuric, nitric, or hydrochloric acid manufacture. 
Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins. 
Tar distillation or manufacture. 
Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture. 
Any other air contaminant discharged into open air of a character and in a quantity which is detrimental to or endangers the public health. 
(Code 1982, § 2-101) 
Sec. 22-32. - Open burning. 
(a)  Generally. Except as hereinafter provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person shall kindle an open fire in any public or private place outside any building. Fires started in violation of this section shall be promptly extinguished by the persons responsible for the same upon notice by the chief of police, fire chief or their duly designated agent. During the existence of an air pollution alert, as may be declared by the mayor, all exceptions are void and no open fires shall be kindled. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Open burning is authorized under permit. Burn permits (for piles six feet by six feet) may be obtained from the Georgia Forestry Commission, telephone number 877-652-2876, or online at www.gatrees.org. For piles larger than six feet by six feet, call telephone number 912-557-7824, or online www.gfc.state.ga.us. 
a.  Only leaves and limbs may be burned. Piles to be burned cannot exceed six feet by six feet by four feet high. 
b.  Building materials cannot be burned. 
c.  Stumps, tree trunks and limbs from land clearing cannot be burned. 
d.  Tires or other manufactured materials cannot be burned. 
e.  Authorized burning is only permitted on the day the permit is issued. All fires must be attended at all times and extinguished by dark. 
(2)  Open burning may be done without permit as follows: 
a.  Fires may be used for cooking of food, provided that no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
b.  Salamanders or other devices may be used for heating by construction or other workers, provided that no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
c.  Open fires may be set for recreational purposes, such as campfires, provided that no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. The following guidelines apply to open fires: 
1.  Recreational fires must be at least 25 feet from all structures. 
2.  Recreational fires must be attended by an adult at all times. 
3.  A water hose or fire extinguisher must be on hand that can reach the fire, and can be ready to use if needed. 
4.  Recreational fires shall not be started with petroleum-based products. 
5  Recreational fires are allowed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. 
d.  Fires in an outdoor fireplace, fire bowl, or other similar device. 
(Code 1982, § 2-102; Amd. of 11-7-2006, § 2; Res. No. 14-18, 1-7-2014; Res. No. 17-13, 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 22-33. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the fire chief and the police chief and such subordinate officers of the fire department as are necessary to effectuate the requirements set forth herein. 
(Code 1982, § 2-103) 
Sec. 22-34. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-11. 
(b)  Action pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall not be a bar to enforcement of this chapter by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the police chief shall have the power to institute and maintain in the name of the municipality any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit, or otherwise impair the right of any person to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding for damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property. 
(Code 1982, § 2-104) 
Secs. 22-35—22-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 17-01, adopted July 5, 2016, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 22-71—22-80, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. 10-12, §§ I—IX, X(C), adopted Oct. 6, 2009. 

Sec. 22-71. - Title. 
This article will be known as "The City of Glennville Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance". 
(Res. No. 17-01, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 22-72. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means that these include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc.. which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR), 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Coastal Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 22-74(c) of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 22-73(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the sight scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Res. No. 17-01, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 22-73. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs section 22-74(c)(15). of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A, § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power, except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Res. No. 17-01, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 22-74. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPS. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15), (16) and (17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsections (c)(16) and (17) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream; that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table yearround; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
17.  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Res. No. 17-01, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 22-75. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Glennville without first obtaining a permit from the local issuing authority to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 22-74(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9), (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 22-74(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 22-74(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsection 22-74(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 (f)(1). 
(Res. No. 17-01, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 22-76. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The local issuing authority will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The local issuing authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Res. No. 17-01, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 22-77. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and; 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 22-75(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Res. No. 17-01, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 22-78. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(4)(b) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Res. No. 17-01, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 22-79. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Tattnall County. 
(Res. No. 17-01, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 22-80. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the fifth day of July, 2016. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Res. No. 17-01, 7-5-2016) 
Secs. 22-81—22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-101. - Purpose of article. 
It is the intent and policy of the city to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the city and its residents; to protect the natural resources, the environment, and the public health of the city; to facilitate the adequate provision of on-site sewage management for all development in the local jurisdiction; to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other development; to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas, and wildlife habitat areas; to establish measures to preserve an adequate supply of safe drinking water and a quality for state waters which is necessary to protect the health and welfare of the public as well as to provide for future growth; to protect the environment, including the soils, air quality, and water resources, from pollution and inappropriate development; to assist in the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of the city; and to require permits for new development or location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 2, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 CFR 261, and as amended. 
Lot means the contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where the severance creates any nonconformity of size or use. 
Perennial river/stream means a river/stream or section of a river/stream that normally flows continuously throughout the whole year. 
Protected river corridor means all land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river within a distance of 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river measured from the uppermost part of the river bank; the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the water is included in the protected area. 
River/stream bank means the rising ground, bordering a river or a stream, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, or building development, whether immediate or future. This shall include all divisions or resubdivisions of land involving a new road or change in existing roads. Excluded from this definition is the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 3, 11-7-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-103. - Permit required. 
No building, mobile home, structure, or land within the jurisdiction of the city shall be erected, constructed, located, moved, used, subdivided, altered or disturbed except in conformity with the regulations of this article and without first obtaining a permit from the city. This section does and shall apply to the location of all manufactured housing and industrialized buildings in the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 4.1, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-104. - Minimum lot size. 
All lots intended for residential or other use within the city shall be of such size as necessary to meet all requirements, rules, and regulations of the state department of human resources according to the "Rules of Georgia Department of Human Resources Public Health for On-Site Sewage Management Systems" manual for on-site sewage management; and as necessary to comply with the minimums set forth in tables MT-1 and MT-2 in section 22-118, if on-site sewage management is utilized; and/or this article, whichever is stricter. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 4.2, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-105. - On-site sewage management permit required. 
No person or business shall construct an on-site sewage management system on any lot within the city until site approval and an on-site sewage management construction permit has been obtained from and issued by the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 4.3, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-106. - Permit coordination. 
The required permit under section 22-103 shall not be issued until the county health department issues an on-site sewage management construction permit or a site approval letter, whichever is appropriate, so that all lots proposed to be used or subdivided would satisfy the requirements of this article, including the "Rules of Georgia Department of Human Resources for On-Site Sewage Management Systems." If the county health department is delegated the responsibility for administering this article, the permit or letter under this section shall suffice as the permit required under section 22-103. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 4.4, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-107. - Requirements are minimum. 
The regulations and requirements set by this article shall be the minimum requirements. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 4.5, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-108. - Compliance with state and federal regulations. 
All developments, structures, and uses within the city shall also meet the requirements of all other local, federal and state regulations in effect, including but not limited to, department of transportation regulations, state fire marshal regulations, Georgia's Uniform Construction Codes, and the state department of natural resources and state environmental protection division environmental rules and regulations. Issuance of a permit under this article does not constitute certification of compliance with such codes or regulations, and does not abrogate responsibility of the owner to so comply. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 4.6, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-109. - Map interpretation. 
If there is any uncertainty as to whether a lot, portion of lot, or a proposed construction or location impacts an environmental resource regulated by this article because of interpretation of the applicable map, the decision of the city or the county health department if it is delegated the responsibility for administering this article shall take precedent and be considered correct and final, but may be appealed as set forth in section 22-110. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 4.7, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-110. - Map appeal. 
Any person who feels aggrieved by a decision of the city or the county health department, as appropriate, regarding map interpretation may at their own expense request reconsideration. Such reconsideration shall include submission of scientific evidence for reversal of the alleged error in map interpretation, and such evidence must be documented by a state registered engineer, geologist, or soils scientist. To obtain a reversal of the decision of map interpretation, the evidence must be acceptable to the state department of natural resources' environmental protection division, the city and the county health department if the county health department is delegated responsibility for administering this article. Any costs for submission of evidence to the state department of natural resources' environmental protection division shall be borne by the person requesting reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 4.8, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-111. - Coordination with zoning and other regulations. 
This article shall be coordinated with any zoning or other regulations adopted by the city, and if there is any conflict with those zoning or other regulations, the stricter provisions shall apply. If zoning is or has been adopted, the provisions of this article shall be considered an overlay, or additional requirements to the requirements of underlying zoning regulations and district. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 4.9, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-112. - Fees. 
(a)  Any fees for applications, inspections, and the issuance of permits or certificates required or issued under the provisions of this article shall be paid by the person seeking such permit at the time of application in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. 
(b)  The amount of such fees, if any, shall be those established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 4.10, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-113. - Delegation of administration. 
The city, because of the need for coordination, hereby charges the zoning administrator with responsibility for administering this article and ensuring compliance with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 5, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-114. - Variances. 
When, due to a particular hardship or extraordinary circumstance of the property involved which is not easily corrected, it is impractical for an owner or developer to comply with all of the requirements of this article, the city shall be authorized to vary such requirements (under its jurisdiction) only to such extent as to provide fairness to the owner or developer and as to not violate the intent and purposes of this article. Such variances shall only be granted in an official public meeting, and the reasons for granting them shall be entered into the minutes of the public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 9, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-115. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violation of these provisions, prohibitions, and installation restrictions by any private individual, land owner, builder, remodeler, contractor, licensed electrician, licensed plumber, septic tank dealer or installer, mobile or manufactured home dealer or mover, or developer; or installation and delivery of any utility services by a public or private utility to any property which holds a septic tank system installed against these prohibitions and restrictions, shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Any person violating, neglecting, or refusing to comply with any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law. The city may take other actions or remedies as available at law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 10, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-116. - Court of jurisdiction. 
The city or the county board of health, as appropriate, may bring complaints of violation of any provision of this article before either the county magistrate court, the county's state court, or the municipal court, as so desired. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 11, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-117. - Conflicting ordinances. 
Whenever the provision of this article and those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 12, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-118. - Minimum lot sizing for on-site sewage management. 
(a)  Minimum lot size requirements for these lots utilizing on-site management systems are as follows for single-family dwellings including, but not limited to: manufactured or mobile homes, stick built homes, modular homes, etc., and individual lots in subdivisions or mobile home lots located in areas other than commercial mobile home parks. Area requirements for multiple dwellings on a single recorded lot, where not prohibited by local zoning, must be provided in multiples of the following minimum lot sizes for each dwelling to be constructed on the recorded lot. See Table MT-1 as follows. These minimum lot size requirements in this table may be increased further based on consideration of other factors and requirements upon application of the state department of human resources Manual For On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), including those currently set forth in sections A through F of the DHR Manual. 
Table MT-1 
Minimum (min) lot sizes, minimum lot widths and maximum (max) allowable sewage flow for the type of water supply system. 

 
* In this context "non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** gpad = gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 
(b)  Minimum lot sizing requirements for those lots utilizing on-site sewage management systems are as follows in Table MT-2 for multifamily residential dwellings, all other non-single-family dwellings and commercial structures, and this also includes mobile home parks. These minimum lot size requirements in this table may be increased further based on consideration of other factors and requirements upon application of the state department of human resources Manual For On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), including those currently set forth in sections A through F of the DHR Manual. 
Table MT-2 
Minimum (min) lot sizes, minimum lot widths and maximum (max) allowable sewage flow for the type of water supply system. 

 
* In this context "non-public" means an individual water supply system or any other water supply system which is not a "public" water supply system. 
** gpad = gallons per acre per day = gal/acre/day. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, appendix 1, 11-7-2000) 
Secs. 22-119—22-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WETLANDS PROTECTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-141. - Findings of fact. 
The wetlands within the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and recreational opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 6.1, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-142. - Reference map. 
The official maps to be used as the determinant for the location of wetlands in the city and to be regulated areas under this article will be the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's National Wetlands Inventory Maps for Tattnall County. These maps portray generalized wetlands inventory areas, and these wetlands inventory areas do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands under the authority of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and cannot serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or a wetland delineation by that agency. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 6.2, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-143. - Wetlands development permit requirements. 
No activity or use except those identified in section 22-144 shall be allowed within wetlands without a permit under this article. Activities or uses permitted under section 404 of the U.S. Clean Water Act may receive a local permit once any required federal permit, or if appropriate, letter of permission/determination, is obtained as described as follows, and any other applicable provisions of this article have been satisfied: 
(1)  If there is a determination in the administration of this article that a proposed activity, use, or development subject to permit herein would not be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and would not disturb an identified wetlands inventory area, no further action concerning this particular section is necessary. 
(2)  If there is a determination in the administration of this article that a proposed activity, use, or development subject to permit herein may be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and might disturb wetlands which appear to be under the jurisdiction of section 404 of the U.S. Clean Water Act, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands determination shall be required prior to issuance of a permit under this article. 
(3)  If a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands determination is required, no local permit under this article will be issued until the person requesting the permit, at their own expense, obtains either a section 404 permit, if so required, or a letter of permission/determination from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that no federal permit is required. 
(4)  No action in the administration of this article, or no local permit issued pursuant to this article relieves the landowner from any federal or state permitting requirements, including those relating to wetlands or land disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 6.3, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-144. - Permitted uses not requiring a permit. 
The following uses are permitted without permit within the wetlands of the city to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein: 
(1)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission. (Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities. However, section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption.); 
(2)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, or other wildlife, provided that they do not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require a section 404 permit. 
(3)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(4)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(5)  Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 6.4, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-145. - Prohibited uses. 
In compliance with the state "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria," the following uses are prohibited entirely, and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 6.5, 11-7-2000) 
Secs. 22-146—22-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS PROTECTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-171. - Findings of fact. 
Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides and herbicides sprayed on crops and animal waste, like septic tank effluents, contribute to a deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 7.1, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-172. - Reference map. 
The official map for delineation of significant groundwater recharge areas in the city to be regulated areas under this article is the state department of natural resources' "Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 edition)." 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 7.2, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-173. - Groundwater recharge areas development permit requirements. 
All uses except those identified in section 22-174 and those subject to further restriction by any underlying zoning district are allowed. The following are additional requirements for specific uses: 
(1)  All new aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks, and shall otherwise meet the requirements of U.S. EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided that they comply with all federal requirements. 
(2)  All single-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings, mobile home parks, or other uses located within a groundwater recharge area and not served by both public water and sewer systems shall be required to have 150 percent of the minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of the state department of human resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (DHR Manual) Tables MT-1 and MT-2 (included as part of this article in section 22-118). The minimums set forth in Tables MT-1 and MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in subsections A—F) of the DHR Manual. Said minimum lot size shall not be in any case less than the minimum lot size specified by any underlying zoning district. The regulations specifying the largest minimum lot size shall apply. 
(3)  All lots shall have a minimum width of 150 feet, or as specified in any underlying zoning district if stricter (larger), in the area where an approved on-site sewage management system is to be located. 
(4)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank or other on-site sewage management system unless the county health department first approves the proposed on-site sewage management system installation as meeting the requirements of the state department of human resources Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems and the provisions of this article. 
(5)  All new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner except for the construction of mining settling basins. 
(6)  All new agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compact clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than five × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 7.3, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-174. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)  All new hazardous waste storage, treatment and disposal facilities. 
(2)  New facilities handling 10,000 pounds or more of hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, excluding underground storage tanks, on any one day. 
(3)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 7.4, 11-7-2000) 
Secs. 22-175—22-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MAJOR RIVER CORRIDOR PROTECTION DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-201. - Findings of fact. 
Perennial river or water courses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second are of vital importance to the state in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable for habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. These river corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 8.1, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-202. - District delineation. 
Protected rivers as defined under the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, adopted by the state department of natural resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, includes any perennial river or watercourses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second. The Altamaha River and the Ohoopee River through the county meet this criteria. A protected river corridor and a protective 100-foot vegetation buffer is established along the entire length of these rivers within the county. The buffer area is measured horizontally from each river bank, if any, within city jurisdiction. Under the method prescribed by the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, no development or other land-disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the protected river corridor and within a 100-foot buffer of the river bank except for the permitted uses in section 22-203. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 8.2, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-203. - Permitted uses. 
No development, or construction, or other land-disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the 100-foot buffer from the protected river except for the following uses, and the natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity or construction permitted within the river corridor for these acceptable uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, if any underlying zoning district so permits, provided that each dwelling is located on a lot with a minimum size as specified by the county health department or the underlying zoning district regulations, but shall be the greater of these requirements; however, in any case the lot for each dwelling shall not be less than two acres, not including any area between the river banks; and provided the septic tank drainfield is located outside of the 100-foot buffer area. 
(2)  Any residential uses existing or under construction prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, provided that the use has an on-site sewage management construction permit issued by the county health department prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(3)  Any industrial or commercial uses existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, provided that they do not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and meet all other federal and state environmental regulations. 
(4)  Road and utility crossings, provided that the construction of these crossings meets the requirements of the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or any local requirements, if stricter. 
(5)  Timber production and harvesting, provided that they are consistent with the best management practices established by the state forestry commission, and do not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(6)  Agricultural production and management, provided that they are consistent with the best management practices established by the state soil and water conservation commission, and all other state and federal laws and regulations, including those promulgated by the state department of agriculture; and do not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(7)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, as amended. 
(8)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(9)  Wastewater treatment. 
(10)  Recreational usage consistent with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river dependent recreation. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 8.3, 11-7-2000) 
Sec. 22-204. - Prohibited uses. 
In compliance with the state "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria," the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them: 
(1)  Facilities or areas used for the handling, receiving, storing, or disposal of hazardous wastes. 
(2)  Hazardous or solid waste landfills. 
(3)  Septic tank drainfields within the 100-foot buffer area under any circumstance. 
(4)  Septic tanks within the 100-foot buffer area, except as expressly provided for single-family dwellings which are permitted under and comply with section 22-203(1). 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 8.4, 11-7-2000) 
Secs. 22-205—22-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WETLANDS DISTRICT 

Sec. 22-241. - Purpose of article. 
(a)  The wetlands in the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the state. 
(b)  Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2001, § I) 
Sec. 22-242. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the city. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2001, § II) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-243. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
(a)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the "generalized wetlands map" and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(b)  The generalized wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2001, § III) 
Sec. 22-244. - Protection criteria; requirement for local permit or permission. 
No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the code enforcement officer authorized local government representative, using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2001, § IV) 
Sec. 22-245. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided that they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations, provided that they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect state waters or of the Unites States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2001, § V) 
Sec. 22-246. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2001, § VI) 
Sec. 22-247. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the city shall include a site plan, drawn at scale of one inch = 50 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grade. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would rather alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the code enforcement officers or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemptions to site plan requirement. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans. 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer that five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the code enforcement officer and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the code enforcement officer. The review period shall include the preparation of findings of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval by the code enforcement officer. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the code enforcement officer. Decisions of the code enforcement officer may be appealed by the city council. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the code enforcement officer. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the director of license and permits and/or the director of planning. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the director of planning. 
(3)  If the director of planning discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act, as amended, the board of commissioners shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension; revocation. The code enforcement officer may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The code enforcement officer shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional insurance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city council concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the county superior court. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the county superior court, the city council or its designee may, within the time specified by the county superior court elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city council. 
(i)  Amendments. These regulations and the resource map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Relief assessment. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(k)  Separability and abrogation. All sections and subsections of this article are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article be declared by a court of jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph, or part of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-6-2001, § VII) 
Secs. 22-248—22-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION ORDINANCE 

Sec. 22-276. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to insure the provisions of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells or springs which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 22-277. - Definitions. 
When used in this article the following words and phrases shall be the meanings given in this section: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitation reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, is disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 22-278. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water wellhead and the radius of which is 250 feet unless lesser distance as authorized by the Georgia Wellhead Protection Plan for the city. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2005, § 3; Ord. No. 08-46, 5-6-2008) 
Sec. 22-279. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection areas: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2005, § 4) 
Sec. 22-280. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses of conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 22-279 of this article: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides. 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto. 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings and street and driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 22-279 of this article. 
(4)  Sanitary landfills. 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites. 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins. 
(7)  Underground storage tanks. 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2005, § 5) 
Sec. 22-281. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to non-conforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. of 10-4-2005, § 6) 
Chapter 26 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-26, adopted Mar. 2, 2010, repealed Ch. 26, Art. II, §§ 26-31—26-43, 26-71—26-74, 26-101—26-105 in its entirety. In keeping with the number style of this Code these provisions have been included to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessorv structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager or hisfher designee interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 26-37. 
Base flood, means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting fiom a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building, means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facilitv means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 29, 1986. (i.e., the effective date of the initial FIRM for City of Glennville). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 13, 1995. (i.e., the effective date of the initial FIRM for City of Glennville). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundarv map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing, means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 29, 1986 [i.e., the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after March 13, 1995 (i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community) and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home ark or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after March 3, 1995 (i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community). 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 6, 3-2-2010; Res. No. 11-07, Art. 6, 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 26-32. - Authortzation. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 1(26-1), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-33. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of City of Glennville, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 1(26-2), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-34. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 1(26-3), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-35. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to lninirnize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 1(26-4), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-36. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Glennville, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 2(26-21), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-37. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 17, 2010 with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for (Tattnall County) are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(c)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Glennville City Hall, Code Enforcement Office. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 2(26-22), 3-2-2010; Res. No. 11-07, Art. 2(26-22), 9-7-2010) 
Sec. 26-38. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 2(26-23), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-39. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 2(26-24), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-40. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 2(26-25), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-41. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 2(26-26), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-42. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Glennville or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result fiom reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 2(26-27), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-43. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than ten days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Glennville fiom taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 2(26-28), 3-2-2010) 
Secs. 26-44—26-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 26-71. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 3(26-51), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-72. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be made to the city manager or his/her designee on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(b)  Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification fiom a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 26-102(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city manager or his/her designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 3(26-52), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-73. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city manager or his/her designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 26-37, then the code enforcement officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 26-72(b)(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with section 26-72(b)(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the city manager or his/her designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with (section 26-72(b)(1)c. and section 26-101(2) or section 26-104(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city manager or his/her designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the ofice of the code enforcement officer and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 3(26-53), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-74. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The planning commission as established by the mayor and council, City of Glennville shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance fiom the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city manager or his/her designee in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Tattnall County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction: therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting fiom the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The city manager or his/her designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 5, 3-2-2010) 
Secs. 26-75—26-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 26-101. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination fiom them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 4(26-71), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-102. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sfficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-101(4), elevated buildings. 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 26-73(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (refer to section 26-106(6)). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)(a) and (3)(c) of this section. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-37, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 4(26-74), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-103. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-37, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with secton 26-37, then the city manager or his/her designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this divsion. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured fiom the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a Limited Detail Study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-101(4), elevated buildings. 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The city manager or his/her designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 4(26-73), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-104. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-37, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 26-102. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 4(26-74), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-105. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-37, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-101(4), elevated buildings. The city manager or his/her designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 26-72(b)(1)c. and (b)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away fiom any proposed structure. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 4(26-75), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-106 - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision andor development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 4(26-76), 3-2-2010) 
Sec. 26-107. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Res. No. 10-26, Art. 4(26-77), 3-2-2010) 
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 54. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage in any violent, tumultuous, obstreperous, or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. Fighting between two or more persons in which physical contact is made, except that which occurs at boxing exhibitions duly authorized by the city, shall be deemed to be disorderly conduct within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 4-107) 
Sec. 30-2. - Discharging firearms and air guns. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm within 300 yards of any street, alley, or building, or at any point upon the land of another person without the express consent of the owner or occupant thereof; or to discharge at any time, any air gun, BB gun or toy gun which projects lead or any other missile. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty; nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. 
(Code 1982, § 4-102) 
Sec. 30-3. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
All physicians and all hospital superintendents in the city are required to report to the police department of the city all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the police department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician or after admission to the hospital. 
(Code 1982, § 4-103) 
Sec. 30-4. - Throwing of missiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock, or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 1982, § 4-104) 
Sec. 30-5. - Ball playing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching, or batting a ball on any public street, alley, or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 4-105) 
Sec. 30-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. No. 14-18, adopted Jan. 7, 2014, deleted § 30-6, which pertained to open burning and derived from Res. No. 12-21, adopted Mar. 6, 2012. 
Sec. 30-7. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4. 
(Code 1982, § 4-107) 
Sec. 30-8. - Weeds, grass and shrubbery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any lot, area, or place located within this city to permit any weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths to obtain a height exceeding ten inches on such property. For the purposes of this section, the term "weeds" shall be deemed to mean jimpson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion or other unsightly growths of a like kind. 
(1)  Notice to remove. It shall be the duty of the city manager or his/her designee to notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which weeds or other prohibited flora are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this section that such growths must be removed, cut, and/or destroyed within ten days from the date of such notice. Notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner or occupant, at his last known address. 
(2)  Action upon non-compliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove, cut, and/or destroy such weeds or other unsightly growths within the designated time period, the city council is authorized and empowered to provide for the removal, cutting, and/or destroying of such growths by or for the city. 
(3)  Shrubbery shall not be permitted to obtain an unsightly growth. 
(b)  The actual costs of such weed removal shall be assessed against the property owner upon whose premises the work is done, and, in the event the bill for such charges remains unpaid for 30 days after it has been rendered, shall become a lien upon the premises enforceable in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(Code 1982, § 4-108; Ord. of 8-1-2006(2); Res. No. 10-08, 10-6-2009) 
Sec. 30-9. - Accumulation of junk. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or resident of any property in the city other than a person who is a licensed junk dealer to permit to accumulate on such property any junk including, but not limited to, any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or junked motor vehicles, or parts thereof. 
(1)  Notice to remove. It shall be the duty of the city manager or his/her designee to notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which junk is permitted to accumulate in violation of the provisions of this section that such material must be removed within ten days from the date of such notice. Notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner or occupant, at his last known address. 
(2)  Action upon non-compliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove such junk within the designated time period, the city council is authorized and empowered to arrange for the removal of such material by the city or by a private individual or firm through contract with the city. 
(b)  The actual cost of such junk removal shall be assessed against the property owner upon whose premises the work is done, and, in the event the bill for such charges remains unpaid for 30 days after it has been rendered, shall become a lien upon the premises enforceable in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(Code 1982, § 4-109; Res. No. 10-08, 10-6-2009) 
Sec. 30-10. - Abandonment of motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or to leave unattended for a period in excess of seven days any motor vehicle on any street, road, alley, or other public way in the city. 
Code 1982, § 4-110) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 54. 
Sec. 30-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. No. 16-30, adopted Feb. 2, 2016, repealed § 30-11, which pertained to hours of public access to middle school complex and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 7, 1993. 
Sec. 30-12. - Wearing pants below the waist. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in public wearing pants below the waist which exposes the skin or undergarments. 
(b)  Any violation of subsection (a) hereof shall be cited by the law enforcement officer by issuance of a written warning for the first offense and a citation as set forth in section 1-11 and summons to appear before the Municipal Court, City of Glennville for any subsequent offenses, and shall not in and of itself, be grounds for an arrest or for a search of the person cited. 
(Res. No. 09-17, 2-3-2009) 
Sec. 30-13. - Prohibited vehicle parking. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Park or parking as used in this section, the terms "park" or "parking" shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether accompanied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers. 
(2)  Inoperable vehicle as used in this section shall mean a vehicle(s) that appears inoperable due to wrecked, flat tire, missing motor, transmission or other parts, no current registration, current license plate, etc. 
(b)  Removal of vehicles parked in violation of this article. If any person violates this section, any police officer upon probable cause that the violation impedes traffic or the safety of others, may have the vehicle involved removed by a private contractor and the owner of the vehicle shall pay the towing fee, storage fees, and any damages that may have incurred to streets or street right-of-ways connected therewith. 
(c)  Parking of commercial or oversized vehicles prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall park or stand any bus, truck or other freight or passenger-carrying vehicle in excess of eight-ton gross vehicle weight upon any public street, street right-of-way, or residential area within the corporate limits of the city, except while actually engaged in loading or unloading for not more than minimum time necessary of purpose. 
(2)  No person shall stop or stand any commercial vehicle, truck or bus with a body more than either eight feet wide or ten feet high on any public street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof, except while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
(d)  Residential parking restrictions. 
(1)  Passenger vehicles. No person shall park or store more than six unenclosed motor vehicles per single-family or two-family residential dwelling unit. "Unenclosed parking" means to park or store a motor vehicle outdoors, outside a garage or carport. 
a.  Exceptions. If more than four members of a family, all of whom reside in the same residential dwelling unit, are licensed to operate a motor vehicle, then one additional unenclosed motor vehicle per licensed family member (over six) shall be permitted to be parked or stored at that residential dwelling unit. Also, there shall be no limit on guest parking, which shall be defined as motor vehicles owned by guests of the property owner and parked or stored on the property for less than ten days. 
b.  For the purposes of this subsection, "family" is defined as two or more persons residing in a single dwelling unit where all members arc related by blood, marriage, or adoption up to the second degree of consanguinity, or by foster care. For the purpose of this definition, "consanguinity" means only the following persons are related within the second degree of consanguinity: Husbands and wives, parents and children, grandparents and grandchildren, brothers and sisters, aunts and uncles, nephews and nieces, and first cousins. For the purpose of this definition, a person shall be considered to reside in a dwelling unit if he or she stays overnight in a dwelling unit for more than 30 days within a 90-day period. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
c.  Inoperable vehicles. No inoperable vehicles may be stored on residential or commercial property unless in an enclosed area or screened from street view. Inoperable vehicles stored in screened area will be counted as number authorized for that particular residence. 
d.  Location. In residential zoning districts, passenger vehicles may be parked or stored anywhere on the property, including side yards and rear yards. Unenclosed parking in front yards shall be permitted only within a well-defined driveway area. 
(2)  Recreational vehicles. No person shall park or store recreational equipment or vehicles on a vacant residential lot. In residential zoning districts, recreational equipment such as boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, motor coaches, tent trailers, and other similar vehicles may be parked or stored only in side yards, rear yards, carports, or in an enclosed building. A recreational vehicle may be parked or stored anywhere on a residential premises, except in a front yard, for a period not to exceed 72 hours. If stored regularly, meaning for periods of time which exceed 72 hours, then a recreational vehicle or other recreational equipment shall be parked or stored in a side or rear yard. 
(3)  Commercial vehicles, six wheels/eight tons or less . No person shall park or store a commercial vehicle on a vacant residential lot. It shall be unlawful to park or store commercial vehicles or bus in front yards or driveways in residential zoning districts except while actually engaged in loading or unloading. One commercial vehicle may be parked or stored in a side or rear yard of a lot in a residential zoning district, but if stored regularly in a side or rear yard, meaning for periods of time, it cannot exceed 72 hours. For the purpose of this subsection, a "bus" is any motor vehicle designed or used to carry 15 passengers, including the driver. For the purpose of [this] subsection, a "commercial vehicle" is a dump truck (empty), delivery truck, box truck, or 15-passenger bus. 
(4)  Truck tractors in residence district. It shall be unlawful to operate or park any tractor in any residence district, except for the purposes of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such vehicle may be driven on such street or parked on such street for not more than the minimum distance or time necessary the purpose. 
(e)  Penalty for violation of this section. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code; provided further, any cost the city sustains in having a vehicle in violation of this section removed, plus the cost of repairs for damages caused to streets or street rights-of-way by said vehicles shall be added to the court costs. 
(f)  Construction of section with zoning ordinance. This section shall not be construed to repeal or amend or alter in any way the parking regulations set forth in the city's zoning ordinances. This section shall be enforced separate from, and in addition to, the parking regulations set forth in the city's zoning ordinances. 
(Res. No. 15-19, § 1, 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 30-14—30-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 30-41. - Regulation generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing within the city limits. 
(Code 1982, § 6-101) 
Sec. 30-42. - Prohibited noises. 
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exhaustive. 
(1)  Motor vehicle horns. The sounding of any horn on any automobile, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a warning signal. 
(2)  Radios, television sets, and similar devices. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighboring residents. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers. The using or operation of any loudspeaker or sound-amplifying device mounted upon any vehicle within the city for the purpose of broadcasting or advertising any information about any business or activity for any other purpose, unless a permit for such sound amplification has been obtained from the city. 
(4)  Construction equipment and activity. The operation of any equipment or the performing of any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, roads, or projects within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless a permit for such construction or repair work between such hours has been obtained from the city. 
(5)  Exhausts. The discharging into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(6)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which by frequent or continuous barking, chirping, or other means of communication disturbs the comfort or repose of the residents of any residential neighborhood. 
(7)  Vehicle repair in residential areas. The repairing, rebuilding, or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the residents of the area. 
(8)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals, nursing homes. The creating of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, court, or nursing home while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital or nursing home, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, nursing home, or court street. 
(9)  Hawkers and peddlers. The selling of anything by outcry within the residential areas of the city, except at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(10)  Drums. The using of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city, unless a permit for such use has been obtained from the city. 
(Code 1982, § 6-102) 
Sec. 30-43. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency. 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, to be construed as work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(Code 1982, § 6-103) 
Sec. 30-44. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding $100.00 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. 
(Code 1982, § 6-104) 
Sec. 30-45. - Injunctions. 
The operation or maintenance of any device, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this article which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents of this city shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1982, § 6-105) 
Secs. 30-46—30-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 30-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, provided that the hurt, inconvenience, or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary reasonable man; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation, or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effect on individuals. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
(Code 1982, § 7-101) 
Sec. 30-82. - Proceedings to abate generally. 
(a)  Any nuisance existing within the corporate limits of this city, shall be abated in the manner set forth in this article: 
(1)  Initiation. Proceedings to abate a nuisance, whether public or private, may be initiated by the filing of a complaint with the city manager or his/her designee, which such complaint shall state the nature and location of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant or complainants. In the case of a private nuisance, the complaint shall be filed by the person injured by the nuisance; in the case of a public nuisance, the complaint shall be filed on behalf of the public by a city official or by a citizen specially injured by the nuisance. Private nuisances may be abated on the application of the injured party or parties; public nuisances can be enjoined by private citizens only if they are "specially injured" by such nuisance. 
(2)  Notice to abate. Upon the filing of a complaint as provided in subsection (1) of this section, the city manager or his/her designee shall notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which the nuisance exists that are in violation of this section that such nuisance must be abated within ten days from the date of such notice. Notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to said owner and/or occupant, at his last known address. 
(3)  Action of non-compliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to abate filed nuisance within the designated time period, the city council is authorized and empowered to provide for the abatement of the nuisance by or for the city. In lieu of city council authorization to abate nuisance, the city manager may direct the chief of police or code enforcement officer to issue a citation to person(s) creating the nuisance to appear before the municipal court. 
(b)  The actual cost for abatement shall be assessed against the property owner upon whose premises the work is done, and, in the event the bill for such charges remains unpaid for 30 days after it has been rendered, shall become a lien upon the premises enforceable in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(Code 1982, § 7-102; Res. No. 10-09, 10-6-2009; Res. No. 17-11, 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 30-83. - Penalty for violation of article. 
If any person is convicted of violating this article, they shall be subject to section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 10-09, 10-6-2009) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 10-09, adopted Oct. 6, 2009, repealed § 30-83 in its entirety and enacted new povisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, § 30-83 pertained to summary abatement. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
Secs. 30-84—30-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 

Sec. 30-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, any includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building to structure of any design. As used herein, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing body means the city council. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of said property and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have an interest of record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building, or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians and trustees. 
Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officers and officials of the city who are authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building, or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(Ord. of 3-7-1989, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-112. - Unsafe buildings defined; enumeration of defects. 
All buildings or structures within the corporate limits of the city which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed to be unsafe buildings: 
(1)  Those in which the interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the base of such wall. 
(2)  Those buildings which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent, or more, of damage or deterioration of the supporting members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of a nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those buildings which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs, or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose for which it is used, or intended to be used. 
(4)  Those buildings which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes, so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants thereof or the people of the city. 
(5)  Those buildings which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein, or may live therein. 
(6)  Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication. 
(8)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(9)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people of the city. 
(10)  Those buildings which exist in violation of any ordinance so as to constitute a nuisance, and to be unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-7-1989, § 2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-113. - Nuisances. 
All unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated, or demolished as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11 and as hereinbefore and hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 3-7-1989, § 3(A)) 
Sec. 30-114. - Duties of building inspector. 
(a)  Generally. The building inspector is specifically charged with the responsibility for the enforcement of this article and upon finding, within the corporate limits of the city, an unsafe building, shall cause an inspection to be made of such building, and if the same is found to be unsafe, shall make a written report of the conditions and defects of such building and such evidence as may be available to the mayor and council. 
(b)  Notice; hearing. Whenever a request is filed with the building inspector by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use or whenever it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, the building inspector shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure, the complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the building inspector (or his designated agent) at a place designated by the building inspector within the city, fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint. The owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed. The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the building inspector. 
(c)  Determination of structure's status; order. If, after such notice and hearing, the building inspector determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial, or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure as a human habitation; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building, or structure. 
In no event shall the city require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value such dwelling, building, or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article. 
(d)  Failure to comply; action by building inspector. If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the building inspector may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The building inspector may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling, or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  Removal or demolishment. If the owner fails to comply with any order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the building inspector may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be removed or demolished; provided, however, that the duties of the building inspector, set forth in this subsection, shall not be exercised until the mayor and council shall have by ordinance ordered the building inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to the particular property or properties which the building inspector shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, which property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. 
(f)  Costs; lien. The amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the building inspector shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of said costs by the building inspector in the office of the clerk on a lien docket maintained by said clerk for such purposes, and a copy of the same shall be forwarded to the office of the clerk of the county superior court for recording in the real estate records of said county. If the dwelling, building, or structure is removed or demolished by the building inspector, he shall sell the materials of such dwellings, buildings, or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the county superior court by the building inspector, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and declare their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(g)  Enforcing collection of amounts due on lien. The city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the following manner: 
(1)  The owners or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city within 30 days after the perfection of said lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to said city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred, or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the said three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(3)  Should the amount due of such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of said three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (g)(2) of this section, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon said property, as provided by law. 
(h)  Service of complaint or order. Service of complaint or order upon parties in interest and owners of unfit buildings or structures shall be accomplished as follows: 
(1)  Complaints or orders issued by the building inspector pursuant to this article shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner, and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the building inspector or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon each person in possession of said property, each owner, and each party in interest personally or by leaving such copy at the place of his residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner, and party in interest. 
(2)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such party by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or parties who reside within the state or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen, that such party was served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at the residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(3)  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in the official organ of the city. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(4)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served, and, if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the city, he shall be served as provided in subsection. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside the city or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor in insane person personally or by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person or persons. In the case of other persons who live outside the city or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the county probate court who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor on insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(5)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the building inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the building inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in this subsection (h) or service may be perfected upon any person, firm, or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(6)  A copy of such complaint or orders shall also be filed in the office of the clerk of the county superior court in a lis pendens docket and shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices as provided by law. Any such complaint or orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the city clerk. 
(i)  Appeals of order. If after the mayor and council have enacted an ordinance as contained in subsection (e) of this section, the owner, tenant in possession, or other party in interest may appeal said decision to the county superior court within 30 days of the enactment of said ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-7-1989, § 4; Res. No. 10-16, 12-1-2009) 
Secs. 30-115—30-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - JUVENILE CURFEW 

Sec. 30-151. - Findings and determinations by city. 
The mayor and council have determined that there has been an increase in juvenile violence and crime by persons under the age of 18 in the city resulting in juveniles being involved in a wide range of unacceptable behavior by juveniles; that persons under the age of 18 are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful activity and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime; that there has been a significant breakdown in the supervision and guidance normally provided by parents for minors resulting in and increase in the crimes, substance abuse, and school dropout rates, juvenile pregnancy, and other illicit behavior. The city has an obligation to provide for the protection of minors from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities which are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances. The mayor and council have determined a curfew for those under the age of 18 will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare and will help to attain the foregoing objectives and to diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of the city and will promote the public good, safety and welfare. Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm, and legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have had demonstrated effectiveness in many cities. The mayor and council have determined that a curfew ordinance will increase parental responsibility for minors within their control and decrease minor delinquency. 
(Ord. No. 4-114, § 4-114-1, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 30-152. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency errand means a mission that results from an unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Minor means any unemancipated person under the age of 18. 
Public place means any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-way, to include sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, malls, or other places or buildings open to the public; any cemeteries, school yards, bodies of water or watercourses; any privately or publicly owned places of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation including parking lots; and any vacant lot or land. 
(Ord. No. 4-114, § 4-114-2, 7-11-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-153. - Hours of curfew; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in any public place unsupervised by his parent, legal guardian, or another adult over the age of 21, having the lawful care and custody of the minor and having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 5:00 a.m. on the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the evening curfew shall begin and 12:00 midnight rather than 11:00 p.m.; and provide further that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity; 
(3)  When the minor is traveling to, or returning directly home from, lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in above referenced place during the proscribed period of time; 
(4)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(5)  When the minor is engaged in interstate vehicular travel through the city with parental consent; 
(6)  When the minor is on the sidewalk adjoining the property where the minor resides or on the property where the minor resides or on either side of or across the street from the property where the minor resides and the adult owner or resident of that property has given permission for the minor to be there; and 
(7)  When the minor is married or has been married pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 4-114, § 4-114-3, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 30-154. - Parental responsibility for violation. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child under the age of 18 years, to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow such minor to violate section 30-153. A person charged with violation of this section for the first time shall be given a warning citation. Upon subsequent violation, the person shall be charged with such violation and, if found guilty, such person shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250.00 and/or confinement of not more than ten days in the city jail. 
(Ord. No. 4-114, § 4-114-4, 7-11-2000) 
Sec. 30-155. - Court jurisdiction. 
Any minor under the age of 17 who violates section 30-153 shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. Any minor 17 years of age or over who violates section 30-153 shall be subject to the jurisdiction of municipal court and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250.00 and/or confinement of not more than ten days in the city jail. 
(Ord. No. 4-114, § 4-114-5, 7-11-2000) 
ARTICLE VI. - SKATEBOARDING 

Sec. 30-156. - Findings and determinations by city. 
Skateboarding in the downtown areas is a major concern for the mayor and council due to the safety of skateboarders, city patrons and for the protection of public and private properties. 
(Res. No. 09-01, 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-157. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alleys means the areas behind businesses on Barnard Street running from Tillman Street to Main Street. 
Downtown area means sidewalks, streets and street right-of-ways on Barnard Street from Tillman Street to Main Street. 
Skateboard means a narrow board about two feet long mounted on roller-skate wheels. 
Skateboarding means a method of travel/entertainment. 
(Res. No. 09-01, 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-158. - Skateboarding prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to use the downtown area of Barnard Street from Tillman Street to Main Street (US-301) and the alleys that run parallel on each side of Barnard Street for the purpose of skateboarding. 
(Res. No. 09-01, 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-159. - Police and municipal court jurisdiction. 
Violators would be subject to having their skateboard seized by police for 48 hours for the first offense. A second offense would allow police to seize the skateboard for 72 hours and, if the offender is a juvenile, the parents would be cited and fined $50.00. A third offense also would result in a 72-hour seizure of the skateboard and Glennville Municipal Court Judge would determine the fine amount. 
(Res. No. 09-01, 7-8-2008) 
Secs. 30-160—30-169. - Reserved. 
Chapter 34 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42. 

Sec. 34-1. - Recreation board. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be known, referred to and may be cited as the "City of Glennville Municipal Recreation Board Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose of section. It is the intent of the city by this section to provide for the establishment of a recreation board to be empowered to provide established conduct and maintain a recreation system for and on behalf of the citizens of the city; to provide and supervise public playgrounds, playfields, indoor and outdoor recreation centers, and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the city. The board shall be empowered to conduct or supervise any form of recreation or cultural activities that will employ the leisure time of the people in a wholesome or constructive manner. 
(c)  Members. The city recreation board shall consist of seven persons to be appointed by the mayor. Each member shall serve without pay. 
(d)  Term of office. The term of office of the members of the city recreation board shall be five years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(e)  Initial appointments. In making the initial appointments to the board following the enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the mayor shall appoint two members to serve an initial two-year term, two members to serve an initial three-year term, two members to serve an initial four-year term, and one member to serve an initial one-year term. Each member appointed at the end of the initial term shall be for a full five-year term. 
(f)  Organization. Immediately after its appointment, the board shall meet and organize by electing one of its members as chairperson, and such other officers as it may deem necessary. 
(g)  Director. The recreation board shall have the power to appoint, designate or hire someone to act as director who is trained or properly qualified to act in that capacity and such other personnel as the board deems fit and proper and necessary to successfully implement the goals and objectives of the board. 
(h)  Budget. The recreation board shall annually submit a budget to the mayor and council for its approval. The board may receive fees and revenues from the operation of recreation facilities and programs, and may also solicit and receive gifts, bequests and/or grants to be used for acquisition, maintenance or expansion of recreation facilities or other recreational purposes. 
(i)  Annual report. The recreation board shall make an annual report to the mayor and council and such other reports as may from time to time be requested by the mayor and council. 
(j)  Vacancies. Any vacancies that occur by death or resignation shall be filled by the mayor only for the unexpired term of the board member being replaced. 
(k)  Conflicts. Whenever the provision of this section and those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern. All of the ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section, to the extent of such conflict and not further, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this section full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2002, §§ 1—11) 
Sec. 34-2. - Regulations governing use of public parks and facilities 
(a)  Use of grounds and facilities in general. Each person, firm, or corporation using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation using such parks, grounds, or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any building; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices, or placards whether temporary or permanent; monuments; stakes, posts, or other boundary markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. 
(3)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof. 
(4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw missiles at animal, reptile, or bird; or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest, or young of any other animal. 
(5)  Bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of the same, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(6)  Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language. 
(7)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. 
(8)  Commit any assault or battery, or engage in fighting. 
(9)  Carry, possess, or drink any alcoholic beverage in the park. 
(10)  Violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by the recreation board or mayor and council. 
(11)  Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and with the rules applicable to such use. 
(12)  Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted. 
(13)  Dress or undress in any vehicle, toilet, or other place, except in such structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(c)  Hours of operation. The public parks shall be open daily to the public during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons other than city personnel conducting city business therein to occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours. Any section or part of a park, or an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by the recreation director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(d)  Group activity. Whenever more than ten members of any group, association, or organization desire to use any park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties, or other entertainment performances, a representative of such group, association, or organization shall first obtain a permit from the recreation director. The recreation director shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group, association, or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public, and if the said group, association, or organization meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the recreation director. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the city from any liability of any kind or character and to protect city property from damage. 
(e)  Picnic areas and use. No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas, or of any of the buildings or structures therein, for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(f)  Other regulations. 
(1)  Games. It shall be unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball, and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts, or areas provided therefor. 
(2)  Camping. It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-wagon, or the like. 
(3)  Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the recreation director. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes, or cigars, tobacco paper, or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road, or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(4)  Animals. It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any park, and it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash not more than ten feet long. 
(5)  Automobiles. It shall be unlawful to drive or park any automobile except on a street, driveway, or parking lot in any park; or to park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking. 
(6)  Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park except those so authorized by the recreation director. 
(7)  Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person within any park to have in his possession, custody or control any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever. 
(8)  Signs. It shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park, except that these provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty. 
(Code 1982, § 8-101) 
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 22; utilities, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
Authorized receptacle, private, means a collection container to be used for refuse, garbage or solid waste that is provided by a private individual or company and that is authorized for use by the city. 
Authorized receptacle, public, means a collection container to be used for refuse, garbage or solid waste that is provided by the city or its agent/contractor/franchisees, and that is authorized for use by the city. 
Auto salvage yard means any place where two or more motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or farm machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the commercial salvaging of any other goods, articles or merchandise. 
Building material means any material such as lumber roofing material, brick, concrete block, plaster, gutters, sand, gravel or other substances used in repairs or alteration of existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures. 
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than four cubic yards, not larger than 30 cubic yards and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks used by private contractual agencies. 
City manager or designee means the city manager or designee of the public works departments. 
Collection area means an area provided or designated by the city to be used for the collection and disposal of garbage and solid waste for the location of collection containers. 
Collection container means a container to be used for the collection and disposal of garbage and solid waste. 
Collector means the person or persons who under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation do the work of collecting and/or transporting solid wastes, from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions, and/or similar locations, or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial wastes means all garbage and waste byproducts for manufacturing offices, restaurants, stores, warehouses, and similar commercial establishments, cinders, and ashes from commercial boilers, cardboard and wooden boxes, crates and barrels, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the control of biological decomposition of yard trimmings into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Dead animals means the carcasses or remains of cats, dogs, small household pets and other farm animals. 
Disposal site means an area, location, tract of land or a facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of solid waste, decaying waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except it shall not include the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling in which the owner, occupant, or lessee of such land or facility resides. 
DNR means the state department of natural resources. 
End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber, or similar materials to make a product with economic value or, in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilizes the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration or pyrolysis of waste tires, chips or similar materials. 
EPD means the state department of natural resources environmental protection division. 
Garbage or household garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable food resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding materials for flies, insects or animals. Also to include every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustic matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, infectious carcass, fecal matter, explosives, sewage sludge, radioactive materials and highly flammable substances, oils, P.C.B., antifreeze, paints, solvents and cleaning fluids, dry cleaners, fuel tanks, biomedical waste, grease traps, batteries, oxidizers, and freon or any other substance that has been defined by federal or state law as being hazardous refuse or material or which poses a similar and immediate danger or hazard to the public health, safety and welfare as the substances described herein. 
Household waste means any solid waste (including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks) derived from households (including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds and day use recreation areas). 
Industrial waste means all waste including solids, semi-solids, sludge and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Junked vehicles means any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, junked or inoperable automobile, truck or other vehicle, or vehicle which does not bear a current license plate or a current inspection sticker. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate, which may percolate through the waste into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Litter means all aluminum cans, cardboard, cigarettes, garbage, glass, paper, refuse, styrofoam, combustible and non-combustible solid waste or waste material, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, wood, wrappings, debris, dead animals, bedding, crockery or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance, which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Loading and unloading area means a space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping, and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Manifest means a form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the environmental protection division (EPD). 
Materials recovery facility means a solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
Mixed tires means a heterogeneous group of tires consisting of "used," "retreadable casings," and "scrap tires." 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from agricultural, silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, and includes, but is not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, non-hazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Open burning means the combustion of solid waste without: 
(1)  Control of combustion air to maintain adequate temperature for efficient combustion; 
(2)  Containment of the combustion reaction in an enclosed device to provide sufficient residence time and mixing for complete combustion; and 
(3)  Control of the emission of the combustion products. 
Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Reclamation means a controlled method of sorting and storing solid waste for future use in accordance with an approved procedure. 
Recycling means the process by which reclaimed resources are transformed into new products in such a manner that the original products may lose their identity. 
Refuse receptacle means a poly-kart, trash can or dumpster. 
Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. Retail tire dealers may also be, but are not limited to, manufacturers, wholesalers and others who sell new replacement tires to the ultimate consumer. 
Retreadable casings means a tire which has the quality and soundness of the tire structure to accept a retread or repair and provide additional service and is destined for retreading. 
Rubbish means waste paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal, cans, glass, packing material and similar material which is discarded, unusable or not being actively used or stored or allowed to be accumulated in an unsightly manner. 
Scavenge or scavenging means unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in this chapter for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. 
Scrap tire processing means any method, system or other treatment designed to change the physical form, size or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its 
management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, buildings, and other elements). Processing includes, but is not limited to, shredding, baling, recycling or sorting of scrap tires. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the EPD to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials, solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Solid waste handling facility means any facility, the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Solid waste handling permit means written authorization granted to a person by the city manager or designee to engage in solid waste handling. 
Tire means a continuous solid or pneumatic rubber covering designed for encircling the wheel of a motor vehicle and which is neither attached to the motor vehicle nor a part of the motor vehicle as original equipment. 
Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
Tree and shrubbery trimmings means waste accumulation of tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings or clippings, or other natural waste. 
Trash or yard trash means grass, straw, shrubs, limbs, leaves, sticks, and hedges. All yard trash is to be free of all other waste; no paper, metal, cans, plastics, cardboard, furniture. This waste must be piled at the curbside separated from any other waste or it will not be picked up until it has been separated. 
Ultimate consumer means any person who receives and uses a new replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be, but are not limited to: 
(1)  An individual consumer; 
(2)  A leasing company purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet; 
(3)  A private company purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet; or 
(4)  A governmental agency purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleet. 
Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of 2/32 of an inch of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose. It must be inventoried and marketed in substantially the same fashion as a new tire, the dealer must be able to provide satisfactory evidence to the EPD and the special enforcement division that a market exists, and that the used tires are, in fact, being marketed. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, greenhouse nursery vegetative residuals and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than pruning, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. I, § 2, 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 08-29, 11-13-2007) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-2. - Collections by city. 
(a)  Generally. All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the city, except as otherwise expressly authorized herein. No person shall collect, convey over any streets or alleys of the city or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city, except as expressly authorized herein or as allowed by pertinent and appropriate actions of the mayor and council. 
(b)  Supervision. All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the city under the supervision of the designated city official, who shall prescribe the days and times of collection, and such other matters pertaining to the storage location, conveyance and disposal as is necessary. 
(c)  Fees. Fees, rates and charges for the collection services outlined in this article shall be as determined by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the clerk. Every residence, business establishment or service agency within the limits of the city and to which garbage and solid waste collection and disposal services are available shall pay a fee for the availability of such service, regardless of whether the residence, business or agency used the service, and based upon a fee schedule approved by the mayor and council. For the purposes of this chapter, the principal occupant or head of household in physical possession of a resident through ownership or lease shall be responsible for payment of the fee. If an account exists with the city of services, the fee shall be added to and denominated separately on monthly account statements. 
(d)  Night collection. Should the best interest of the public be served by collection of refuse from certain areas in the city at night, the city shall make such collections. The occupants of all residences or places of business within the designated area shall be notified of the hours of such collection. All persons so notified shall comply with such order and shall place the containers as designated within such hours. 
(e)  Landlord's responsibility. All garbage charges to a complex of apartments, houses, mobile homes or businesses will be billed to the landlord of the property, and the landlord shall be responsible to the city for payment of assessed charges. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. I, § 3, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-3. - Private collection. 
No person shall engage in the business of and receive compensation for the collection or disposal of garbage or solid waste within the city except pursuant to a contractual agreement approved by the mayor and council and duly executed by all parties thereto and under terms and conditions set out in the contractual agreement or in this Code, unless otherwise explicitly stated herein. It further shall be unlawful for any person to collect refuse within the city except from his own residence, business, service agency or industrial plant, without first having obtained a proper permit from the state department of natural resources and the city, and without first having paid an occupational tax or regulatory fee, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. I, § 4, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-4. - Authorized receptacles and containers required. 
Every person in possession, charge or control of any building from which business trash, industrial waste or other waste is accumulated or produced shall be required to provide and keep in a suitable place, readily accessible to city crews or other licensed and authorized private collectors, authorized public receptacles and containers suitable for the storage of all such waste materials which will normally accumulate between the established collection dates. The city manager or designee shall determine the quantity and location of such receptacles and shall determine whether such receptacles and containers are in a serviceable condition. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. I, § 5, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-5. - Public and private receptacles and containers to be safe. 
All public and private receptacles and containers shall be of safe construction and design and shall be maintained in good, orderly and serviceable condition at all times. The user shall promptly replace any receptacle or container, which does not conform or which has ragged or sharp edges or any other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents therefrom or the public generally. If such container, after appropriate notice, has not been replaced, the city manager or designee shall have the right to suspend further collection of such waste material until such time as the container is brought into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. I, § 6, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 38-6—38-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 38-41. - Responsible agency. 
The city manager or designee shall investigate complaints or violations of any provisions of this chapter. They shall determine if there has been a violation, issue warnings and initiate an attempt to obtain compliance with this chapter by the person in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. II, § 1, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-42. - Initiation of complaint. 
The city manager or designee shall be authorized to sign a complaint or issue a summons against a violator of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. II, § 2, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-43. - Civil remedies. 
In case of any violation of this chapter, the city manager or designee, and the city attorney in addition to any other remedies, may institute injunction, mandates or other appropriate proceedings to prevent such violation, to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. II, § 3, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-44. - Suspension of service. 
Upon appropriate notice to the person violating this chapter, the city manager or designee may suspend any service or the use of any facility maintained by the city during the period such violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. II, § 4, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-45. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person violating this chapter may be held liable for damages, and the recovery shall be in a sum of not less than $110.00, nor more than $550.00 for each violation. The city attorney may institute a proceeding in any court having jurisdiction thereof to collect such civil penalty. If the violation has been committed by the owner of the property on which the violation occurs, the clerk may further proceed to collect the costs to the city of eliminating, removing or cleaning the premises in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. II, § 5, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 38-46—38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES 

Sec. 38-81. - Generally. 
The practices and procedures specified in this chapter shall be employed by persons in the city in order to facilitate the collection of solid wastes. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 1, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-82. - Refuse and garbage. 
All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers as specified in this chapter. All containers shall be maintained at all times with tight-fitting lids or covers. All garage placed in containers for collection shall first be drained of all liquids, and shall be wrapped, bagged, or enclosed in paper or plastic material. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 2, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-83. - Household trash. 
All household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in refuse receptacles. Household trash may be combined with garbage. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 3, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-84. - Injurious trash items. 
All waste materials of an injurious nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes shall be securely packaged or wrapped (used needles shall be placed in hard plastic container with lid) for the purpose of preventing injury to the collection crews or third parties. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 4, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-85. - Hazardous refuse and building materials. 
No hazardous refuse or building materials shall be placed in any receptacle at any time. The city shall not be required to collect any hazardous refuse or building material. All hazardous refuse shall be secured against the possibility of causing injury to any person and shall not be placed on public property or private property without the written consent of the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 5, 10-6-1998) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 22. 
Sec. 38-86. - Collection limits. 
No residence or business shall place for collection at one time more than five cubic yards or 400 pounds of trash. If the residence or business establishment places trash for collection which exceeds these limits, the residence or business shall be assessed an additional fee in an amount based on the actual cost of equipment, labor, transport or hauling and tippage fees needed for collection and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 6, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-87. - Box collection. 
All persons, firms, businesses, institutions or corporations utilizing city pickup of trash at a place of trade or business shall be required to break down any and all boxes, whether made of cardboard, wood, or other material, before placing the boxes into collection bins, receptacles, or other designated and approved collection points. To break down a box, it shall be rendered into a flat shape by whatever means necessary so that it no longer retains its three-dimensional shape and utilizes as little space as possible. Failure to break down boxes shall result in a violation of this chapter or the refusal by city sanitation officials to remove the garbage, or both. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 7, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-88. - Yard trash, tree and shrubbery trimmings. 
(a)  It shall be prohibited to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a linear and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. Yard trimmings and small branches shall be sorted in the following manner. 
(b)  All leaves, clippings and small branches shall be collected and stored in lawn and garden bags no larger than 40 gallons in capacity. All such leaves and trimmings stored in bags shall be placed at the edge of the pavement of any public right-of-way used for road purposes. 
(1)  All limbs shall be cut into lengths of no more than four feet each and shall be neatly stacked in piles not to exceed an area of four feet by four feet at or near the curb to facilitate easy collection by the city. 
(c)  If any residence or business establishment places yard trimmings for collection that exceeds these limits, the residence or business shall be assessed an additional fee in the amount based on the actual cost of equipment, labor and tippage fees needed for collection. The city will not pick up yard waste mixed with other debris. Trash other than yard waste must be in a separate stack. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 8, 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 08-43, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 38-89. - Felled trees. 
The owner of property on which trees are cut down, whether by the owner or another, is required to remove promptly following the cutting at the owner's expense all tree trunks, logs, limbs, tops or other debris resulting therefrom, when such materials are clearly visible from any public street, alley, sidewalk, lane or path from the property of another that adjoins the property on which the materials are located. Such materials shall not be destroyed or removed by burning. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 9, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-90. - Trees, shrubbery, branches, and similar growth. 
All individuals, firms, businesses, partnerships, proprietorships or corporations engaged in the business of yard maintenance, landscaping, nursery operation or in the business of trimming or removing trees, shrubbery, or similar growth, who shall contract with the property owner, the owner's agent or occupant to perform services on the property shall remove from the property all sawdust, branches, stumps and all portions of the byproducts of the services performed, as well as all rubbish associated therewith including rocks, concrete, dirt and trimmings. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 10, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-91. - Removal for compensation. 
It shall be unlawful for any firm, partnership, proprietorship or corporation to trim trees or bushes, do landscaping or yard work for compensation within the city unless the byproduct from those services is immediately removed from the premises and placed or deposited by the contractor in the city designated landfill or hauling station, or unless arrangements are made by the contractor or property owner for yard trimmings removal by the city for a fee. Compensation shall be interpreted to include receiving as compensation the wood, limbs and other residue from such trimming and cutting. Any form of compensation shall place the burden of disposal directly upon the individual or contractor performing the task. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 11, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-92. - Household furniture and appliances. 
Upon request, the city may, where such service is found to be economical and in the best interest of the general health, safety and welfare, collect, or, arrange for the collection, of normal household furniture and appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, refrigerators, washers, dryers, hot water heaters and similar items, but not including furnaces. Persons requesting this service shall notify the office of the city manager or designee as to the date the collection will occur. The city shall have the right to set and collect a fee for this service. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 12, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-93. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities are declared to be unlawful and in violation of this chapter: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse, trash, or litter in any street, sidewalk, median strip, alley or other public right of way, nor upon any private property, except with the written consent thereof and then only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Blockage of drainage. At no time shall trash be placed in a manner to obstruct drains, utility meters, walkways or streets. It shall be unlawful to use brooms, rakes, blowers or other sweeping, raking or debris removal tools or equipment to sweep, rake, blow or otherwise deposit or accumulate trash, garbage, gardening residue, clippings, limbs, ashes, alluvium, sediment, litter or other debris of any kind in or on city streets, walkways, drains, pipes or gutters. It shall be unlawful to place, accumulate or otherwise deposit any type of the aforementioned debris or material into a city drain, pipe, gutter or other draining conduit or receptacle. 
(3)  Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items, or any litter, on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this chapter, is declared to be a nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the city manager or designee shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this chapter. 
(4)  Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling, except as specified in section 38-92, any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, junked motor vehicle, tires or other items which are either in a partially used, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, and which are not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. 
(5)  Sweeping and blowing. It shall be unlawful to sweep or blow with a blower, grass clippings, leaves and other debris onto a city sidewalk, gutter or street. 
(6)  Dumping. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this section to dump, place or leave bricks, blocks, rocks, lumber, asphalt, cement, concrete, concrete products or waste, roofing, sheetrock, leaves, limbs, bushes, trees, roots, dead animals, appliances, equipment, bed springs, mattresses, furniture, fixture, motors, engines, chemical wastes, industrial or commercial waste or rubbish, scrap metal, fence wire, vehicles or parts thereof, tires, building materials or supplies, and inorganic solid material of any type or kind except as authorized herein. 
(7)  Fires. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter to set any fire to any solid waste, litter or rubbish, or to allow a fire to burn inside or outside of an authorized receptacle, or in any other way attempt to damage or destroy the garbage and solid waste collection containers provided by the city. 
(8)  Container of another. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to dump, place or leave any item at a garbage and solid waste collection area or in any collection container unless such person has permission of the owner and/or occupant of the premises on which the area or container is located and such arrangement is authorized by the city manager or designee. 
(9)  Billboards. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for owners to fail to maintain billboards in a manner that prevents loose paper, bills and other litter and debris resulting from the use of such signs and billboards. The owners or their agents immediately upon accumulation shall remove any such debris, loose papers, bills and other litter. 
b.  Any such item or items, which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of 30 days after notice of violation, shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city without further notice. The city may charge the owner or occupant a fee for the cost of removing such item or items, and may collect the fees for removal as prescribed herein. This section shall not apply to licensed junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(10)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof or an agent or employee of the city manager or designee shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, remove any contents therefrom, or remove such container from its collection place. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 13, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-94. - Abandonment. 
Any such item or items, which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of 30 days after notice of violation of this chapter, shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city without further notice. The city may charge the owner or occupant a fee for the cost of removing such item or items. The clerk may collect any unpaid charge for removal in the same manner as delinquent taxes. This section shall not apply to licensed junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, § 14, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 38-95—38-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 38-131. - Generally. 
All commercial establishments shall store their refuse in containers, as specified in this chapter, to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishments. Approved methods of containerization shall include refuse receptacles, bulk containers and detachable containers. Such establishment shall immediately clean up any spillage or overflow. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. IV, § 1, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-132. - Loading and unloading areas. 
All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment shall place a sufficient number of containers in such area to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The number of such containers to be placed in service for a particular establishment shall be set by the city manager or designee. The occupant of the premises shall maintain surveillance to ensure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. The city manager or designee may require refuse receptacles to be screened or buffered or moved if it can be feasibly determined that a loading or unloading area is inadequate, unsanitary or unsightly. If the occupant violates this section where all other remedies have failed, collection service, and at the discretion of the city water service may be suspended until such time as the owner or occupant of the premises brings such premises into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. IV, § 2, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-133. - Construction sites and demolition sites. 
All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials and other trash (no hazardous waste shall be deposited in the containers) produced by those working at the construction site. A separate container shall be provided for metal scraps free of all other debris at the construction site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. The number of refuse receptacles (not to exceed four bulk containers, or detachable containers), shall be determined by the size of the job. The designated collection contractor upon completion of the construction shall remove dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris upon any public or private property belonging to a person other than the owner of the construction site. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. IV, § 3, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 38-134—38-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COLLECTION PRACTICES 

Sec. 38-161. - Residential garbage collection. 
Residential garbage collection shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Garbage and solid waste at residences within the city shall be collected only by departments and employees of the city, or pursuant to a contract or franchise issued by the city. Removal by persons for hire or compensation is prohibited. 
(2)  Collections from residential premises shall be made once weekly, with the exception of holidays or in times when such collection is impossible, such as in the event of natural disasters. 
(3)  Residents shall place garbage for curbside pickup in carts provided by the city. On the evening before each day assigned by the city sanitation department, or its contractor, for collection in the resident's area, the cart will be placed at a curbside point designated by the city sanitation department no earlier than 6:00 p.m. for pick up the next day. The cart will be removed from the curbside point by the resident no later than 8:00 a.m. on the day after the assigned collection date. Failure to remove a cart by 8:00 a.m. on the day after the assigned collection date shall result in a fine of $10.00 per day until the cart is removed. At other times, carts will be stored by the residents where possible in locations not visible from the street or road on which the garage is collected. 
(4)  The city shall initially provide and bear the cost of the first cart for each residence. In the event the cart is insufficient to contain the garbage for a residence, the resident shall bear the cost of placement of an additional cart at the residence. In the event a cart is lost, stolen or abused, the resident shall bear the cost of placement of another cart at the residence. 
(5)  In the event the cart is not used for a period of three weeks, then the cart shall be removed from the residence. 
(6)  Persons having physical handicaps, which prevent them from placing carts at curbsides, shall be exempted from the requirement to place the cart at the curbside. The other requirements for collection and disposal of garbage contained within this chapter will nonetheless apply to persons exempted under this subsection. 
(7)  Persons required to maintain containers under this chapter shall maintain the containers in a sanitary condition, tightly covered at all times other than filling, emptying and cleaning, and free from odor. Such containers shall be filled in such a manner as to allow pickup by one person, except when hoist type containers are used. Such containers shall be further maintained to prevent the overflow and scattering of trash, garbage, refuse, other solid waste, or water/rainwater. 
(8)  All apartment buildings or structures containing in excess of six dwelling units are required to use hoist type dumpsters or containers that are compatible for loading by mechanical means by garbage and solid waste collection vehicles maintained by the city sanitation department for the accumulation of garbage by building or structure residents. In apartment buildings or structures containing less than six dwelling units, each occupied dwelling unit, household or apartment within the city shall provide at least one container and shall provide additional containers as required by the city sanitation department. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. V, § 1, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-162. - Garbage collection at commercial establishments. 
Garbage collection at commercial establishments shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Commercial garbage and solid waste shall be collected and disposed pursuant to a contractual agreement entered into by a private garbage and solid waste collection and disposal service and the city, as evidenced by a written agreement approved by the mayor and council. A copy of such contractual agreement shall remain in the office of the clerk and be available for inspection by members of the public during the clerk's regular office hours. 
(2)  Collections from businesses and commercial enterprises within the city shall be at times as established by the mayor and council and set out in the contractual agreement with the private garbage and solid waste disposal referenced in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Service to commercial establishments will be provided by a schedule that is provided by the sanitation superintendent. Such collections shall be limited to a maximum of two refuse receptacles per collection or the standard bulk container to be collected by a private contractual agency, as contemplated by subsection (1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. V, § 2, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-163. - Industrial waste. 
Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by any factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing such waste. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. V, § 3, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-164. - Hazardous refuse. 
No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of refuse by the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. V, § 4, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-165. - Dead animals. 
Small dead animals will be collected by the city during operating hours of the city/county landfill or hauling station, provided the body is appropriately wrapped and isolated in an area readily accessible to the collector. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. V, § 5, 10-6-1998) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6. 
Sec. 38-166. - Building materials. 
The city shall not be responsible for the collecting preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of a new building, alteration or additions to an existing building or of any kind of construction of any and all refuse, trash, debris resulting therefrom as well as from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. V, § 6, 10-6-1998) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 
Secs. 38-167—38-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL REFUSE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-201. - Contagious disease refuses. 
Clothing, bedding or other refuse from places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be decontaminated prior to removal under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in receptacles or bulk containers for the city collection until decontaminated. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VI, § 1, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-202. - Hypodermic instruments. 
No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of re-use, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by securely placing in plastic container with lid so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VI, § 2, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 38-203—38-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DISPOSAL SITES 

Sec. 38-231. - Use authorized; regulations. 
All yard trimmings and other acceptable refuse shall be delivered and deposited at authorized public disposal sites in accordance with the directions and orders of the city manager or designee or representative in charge of operations; except, however, privately operated sites may be used for the sanitary disposal of industrial wastes or other specified waste upon the approval of the city manager or designee and upon the issuance of appropriate disposal permits, as required by the regulations of the state department of natural resources and/or the federal Environmental Protection Agency. The city manager or designee or his representative shall be authorized to promulgate appropriate regulations requiring disposal site users to classify and separate deposits. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 1, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-232. - Designation of sites. 
(a)  Public sites approved for the disposal of yard trimmings and other acceptable refuse shall be identified by appropriate directional signs posted near the roadside and at the location of the city inert landfill. 
(b)  Such sites shall be maintained in use until permanently closed, at which time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting and through public advertisements. 
(c)  The mayor and council may restrict certain sites or portions thereof to a specific type or types of yard trimmings or refuse. 
(d)  Commercial collectors, including yard maintenance men, may use the public designated sites. 
(e)  Residents of the city, other than commercial collectors, may use public sites, in accordance with the regulations for the particular site and under the instruction of the site attendant. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 2, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-233. - Operating schedule. 
Authorized public disposal sites shall be operated on a schedule as established by the city manager or designee during the hours designated. Acceptable refuse generated in the city shall be received for disposal from any resident of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 3, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-234. - When use authorized; ownership of waste. 
No person shall enter a disposal site except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days prescribed in this chapter. Only residents of or businesses with locations in the city shall be allowed to use or dispose of yard trimmings at the disposal sites, and only yard trimmings generated within the city will be accepted. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 4, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-235. - Classification of refuse for disposal; domestic refuse. 
The following types of refuse shall be classed as "domestic refuse" and shall be accepted for disposal: Yard trimmings as described in section 38-1. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 5, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-236. - Permit required for private sites. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his ownership and control any refuse without first having obtained a disposal area permit as required by any regulation of the state department of natural resources, the federal Environmental Protection Agency and the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 6, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-237. - General maintenance. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be public nuisance or menace to public health. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 7, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-238. - Right to enter to inspect. 
The city manager or designee shall have the right to enter a private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether or not the site is in compliance with this chapter and all other pertinent laws and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 8, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-239. - Disposal locations. 
(a)  No person shall dispose of garbage, trash, commercial waste or other garbage or solid waste at any location within the limits of the city except in authorized containers for collection by city departments or its contractual assigns at an approved landfill or hauling station located outside of the city. Only residents of or businesses with locations in the city shall be allowed to use or dispose of waste at the disposal sites, and only waste generated within the city or county will be accepted. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or cast any garbage or solid waste, rubbish, trash, filth or litter of any nature into the streets, sidewalks, lanes, squares or thoroughfares of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, sweep, cast or otherwise put or place any straw, paper, cans, bottles, broken glass, decaying vegetables or fruit or other decaying vegetation, rubbish, garbage or solid waste on any vacant lot within the limits of the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any lot, tract or parcel of land or premises within the city to permit the growth thereon of weeds or noxious vegetation to such extent that such vegetation constitutes a public health, safety or welfare concern. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 9, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-240. - Fire hazards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place ashes within any building in any box, barrel or other wooden vessel or upon any wooden vessel or floor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain or permit to be kept on any premises within the city oily waste or oily rags unless, at all times when not actually in use, such oily waste and rags are kept in a metal can or container with a self-closing cover and riveted joints, standing on metal legs which raise the bottom of the container at least four inches above the floor. 
(c)  All owners or occupants of buildings are required to permit the Chief of the Fire Department or his designated agent to inspect or to have inspected their buildings or premises to determine compliance with subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 10, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-241. - Transportation of trash, garbage and refuse. 
(a)  All persons hauling or transporting trash, garbage, refuse or other debris to the city landfill or hauling station shall transport same in such a way as to prevent trash, leaves, limbs, paper, garbage, refuse or other debris from falling from a vehicle transporting the same or from blowing off of the vehicles so as to fall in the public streets of the city or in the ditches or yards adjacent to such streets. Vehicles transporting such materials shall have suitable covers, such as a tarp, securely fastened to the vehicle. 
(b)  Such material being transported to the city landfill or hauling site shall be packed in the vehicle transporting it so that it will not fall off or blow out and shall have suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle to prevent littering of the streets and yards of the city. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the transportation of poultry, livestock, silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 11, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-242. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any individual, whether as a pedestrian or traveling in a motor vehicle, to deposit, place or throw litter on to any public property or right of way, or upon private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 12, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-243. - Maintenance of litter. 
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this does not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized receptacles or containers. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 13, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-244. - Placement of litter in receptacles to prevent scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, § 14, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 38-245—38-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SCRAP TIRES 

Sec. 38-281. - Storage. 
Except as otherwise provided in within this chapter, no person may store more than 100 scrap tires anywhere in the city. Any persons storing in excess of 100 scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. All scrap tires must be stored in shipping containers, storage building or in an enclosed fenced (privacy) area and covered to prevent accumulation of rain water in scrap tires. The following exemptions shall apply: 
(1)  A solid waste disposal site permitted by the EPD if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; 
(2)  A retail tire dealer who stores not more than 2,000 scrap tires in a shipping container and not more than 1,000 scrap tires in storage, provided such a retail tire dealer complies with EPD Rule 391-3-4-.19(3); 
(3)  A tire retreader with not more than 1,500 scrap tires in storage so long as the scrap tires are of the type the retreader is actively retreading; 
(4)  An auto salvage yard with not more than 500 scrap tires in storage; and 
(5)  A scrap tire processor approved by the EPD so long as the number of scrap tires in storage does not exceed the quantity approved by the EPD. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VIII, § 1, 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 08-48, 6-3-2008) 
Sec. 38-282. - Staging and/or processing. 
(a)  All scrap tire processing or disposal facilities which stage scrap tires or processed tires outdoors must comply with the following standards: 
(1)  An outdoor scrap tire pile or processed tire pile will have no greater than the following maximum dimensions: Width: 50 feet; area: 10,000 square feet; and height: 15 feet. 
(2)  A 50-foot wide fire lane must be placed around the perimeter of each scrap tire pile and must have uninhibited access from a public road. Access to the fire lane for emergency vehicles must be unobstructed at all times. In the event of fire, the owner or operator shall, upon receipt of notification of a fire, immediately take all necessary steps to control and extinguish the fire, including all oil and other residue created by the fire. 
(3)  The owner or operator will control mosquitoes and rodents. 
(b)  Processors staging scrap tire indoors or outdoors must meet the following standards: 
(1)  No operations involving the use of open flames will be conducted within 25 feet of a scrap tire pile. 
(2)  A 50-foot wide approach and access road to the scrap tire processing facility must be kept passable for any motor vehicle at all times. 
(3)  The facility must be secured from public access during nonoperating hours by the use of fences, gates or other means. 
(4)  An attendant must be present when the scrap tire processing is open for business if the facility receives tires from persons other than the operator of the facility. 
(5)  The facility must be bermed or given other adequate protection to keep liquid runoff from a potential tire fire from entering the waters of the state. 
(6)  Prior to origination of operation, fire protection services for the facility must be assured by notifying the city fire department. A fire safety survey must be conducted. 
(7)  Communication equipment must be maintained in proper working order at the scrap tire processing facility to ensure that the facility operator can contact local fire protection authorities in case of fire. 
(8)  The scrap tire processing facility must be kept free of long grass, underbrush and other potentially flammable vegetation at all times. 
(9)  The operator of the facility must prepare and keep at the facility an emergency preparedness manual. The manual must be updated at least once annually or within 30 days upon changes in operations at the site. The manual must contain the following elements: 
a.  A list of names and numbers of persons to be contacted in the event of a fire, flood or other emergency; 
b.  A list of the emergency response equipment at the facility, its location, and how it should be used in the event of a fire or other emergency.; and 
c.  A description of the procedures that should be followed in the event of a fire, including procedures to contain and dispose of the oily material generated by the combustion of large numbers of tires. 
(c)  Any residuals from scrap tire processing must be managed to be contained on-site and must be controlled and disposed of in a permitted solid waste handling facility or be properly recycled. 
(d)  A scrap tire processing facility may not accept any scrap tires for processing if it has reached its approved or allotted staging limit. At least 75 percent of both the scrap and processed tires that are accumulated by the scrap tire processing facility each calendar quarter and 75 percent by weight or volume of all scrap tires previously received and not recycled, reused or properly disposed during the preceding calendar quarter must be processed and removed from the facility for disposal or recycling during the quarter or disposed of in a permitted solid waste handling facility. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VIII, § 2, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-283. - Reuse and recycling of scrap tires. 
(a)  All scrap tires or processed scrap tires must be used, reused or recycled in accordance with this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the following criteria will be used to determine if scrap tires are being used, reused or recycled: 
(1)  The scrap tires or processed scrap tires have a known use, reuse or recycling potential; 
(2)  The scrap tires or processed scrap tires have been feasibly used, reused or recycled; 
(3)  The scrap tires or processed scrap tires have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing; and 
(4)  The scrap tires or processed scrap tires must either be: 
a.  Employed as an ingredient (including use as an intermediate) in a process to make a product (for example, utilizing crumb rubber to make rubber asphalt); 
b.  Employed in a particular function or application as an effective substitute for a commercial product (for example, utilizing shredded tires as a substitute for fuel oil, natural gas, coal, or wood in a boiler or industrial furnace) as long as such substitution does not pose a threat to human health or the environment, and so long as the facility is not a solid waste thermal treatment technology facility or utilizing shredded tires as a soil amendment, aggregate, etc.; or 
c.  Reused for its original intended purpose as a used tire or reused for other purposes approved by the EPD, such as playground equipment, offshore reefs, erosion control, etc. 
(b)  Scrap tires or processed scrap tires may not be "accumulated speculatively." Scrap tires or processed scrap tires are not "accumulated speculatively" if: 
(1)  There is a known use, reuse or recycling potential for them as shown by: 
a.  Proof of a known market or disposition of the scrap tires or processed scrap tires; and 
b.  Proof that the necessary equipment is available prior to receiving the scrap tires for processing; 
(2)  They can be feasibly sold, used, reused or recycled; and 
(3)  During the preceding 90 days, the amount of scrap tires or processed tires recycled, sold, used or reused equals at least 75 percent by weight or volume of the tires received during the 90-day period. Proof of recycling, sale, use or reuse shall be provided in the form of bills of sale, or other records showing adequate proof of movement of the scrap tires in question to a recognized recycling facility or for proper use or reuse from the accumulation point. 
(c)  A scrap tire is "sold" if the generator of the scrap tire or the person who processed the scrap tire received consideration or compensation for the material because of its inherent value. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VIII, § 3, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 38-284. - Scrap tire generators. 
(a)  Any person who generates scrap tires shall have a scrap tire generator identification number (ID#) issued by the environmental protection division. The ID number shall be used on scrap tire shipment manifests. Separate ID numbers shall be required for generators having multiple generation locations. 
(b)  Generators shall initiate a manifest to transport scrap tires from the point of generation to an end user or to a scrap tire processing or disposal facility approved by the environmental protection division. The manifest shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and ID number of the generator; 
(2)  Number of total tons (accurate to within ten percent of actual number) of scrap tires to be transported; 
(3)  Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier; 
(4)  Date of transport; and 
(5)  Destination of scrap tires. 
(c)  If a generator chooses to use tons of tires rather than actual numbers of tires on the manifest for passenger and truck tires, the following conversion factor must be used: 
Passenger tires: 2,000 lbs. (one ton) = 100 tires, @ 20 lbs./tire. 
Truck tires: 2000 lbs. (one ton) = 20 tires, @ 100 lbs./tire. 
(d)  Unless otherwise approved in writing by the environmental protection division, generators shall ensure that any person collecting and transporting their scrap tires hold a valid scrap tire carrier permit issued by the environmental protection division; provided, however, that a person who generates less than 100 tires per month and who transport only their own scrap tire to approved end users, processors, recyclers or disposers are not required to have a scrap tire carrier permit, but must comply with all other provisions required of generators and scrap tire carriers. 
(e)  Generators shall maintain receipts (copies of completed manifest) for a period of three years. 
(f)  A generator shall report to the environmental protection division any carrier who fails to return a properly completed manifest to the generator within 30 days of scrap tire pickup. Such report shall be filed within 30 days of failure of the carrier to comply. 
(g)  Generators may choose to determine whether a tire, because of wear, damage, or defect is not suitable for classification as a "used tire" or "retreadable casing" as defined in section 38-1. However, if a generator fails to sort or delineate which tires are "used," "retreadable casings," or "scrap tires," then all tires transported shall be considered scrap tires and must be indicated as such on the shipment manifest. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VIII, § 4, 10-6-1998) 
Chapter 42 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; cemeteries, ch. 14; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 22; floods, ch. 26; parks and recreation, ch. 34; subdivisions, ch. 46; peddlers and solicitors, § 50-441 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50.00 per day. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. 
(Ord. of 10-6-1997, § 12-106) 
Sec. 42-2. - Maintenance and repair of public streets. 
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the city manager, which officer shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this chapter and all ordinances of the city relating to such public ways. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(2)) 
Sec. 42-3. - Maintenance of sidewalks. 
It shall be the duty of all owners of property in the city upon which sidewalks have been laid to keep such walkways in good repair at all times. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(2)) 
Sec. 42-4. - Maintenance of property between sidewalks and streets. 
All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts upon any sidewalk which is paved shall be required to keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property line and the curbline of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of the sidewalk lying between the property line and the curbline of the street as aforesaid, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. If such owners are not in the possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of the same. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(3)) 
Sec. 42-5. - Defacing sidewalks, streets, and curbs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any newly laid street, sidewalk or curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(4)) 
Sec. 42-6. - Obstructions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction on any street, street right-of-way, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, except as may be provided in this chapter or in the ordinance and laws of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(5); Ord. No. 08-23, 10-2-2007) 
Sec. 42-7. - Deposits and discharges onto streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street or sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal or property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk or other organic material. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(6)) 
Sec. 42-8. - Report of defects, obstructions, deposits and discharges. 
It shall be the duty of every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public way of the city to report the same to the city manager as soon as possible. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(7)) 
Sec. 42-9. - Private use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any street, sidewalk, or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or make any sign or advertisement on any such pavement if, in the opinion of the mayor and council, it would be dangerous to the public. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(8)) 
Sec. 42-10. - Encroachments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley or other public way, without having first secured a permit from the clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(9)) 
Sec. 42-11. - Openings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley without first obtaining a permit from the clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  All lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(10)) 
Sec. 42-12. - Trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Planting and removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure or cut any tree, bush or shrub in or from any public street, parkway or other public place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Advertisements. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(c)  Dangerous trees. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. Any tree or limb of a tree which is likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. The city manager may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(d)  Poles and wires. Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the city manager, so that no injuries befall either the poles and wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(11)) 
Sec. 42-13. - Burning of leaves and rubbish. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish, or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 12-101(12)) 
Sec. 42-14. - Deposit of limbs, shrubbery trimmings and debris, street right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to place limbs, shrubbery trimmings or other generated debris on street right-of-way for an extended period of time. This debris must be removed within seven days after placement on the right-of-way. Burning of any type of debris is prohibited on street right-of-ways. 
Enforcement; penalty. This section shall be enforced by the office of the city building inspector. Citations for noncompliance may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city and subject to provisions of city ordinance section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 08-30, 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 42-15. - Placement of curbside mailboxes. 
All mailboxes shall be placed at curbside in accordance with the following dimensions: Front of mailbox to be six to eight inches from the curb or edge of pavement; height of mailbox to be 41 to 45 inches off the ground. 
(Ord. No. 08-27, 11-13-2007) 
Sec. 42-16. - Speed control devices. 
The construction of speed control devices (speed bumps) are prohibited on all city controlled streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 08-31, 3-11-2008) 
Secs. 42-17—42-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 42-41. - Council resolution. 
Whenever the improvement of any street or part thereof shall be deemed necessary by the mayor and council, a resolution stating the nature and location of the proposed improvement shall be declared and published once a week for three consecutive weeks in the newspaper in which the county sheriff's advertisements are published. If the owners of a majority of the lineal feet of frontage of the lands abutting on the proposed improvement do not within 15 days after the last day of publication of said resolution file with the clerk a written protest against such improvement, contracts for the work to be done shall be entered into and assessments and liens shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 
(Code 1982, § 12-102(1)) 
Sec. 42-42. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any pavement for or on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way, or to repair the same, without having first obtained a permit from the clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 12-102(2)) 
Sec. 42-43. - Bond. 
Each applicant for a permit to construct or improve any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, curb, alley, or other public way shall be required to file a bond in the amount with surety to be approved by the city council, conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss or damage caused by, or resulting from, the work undertaken. 
(Code 1982, § 12-102(3)) 
Sec. 42-44. - Specifications. 
(a)  Generally. All street and sidewalk pavements and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Curb ramping. The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any city street, or any connecting street or road for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block on the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and constructed to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons. 
(Code 1982, § 12-102(4)) 
Sec. 42-45. - Barricades. 
Any person, firm, or corporation laying or preparing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(Code 1982, § 12-102(5)) 
Secs. 42-46—42-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 42-81. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any manner break up any street, or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose, or to place, deposit, or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit from the clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(1)) 
Sec. 42-82. - Excavation permit fee. 
The excavation permit fee to be collected by the clerk shall be in an amount varying with the type of surface to be opened, dug, or excavated under the permit issued, on file in the clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(2)) 
Sec. 42-83. - Surety bond. 
Each applicant for an excavation permit shall be required to file a surety bond with the clerk in the amount approved by the council. The required surety bond must be conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to secure and hold harmless the city and its officers against and all claims, judgments, or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for which the city, the city council, or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee resulting from the negligence of the permittee, and further conditioned on the permittee's agreement to fill up, restore, and place in good and safe condition as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the city manager, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street where an excavation is made in as good condition for the period of 24 months after said work shall have been done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was in before said work shall have been done. Any settlement of the surface within said two-year period shall be deemed conclusive evidence of defective backfilling by the permittee, except that nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the permittee to maintain any repairs to pavement made by the city if such repairs should prove defective. Recovery on such bond for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond, but it shall in its entirety cover any or all future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given. In the event of any suit or claim against the city by reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the city's given written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment again the city requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee and its surety. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(3)) 
Sec. 42-84. - Routing of traffic. 
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions shall be maintained at all times as nearly normal as practicable so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants to the abutting property and to the general public, provided that the city manager may recommend the closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time if in his opinion it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the police department. The following steps shall be taken before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic: 
(1)  The permittee must receive the approval of the city manager and the police department. 
(2)  The permittee must notify the chief of the fire department of any street so closed. 
(3)  Upon completion of construction work the permittee shall notify the city manager and city police department before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made. 
(4)  Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the chief of police, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the city manager will designate detours. The city shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee, but in case there are not existing highways the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the city manager. The permittee will be responsible for any unnecessary damage caused to any highways by the operation of its equipment. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(4)) 
Sec. 42-85. - Clearance for fire equipment. 
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire plugs. Passageways leading to fire escapes or firefighting equipment shall be kept free of piles of material or other obstructions. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(5)) 
Sec. 42-86. - Protection of traffic. 
The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers, and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely; pedestrian crossings shall be of adequate thickness, width, and length, together with necessary blocking, to ensure safe passage by pedestrians. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(6)) 
Sec. 42-87. - Interference with utilities. 
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the city manager and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee, unless the costs of such work shall be borne by the permittee. The costs of moving privately owned utilities shall similarly be borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain, and protect them under, over, along, or across said work. In case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and the bond of same shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewers, gas pipes, electric conduits, or other utilities, and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(7)) 
Sec. 42-88. - Protection of adjoining property. 
The permittee shall at all times, and at its own expense, preserve and protect from injury adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission from the owner of such private property for such purpose. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through lawn areas, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as near as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property, the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(8)) 
Sec. 42-89. - Sidewalk excavations. 
Any excavation made in or under any sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over said excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that pedestrians can pass over safely at all times. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(9)) 
Sec. 42-90. - Protective measures. 
The permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the street or sidewalks, and such protective barriers shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight there shall be placed upon each place of excavation, and upon any excavated materials, structures or other obstructions to streets, suitable and sufficient lights which shall be kept burning throughout the night for the duration of such obstructions. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(10)) 
Sec. 42-91. - Attractive nuisances. 
It shall be unlawful for the permittee to allow to remain unguarded at the place of excavation any machinery, equipment or other device having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract children and be hazardous to their safety or health. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(11)) 
Sec. 42-92. - Care of excavated material. 
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(12)) 
Sec. 42-93. - Damage to existing improvements. 
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable code provision or ordinance. If upon being ordered, the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the city manager shall have the authority to cause said necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the city, and the costs shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable on its bond therefor. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(13)) 
Sec. 42-94. - Cleanup. 
As the excavation work progresses, all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city manager. From time to time, as may be ordered by said city manager, and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the permittee shall, at its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the city manager, said work may be done by the city and the costs thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the costs thereof under the surety bond provided for hereunder. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(14)) 
Sec. 42-95. - Backfilling. 
Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug and in a manner consistent with sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(15)) 
Sec. 42-96. - Restoration of surface. 
(a)  The permittee shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original condition in accordance with the specifications of the city manager. The permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes and shall be required to exercise special care in making and maintaining such temporary restorations to assure safe traveling conditions until such time as permanent restorations are made. 
(b)  Permanent restoration of streets shall be made by the permittee in strict accordance with the specifications prescribed by the city manager. 
(c)  Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the city manager shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and its surety under the surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if such defects are discovered within 24 months from the completion of the excavation work. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(16)) 
Sec. 42-97. - City's right to restore surface. 
(a)  If the permittee shall have failed to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by the permit, or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the city manager, if he deems it advisable, shall have the right to do all work and things necessary to restore the street and to complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost, in addition, for general overhead and administrative expenses. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the permittee to guarantee and maintain the site of the excavation work in the same condition it was prior to the excavation for two years after restoring it to its original condition. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(17)) 
Sec. 42-98. - Prompt completion of work. 
The permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expediency all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, as soon as practicable and in any event not later than the date specified in the excavation permit. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(18)) 
Sec. 42-99. - Emergency work. 
In the event of any emergency in which a sewer, main, conduit, or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts, or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health, or safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit, or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit hereunder, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of the property, life, health, and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the clerk's office is open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit as herein provided. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(19)) 
Sec. 42-100. - Noise, dust and debris. 
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable noise, dust, and unsightly debris and during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall not use, except with the express written permission of the city manager or in case of an emergency as herein provided, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(20)) 
Sec. 42-101. - Inspections. 
The city manager shall make such inspections as reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article, and shall have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be required to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(21)) 
Sec. 42-102. - Drawings. 
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans, and profiles showing the locations and character of all underground structures including abandoned installations, and shall provide the city manager with a copy of the same. Corrected maps shall be filed with such officer within 60 days after new installations, changes or replacements are made. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(22)) 
Sec. 42-103. - Exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to any excavation work carried out under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 12-103(23)) 
Secs. 42-104—42-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVEWAYS AND CURBS 

Sec. 42-131. - Permit required. 
No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any driveway, curb or curb cut on the public streets without first obtaining a permit from the clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12-104(1)) 
Sec. 42-132. - Bond. 
The city manager shall have the authority to require an applicant for a permit hereunder to file a bond with his application conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to any persons by reason of the proposed alteration work. 
(Code 1982, § 12-104(3)) 
Sec. 42-133. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
The clerk shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds that: 
(1)  The plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the city manager, to whom such plans shall be forwarded by the clerk within a reasonable time after receipt thereof. 
(2)  The work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character. 
(3)  The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress to and egress from the affected and adjacent properties. 
(4)  The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(Code 1982, § 12-104(4)) 
Sec. 42-134. - Supervision. 
All work for which a permit is granted hereunder shall be under the direction and supervision of the city manager or designated persons. 
Secs. 42-135—42-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMITS 

Sec. 42-171. - Application. 
Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or law relating to the subject matter of this chapter shall submit a written application for such permit to the clerk. The written application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The purpose for which the application is submitted. 
(3)  The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm who is to do such work. 
(4)  The estimated cost of the proposed work. 
(5)  The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work, and other data or plans as may reasonably be required by the clerk or the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 12-105(1)) 
Sec. 42-172. - Permit fee. 
Unless otherwise provided, each application for a permit under this article shall be accompanied by a permit fee on file in the clerk's office. 
(1)  Issuance of receipts. The clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application. 
(2)  Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this article, the clerk shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 12-105(2)) 
Sec. 42-173. - Review of application. 
Upon receipt of the application for a permit under the provisions of this article, the clerk shall forward such application to the city manager, who shall approve or disapprove such application within seven days after receipt thereof. After indicating approval or disapproval on the application, the city manager shall return the same to the clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 12-105(3)) 
Sec. 42-174. - Issuance of permit. 
Upon receipt of an approved application from the city manager, the clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant therefor, which shall state the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 12-105(4)) 
Sec. 42-175. - Display of permit. 
It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit issued to him in a conspicuous place at the site of the work or activity to be engaged in. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(Code 1982, § 12-105(5)) 
Sec. 42-176. - Limitation on issuance. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no permit shall be issued to any applicant therefor who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such applicant. 
(Code 1982, § 12-105(6)) 
Secs. 42-177—42-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT GUIDELINES 

Sec. 42-200. - In general. 
The purpose of this document is to provide guidelines for property owners, merchants and event sponsors within the City of Glennville Downtown Business Area. However, all state and federal regulations to include American Disabilities Act (ADA) supersede these regulations as set forth in this article. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-201. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Downtown business area: The area of Barnard Street from U.S. 301(Veterans Boulevard) to Tillman Street to include alleys,(one block) to the north and south of said area excluding U.S. 301. 
Downtown development authority: A committee appointed by the mayor and council, for the purpose of revitalization and redevelopment of the central business district of the city, to develop and promote for the public good and general welfare trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities, and to promote the general welfare of the State of Georgia by creating a climate favorable to the location of new industry, trade and commerce and the development of existing industry, trade and commerce within the city. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-202. - Regulation of use of streets and sidewalks for business purposes. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall have full power and authority to regulate the use of the streets and sidewalks of the City of Glennville for business purposes and no person, firm or corporation shall have the right to use the streets and sidewalks of the City of Glennville for business purposes without first being permitted by the City of Glennville. 
(b)  If at any time, it shall appear that any person is encroaching upon or maintaining any obstruction in any part of a street, sidewalk, alley or other thoroughfare, it shall be the duty of the city manager, chief of police or code enforcement officer or their designees to give notice to such party, ordering the removal of such encroachment or obstruction; and if such encroachment or obstruction is not removed within 24 hours after receipt of such notice, or such other reasonable time as may be designated by the city manager, chief of police or code enforcement officer, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause any such encroachment or obstruction to be summarily removed, and the cost and expense thereof shall be charged to the person maintaining the encroachment or obstruction. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-203. - Street closing. 
The complete or partial closure of any street, sidewalk or other public way as a part of a special event shall be approved by the city manager in consultation with the chief of police. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-204. - Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or have placed any banner or sign across any public street or alley except when expressly authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-205. - Obstructing view at intersections prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to have or maintain on his property any billboard, merchandise or other obstruction which prevents persons driving vehicles on public streets or alleys from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-206. - Encroachment by street coverings, awnings or other shelters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain within the fire limits of the city over or upon the sidewalks or streets of the city, within said limits, any shelter or sidewalk or street covering, which shall encroach upon said street or sidewalks, or decorative street lights and extending arms, which said shelter or sidewalk or street covering shall be supported from the ground by columns or otherwise. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-207. - Riding on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any horse, bicycle, motorcycle, or roller skate, roller blade or skateboard on any sidewalk within the area designated as downtown business area. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-208. - Deposits and discharges. 
(a)  No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street, storm drainage system or other public place within downtown business area the accumulation of litter from any building or lot from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on any street, sidewalk or storm drainage system any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste materials, or any glass or other article which may do injury to any person, animal or property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or to allow to be discharged onto any city street, sidewalk or storm drainage system any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste, milk or other organic materials. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-209. - Maintenance of property between street and sidewalk. 
The city requests and encourages that all persons who owns real estate in the city which abuts upon any sidewalk keep that portion of such sidewalk which lies between the property and the curb line of the adjoining street, and upon which his real estate abuts, free from growing weeds and other obnoxious and unsightly vegetation or other things which would mar or detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. If the owners are not in possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of the same. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-210. - Interference with traffic and conduct of business. 
No number of persons shall block any street, sidewalk, alley or entrance to any place of business in the city by congregating on any street, alley sidewalk, or entrance to any place of business in the city in such number as to interfere with traffic or the conduct of business thereon and therein. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-211. - Defacing sidewalks, streets, and curbs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any public sidewalk, street or curb in the city by painting any signs thereon, whether for commercial advertising purposes or not, or to walk or to drive any vehicle upon or injure in any way any street, sidewalk or curbing pavement while the same is guarded by a warning sign or barricade or is soft or newly laid. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to move, disturb or take any earth, stone or other material from any street, sidewalks or other public property. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-212. - Trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Planting and removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, remove, injure, or cut any tree, bush or shrub in or from any public street, or other public place without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(b)  Advertisement. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-213. - Street numbers. 
The owner or owners of any real estate upon which there is situated a business or other building or structure to which there is assigned a street number by the city shall post the street number of such business or other building, in one of the following manners: 
(a)  By affixing the street number to the front of the business or other building in a prominent manner such that the same can be easily viewed from the street or road upon which such business or other building fronts. 
(b)  By incorporating the street number into or onto a sign located on the property in such a manner that the same can be easily viewed from the street upon business or other building fronts. 
(c)  All street numbering shall be a minimum of three inches in height and a maximum of five inches. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-214. - Encroachments, obstructions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley or other public place. 
(b)  No person shall erect, place or maintain in, upon or over any sidewalk, street, alley or other public place in the city, any fruit stand, shoe shining stand, flower stand, vegetable stand, lunch wagon, table box bin or other arrangement or structure for the display or sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the pursuit of any occupation whatsoever. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-215. - Smoking prohibited. 
Smoking is prohibited on the Barnard Street of the Glennville Downtown Business Area. Smoking is allowed only in the alleys located behind the downtown business area. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-216. - Use of public spaces and facilities. 
No person shall, without first submitting and receiving a permit from the city manager or his/her designee made according to the requirements set out hereinafter: 
(a)  Conduct a public assembly ,meeting, march, parade, demonstration, or other like event fixed or processional. 
(b)  Circulate or distribute any leaflets, handbills, notices, pamphlets, book, documents or papers of any kind on any public street, sidewalk or public place. 
(c)  Bring any non-domestic (e.g., any of the following would be considered non-domestic: poisonous, exotic, dangerous, feral, or farm animals) on, over or upon the public properties of the city, or facilities thereon. 
(d)  Station or erect any building, stand, bandstand, stage, tower, scaffold, sound stage, platform, rostrum or other structure on, over, or upon the public properties of the city. 
(e)  Create or emit any electronically amplified sound, on, over, or upon the public properties of the city, except from a radio, recorder or other device, which is possessed and used by an individual for his own enjoyment and is operated in such a manner so as to not interfere with the and enjoyment by any other person; or 
(f)  Conduct any exhibit, music, or dramatic performance, fair, circus, concert, play, radio or television broadcast, other than a news transmission on, over, or upon the public properties of the city; or station or use any electrical or electronic device or equipment that would require outdoor auxiliary power. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-217. - Event application. 
No less than 30 days prior to an event, the person associated in fact, whether or not a legally recognized entity, who wish to conduct an event requiring a permit, shall apply to the City of Glennville for an event permit. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-218. - Exhibition shows in street regulated. 
(a)  Defined. For the purposes of this section "exhibition show" shall mean an exhibition or show where merchandise, wares or other tangible items are displayed for show and/or sale either out of doors or in a building occupied in whole or part for a period not to exceed two days. It shall not include a sidewalk sale conducted by a merchant having a valid business license, on the sidewalk immediately adjoining said merchants' store. However, all sidewalk sales must be conducted so that reasonable use of the sidewalk is maintained for the normal pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or commence an exhibition show as defined above, in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place in the city unless an event permit has been obtained from the city. 
(c)  The producer of a special event shall be required to provide temporary outdoor toilet facilities for any event at which 200 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. The number of toilets and their locations shall be determined by the city code enforcement section. 
(d)  Persons wishing to use the street or sidewalks to conduct an event must present to the city a writing signed by an agent of his insurance carrier stating the person currently carries liability insurance in the amount equal to or exceeding $500,000.00, and that any accident or mishap occurring during the event is covered under the primary liability coverage. 
(e)  The producer of any special event shall hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents from liability of damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such wavier shall be filed with, and made a part of the application form. The producer shall be responsible for providing any and all other insurance that may be necessary for any special event. The amount and kind of insurance required shall be determined by the city manager, or his/her designee, after considering the nature of the special event, and the potential for harm and the degree of harm to persons and property. The producer shall provide proof to the city manager or his/her designee, that such insurance is in effect prior to the issue of a permit. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-219. - Cessation of activities. 
The safety, health, welfare and good order of all citizens and the community shall be first and foremost and every special event shall be conducted in such manner. The city manager, chief of police or code enforcement officer or their designee may terminate any activity, whether a part of or the entire event, which does not meet this community standard. Upon notification of the event producer in person by the city manager, chief of police or code enforcement officer to cease any activity, it shall be unlawful for such producer and/or any participants to permit such activity to continue. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-220. - Display of merchandise on sidewalks. 
It shall be permissible and lawful for merchants and dealers in various and sundry types of merchandise to display their merchandise on the sidewalk in front of their place of business provided such merchandise does not extend more than 27 inches from the front wall of the building occupied by the merchant or dealer (this area can be generally defined as the area of concrete located between the front wall of the building and the edge of the brick pavers), and provided the placing of such merchandise or articles for sale on the sidewalk does not interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage by the public along the sidewalk, and meets all state and federal regulations to include American Disabilities Act (ADA). No merchandise, articles for sale or other items shall be placed on or among any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or passageways within the city if the placing of same will interfere with the free use and passage of the public along said street, alley, sidewalk or passageway. 
(a)  The merchant wishing to use the sidewalk for display of goods must present to the city a writing signed by an agent of his insurance carrier stating the merchant currently carries premises liability insurance in the amount equal to or exceeding $500,000.00 and that any accident or mishap occurring as a result of merchant displaying any wares, goods or merchandise of any kind upon any part of a city sidewalk is covered under the primary liability coverage. 
(b)  The merchant must execute an indemnity contract between himself and the city in which he agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all liability resulting from merchant's displaying any wares, goods, or merchandise of any kind upon any part of a city sidewalk. 
(c)  A merchant using city sidewalk pursuant to this section may use only that portion of the sidewalk directly in front of his own store, and may not in any way encroach upon the sidewalk frontage directly in front of any other store or business. 
(d)  Any items placed must be free of any lewd, racist or derogatory materials or images. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-221. - Posting. 
No person shall stick or post any handbill or placard of any description upon any public street light, electrical power poles, street signs, on vehicles, or any other structure without the permission of the property owner. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-222. - Signage. 
(a)  Permit required. Sign permits are required for all signs affixed to or hung from building, awning or structure. Permit applications are available in Glennville City Hall. 
(b)  Sidewalk signs in front of store fronts are authorized, provided the signs meet the follow conditions: 
(1)  Overall height not to exceed 60 inches tall and width not to exceed 27 inches wide. 
(2)  Contains no posters or print materials. 
(3)  Features no logos other than that of the business it promotes. 
(4)  Contain a chalkboard writing area (no dry-erase boards). 
(5)  Does not extend more than 27 inches from the front wall of the building (this area can be generally defined as the area of concrete located between the front wall of the building and the edge of the brick pavers), occupied by the merchant or dealer, and provided the placing of such signage on the sidewalk does not interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage by the public along the sidewalk, and meets all state and federal regulations to include American Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(6)  Items placed must be free of any lewd, racist or derogatory materials or images. 
(c)  All planned signage for downtown area must be reviewed and recommended by the downtown development authority prior to approval of the city. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-223. - Storefront awnings, painting and renovations. 
Prior to installing any awning, painting of exterior or renovation of any storefront, a permit must be obtained from city hall. All permits must be reviewed by the Glennville Downtown Development Authority which will make recommendations to the mayor and council for approval/disapproval. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Sec. 42-224. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Penalties for each violation of any item in articles II, III, IV or V, shall be as follows: 

 
The written warning for a first occurrence shall be hand delivered or mailed by first class mail and certified return receipt requested to the location of the house, dwelling unit or place of business prior to the issuance of a citation for violation of this article. Failure to make, deliver, mail or receive the first occurrence warning shall not affect any subsequent efforts or the penalty for any subsequent violation of this article. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this article may be enjoined as a nuisance by issuing a citation for an article violation returnable to the city municipal court as referenced in section 1-11, General penalty; continuing violations. Such action may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(Res. No. 14-17, 11-18-2013) 
Chapter 46 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or adopt any subdivision regulations saved from repeal, § 1-6(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 22; floods, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; utilities, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 62; mobile or manufactured home parks, § 62-491 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Purpose and intent of chapter. 
The intent of having requirements and standards for subdivisions and planned unit developments are to: 
(1)  Provide a tool to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Bestow flexibility and encourage innovation in the design of land development projects; 
(3)  Ensure the provision of public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes, using options for cluster developments where appropriate; 
(4)  Provide the means to develop land in a unified approach rather than a lot-by-lot approach; 
(5)  Preserve and protect natural resources; 
(6)  Provide safe, efficient and economical public services; and 
(7)  Promote affordable housing. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. I, § 102, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-2. - Interpretation of conflicting requirements. 
Whenever the requirements of this chapter conflict or are in any way inconsistent with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing higher standards, shall govern. No plat shall be approved or considered valid for any use or activity which is or would be otherwise illegal under the terms of any applicable local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. I, § 103, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-3. - Legal conformity. 
The regulations of this chapter have been reviewed and found to be written in a legal format and in conformance with law by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. I, § 104, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-4. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically described in this section, all words shall have their customary dictionary meanings. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure." The word "should" expresses what is probable or expected. The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designated to be used or occupied." The term "land use map" means the "city future land use map" as contained in the adopted county joint city-county comprehensive plan. Doubt as to the precise meaning of any word used in these regulations shall be clarified by the planning commission. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a public way dedicated to and accepted by a governing body, providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties within a block. 
As-built plans means site plans depicting improvements made in any subdivision or planned unit development that were previously not accepted by the planning commission or the city council or that varied substantially from the preliminary or final plats previously submitted for review and approval. 
Base flood means any flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
Block means a series of adjoining lots or a parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys or driveways. 
Buffer means a dense planting of shrubs and trees established and maintained to a height of not less than six feet on a strip of land not less than 20 feet in width; also includes areas along the course of any state waters that are required to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
Building official means the individual who is appointed by the city manager to assist in enforcing and administering the development codes of the city. 
City council means the city council, which is the elected governing body. 
City manager means the city manager appointed by the city council. 
Cluster development means a residential subdivision within which individual lot sizes have been reduced to permit the creation of common open space maintained by a homeowner's association for the residents of the subdivision. 
Future land use map means the future land use map for the city as contained in the comprehensive plan; also referred to as the "land use map." 
Impervious surface means any area of land where the surface has been compacted to 98 percent or more, or has been covered with a layer of material (asphalt, concrete, brick or a structure containing a solid roof, floor, pad or foundation) that is similarly resistant to permeation by water. 
Land development means the division of a parcel of lot of record into two or more lots; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any change in the use of any building or other structure or land, or extension of the use of land. 
Lot means a parcel of land which satisfies the applicable area and dimensional requirements for the general zoning district within which it is located, or upon which exists a legal nonconforming use or structure and which has frontage along or legal access to a public street, and is intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for land development. A recorded lot shall have a separate tax parcel reference number designated in the office of the county tax commissioner and/or the county tax assessor. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and, with respect to which, the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Manufactured home park means any lot where manufactured homes are customarily parked for a longer period of time than 30 days for living or sleeping purposes, or where spaces are set aside and offered for rent for use by manufactured homes for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure or facility used by occupants of manufactured homes on such premises. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. 
Modular home means a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes. 
Net density means an expression of a common measure indicating the ratio of the total developable land area of a proposed development project divided by the number of buildable lots or residential dwelling units. Total developable land area is the total land area of the proposed development site, less land dedicated for public improvements, areas of common use or areas of sensitive natural resources. 
Open space means a yard area which is not used for or occupied by a dwelling, driveway, off-street parking lot, loading space, drying yard or refuse storage space. 
Planned unit development (PUD) means a type of land use planning option which is intended to provide a more flexible approach to permitting for subdivisions and planned unit developments on a larger scale. Within the context of this chapter, four types of PUD options are permitted: 
(1)  Cluster residential subdivisions; 
(2)  Zero-side yard residential subdivisions; 
(3)  Mixed use developments; and 
(4)  Planned business centers. 
Planning commission means the city planning commission. 
Plat means a map, plan or layout of a proposed development site or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of properties and the proposed land development activities. 
Private estate means a landed estate or real property whereby the owner of a lot or parcel who maintains a residence, and has a vested interest in a principal residential structure (consisting only of one existing single-family dwelling), may execute the grant of an interest to an heir, subject to conditional or qualified fee in the landed estate, to build, place, or otherwise develop one new single-family dwelling on the same lot, subject to the requirements of the applicable zoning district and other pertinent requirements of this chapter. 
Street means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way which has been improved to provide a principal means of motor vehicle access to abutting properties. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. The term structure shall refer specifically to a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above the ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Subdivider means any person who undertakes the subdivision of land. 
Subdivision means any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development, and includes all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition: 
(1)  Any minor lot line adjustment of previously plat/planned lots where the total acreage of each lot affected is not increased and the resultant lots satisfy to the dimensional standards of these regulations; and 
(2)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously plat/planted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots satisfy the dimensional standards of these regulations. 
Subdivision, major, means a subdivision of land involving three or more new lots, and having three or more acres in developable land area, all which abut a dedicated and accepted road or street, or which involve new roads or streets or changes in existing rights-of-way. A major subdivision must adhere to the development requirements of this chapter. 
Subdivision, minor, means a subdivision of land involving three or fewer new lots, or less than three acres in developable area, all which abut a dedicated and accepted road or street, or which involve new roads or streets or changes in existing rights-of-way. 
Zoning district means a section of the city as established by this chapter within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. II, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-5. - Effective date. 
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall take effect and be in full force from and after the date of its adoption by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XV, § 1503, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-6. - Amendments. 
This chapter may be amended from time to time by the city. Before enacting any amendments, the city shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least 15 days prior to passage. Notice of the time and place of such a hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XV, § 1504, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 46-7—46-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS 

Sec. 46-41. - Platting jurisdiction and enforcement. 
(a)  Platting authority. The planning commission shall be the official plat/platting authority. 
(b)  Subdivision and planned unit development requirements. Any person proposing a major subdivision or planned unit development shall submit to the planning commission plat/plans and plans for a project of which shall conform to all the planned development requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  Final plat/plan approval required prior to clearing and grading streets. No clearing or grading of any proposed streets shall begin prior to approval of the final plat/plan or preliminary plan by the planning commission as certified thereon. This prohibition shall extend to any other improvement related to the development of the proposed subdivision or planned development. 
(d)  Development plans approval required prior to construction of improvements. No subdivision or planned unit development improvement shall commence prior to the approval of development plans by the planning commission. 
(e)  Recording of final plat/plan/plan required prior to sale of lot. No landowner shall sell or negotiate the sale of any lot in a proposed subdivision or planned development by reference to or exhibition of or by any other use of plat/plan, plan, or such subdivision, until such plat/plan or plan has been given final approval by the planning commission, as certified thereon, and recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court. 
(f)  Submission of "as-built" plans prior to final acceptance by city council. Final acceptance of improvements in any subdivision which vary substantially from approved development plans shall not be given by the planning commission prior to the submission and approval of "as-built" plans and any other technical information which may be required. 
(g)  Legal status of public street required. No land dedicated as a public street shall be accepted, opened or improved, nor shall any utilities or other facilities be installed therein unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a plat/plan approved by the planning commission. Streets which shall have been accepted or opened as, or otherwise shall have received the legal status of a public street prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which the regulations of this chapter are derived may be improved, or utilities or other facilities may be installed therein. The city council, however, may locate and construct or may accept any other street, if the resolution or other measure for such approval is first submitted to the planning commission for its review and comment. 
(h)  Access to public street required. No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot unless such lot has access to a street which shall have been accepted or opened, as, or otherwise shall have received the legal status of, a public street; provided, however, that private streets and other drive accessways may be approved under the terms of these rules and regulations in planned unit developments, condominium projects, apartment projects, townhouses, commercial developments, shopping centers or other developments. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. III, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-42. - Preapplication conference and applications of record. 
(a)  Preapplication review. A pre-application conference is intended to assist both the city and the applicant with regard to what type of application of record will be required for the proposed development activity. It also provides a means of exchanging information about the application process and how to develop land in conformance with the requirements and standards of this chapter. All pre-application conferences shall be governed by the following procedures: 
(1)  Voluntary and required preapplication conferences. There are two types of pre-application conferences, one type which is voluntary, and another which is required. They are distinguished as follows. No administrative or formal application or submissions are required to initiate a preapplication conference. 
a.  Voluntary. A voluntary pre-application conference may be arranged between the applicant and the building official or city manager for minor subdivisions, minor lot-line adjustments or re-combinations of previously plat/planted lots. 
b.  Required. A pre-application conference shall be required between the applicant and building official and the city manager for all major subdivisions and planned unit developments. 
(2)  Scope of consultation. Any discussions and recommendations that result from either type of pre-application conference shall be non-binding on the applicant and the city. Whenever a subdivision or planned unit development within the jurisdiction of the planning commission is proposed, the applicant may, at his discretion, consult early and informally with the building official or city manager for advice and assistance. The applicant may submit sketches and data, or a concept plan showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout of the development. If the tract of land is not to be initially subdivided in its entirety, the applicant should provide sketches for the entire tract and indicate the proposed unit division of phased development boundaries. 
(3)  Recommendations. Should the applicant request a pre-application conference, the building official or city manager shall return any submitted sketch plans as quickly as possible and inform the applicant of areas where the proposed plans do not comply with the requirements set forth in these regulations. However, in no instance shall the pre-application conference be made or accepted in lieu of the required plat/plans and specifications contained herein. 
(b)  Administrative applications. Administrative applications may be submitted for minor subdivisions, a recombination of previously plat/planted lots, or minor lot line adjustments. The building official or city manager shall approve, disapprove, or otherwise reconcile administrative applications. The decision to approve an administrative application by the building official or city manager shall be made after consideration of all the relevant facts before him. Such relevant facts shall be measured to determine compliance with this chapter. The review procedures for an administrative application are as follows: 
(1)  Approval. If the proposed minor subdivision, recombination of previously plat/planted lots, or minor lot line adjustment as set forth in the application is in compliance with this chapter, the minor subdivision, lot recombination, or lot line adjustment shall then be recorded at the county clerk of court office. Final approval will be withheld pending confirmation to the city from the clerk of courts that the plat/plan has been filed. 
(2)  Disapproval. If the proposal submitted is not approved or otherwise reconciled, the reason for disapproval shall be stated in writing on the application. 
(3)  Reconciliation. Any administrative application that has been formally disapproved, or deemed incomplete or deficient by the building official or city manager, may be resubmitted for proper reconciliation. An additional application fee shall not be necessary for a re-submission. 
(4)  Review deadline. The building official or city manager shall issue a final determination regarding an administrative application within 30 days of the date that the application is complete and formally accepted by the building official or city manager (or designated agent) Failure by the building official or city manager to issue a final determination within the 30-day deadline shall constitute automatic approval of the application only if the applicant receives all other required local, state and federal approvals. 
(c)  Formal applications. The filing of a formal application is established to allow expedient and thorough review of larger scale development projects which are more complex and require substantial review. Major subdivisions and planned unit developments are subject to the formal application process. Review of formal applications shall be subject to the preliminary and final plat/plan procedures outline in sections 46-44 and 46-45. 
(d)  Coordination of review with other required local, state and federal reviews. The applicant shall be responsible for submitting applications to and receiving approval for any proposed development from other local, state and federal agencies as required by this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, regulations, and laws. At a minimum, the applicant shall submit copies of applications to such local, state and federal agencies along with the application information provided to the city. The planning commission may grant conditional approval for any municipal application upon approval by any and all local, state and federal agencies with jurisdiction to approve any aspect of the proposed development. An applicant shall not be issued a construction permit by the building official or city manager until such time that the applicant submits a copy of all required approvals from the applicable local, state and federal agencies. 
(e)  Special impact studies. During review of any application, the building official or city manager, the planning commission or the city council may determine that additional specific technical information regarding the project and its potential environmental, fiscal or traffic impacts is needed. If such a determination is made, the planning commission or the city council may condition approval of an application upon preparation of a special impact study intended to analyze the potential impacts of the development on the specific areas of concern. Where preparation of a special impact study has been required, no application shall be approved until such study has been submitted with adequate time provided for review. Typically, the responsibility and costs for such a study shall be borne by the applicant, unless municipal officials determine otherwise. 
(f)  Development construction phasing. Whenever a subdivision or planned unit development is proposed, the planning commission may require construction phasing, if it has been determined that there would be an undue burden on existing public infrastructure and facilities. Where it has been determined during the review of a subdivision or planned unit development application that a proposed development would exhaust or exceed the available capacity of existing public facilities including, but not limited to, roads, municipal water and sewer, fire protection, schools and police protection, the planning commission may require the applicant to submit a phased development schedule that shall demonstrate consistency and concurrency with the planning and installation of adequate public infrastructure and facilities to serve the affected development. 
(g)  Application and review fees. Application fees for the pre-application conference, minor applications, formal applications (tiers I, II and III) and plan/plat/plan changes and modifications will be assessed at the time of filing of a preliminary plat/plan/plan according to the schedule on file in the clerk's office. Any tier II or tier III formal application that involves development phasing as described in this chapter shall be subject to application and review fees for each submission of a preliminary plat/plan. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. IV, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-43. - Preliminary plat/plan procedures. 
(a)  Preliminary plat/plan application procedures. Upon completion of any voluntary or required pre-application conference, and after any determination is made, or action is taken (including subsequent application for re-zoning and approval thereof), leading to satisfactory conformance with zoning requirements, the applicant may submit an application for a preliminary plat/plan for consideration by the planning commission. A complete application shall be submitted to the building official or city manager at least 30 days prior to a regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. No formal application involving a preliminary plat/plan shall be accepted by the building official or city manager as complete unless it contains all of the documents required in section 46-42. The secretary of the building official or city manager or other designated official shall distribute copies of the submitted development plat/plan/plan to the members of the planning commission, and any other local government departments as necessary. 
(b)  Preliminary plat/plan review procedures. Upon determination by the building official or city manager that a submitted preliminary plat/plan is complete, the application shall be scheduled for review at the following regular meeting of the planning commission. The planning commission shall have 60 days from the date of the regular meeting to review the application and preliminary plat/plan for conformance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. In instances where the proposed development will be served by community or on-site sewage systems and/or water, the approval of the county health department shall be received prior to approval of the preliminary plat/plan by the planning commission. If the planning commission fails to approve or deny the application within the required 30 day review period and the applicant receives all other required local, state, and federal approvals, the preliminary plat/plan shall be deemed to have been approved. 
(c)  Preliminary plat/plan review period extensions. The applicant and the planning commission may mutually agree to extend the time period for approval or denial of a preliminary plat/plan for a period not to exceed 30 days to allow additional time for the preparation of special impact studies and/or major changes to the application. 
(d)  Expiration of an approved preliminary plat/plan. A preliminary plat/plan approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission shall expire and be of no further effect 180 days from the date of the approval, unless the applicant submits a written request for time extension to the planning commission clearly stating the need for the extension. When such a request has been received, the planning commission may extend the approval for not more than an additional 180 days. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. V, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-44. - Preliminary plat/plan specifications. 
(a)  Specifications Each preliminary plat/plan shall be accompanied by five copies of the plat/plan prepared in compliance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Drafting specifications. The preliminary plat/plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale shall be 100 feet to one inch on sheets of 36 inches by 24 inches. If the complete plat/plan or plan cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown in sections on more than one sheet with an index map at a reduced scale. A reproduction of the original tracing must be submitted. 
(2)  Additional specifications. Additional specifications are as follows: 
a.  Ground elevations at two-foot contours. 
b.  Proposed name of subdivision. 
c.  North point and graphic scale and date. 
d.  Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the subdivision. 
e.  Primary control points with necessary descriptions and locations of such angles, bearings, and similar data necessary for proper location. 
f.  Names and owners of record of adjoining land. 
g.  Existing streets, utilities and easements on and adjacent to the tract. 
h.  Proposed layout including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, lands to be reserved or dedicated for public uses and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings. 
i.  Block numbers and lot numbers. 
j.  Provisions for water supply, sewerage and drainage. 
k.  Minimum building setbacks on all lots and other sites. 
l.  Such street cross sections and centerline profiles as may be required by the chapter. 
(b)  Certificate of preliminary approval. Upon approval of the preliminary plat/plan by the planning commission, the following certification shall be placed on the plat/plan: 
"I certify that all the requirements for preliminary approval of this plat/plan/plan have been fulfilled in accordance with the regulations of the City of Glennville, Georgia, and the requirements of the City of Glennville planning commission. 
Name ____________ , chair (secretary) of (for the chair of) the City of Glennville planning commission. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ " 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VI, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-45. - Final plat/plan procedures. 
(a)  Review. Upon determination by the building official or city manager that a submitted final plat/plan is complete, the application shall be scheduled for review by the planning commission at the following regular meeting. The planning commission shall have 30 days from the date of the regular meeting to review the application and/or final plat/plan for conformance with the applicable requirements of this chapter. In instances where the proposed development will be served by community or on-site sewage systems and/or water, the approval of the county health department shall be received prior to approval by the planning commission. If the planning commission fails to approve or deny the application within the required 30-day review period and the applicant receives all other required local, state and federal approvals, the application shall be deemed as approved, and advanced to the next stage of review or recording. 
(b)  Review period extensions. The applicant and the planning commission may mutually agree to extend the time period for the review, approval or denial of a formal application for a period not to exceed 30 days to allow additional time for the preparation of special impact studies and/or major changes to the application. 
(c)  Planning commission approval. The planning commission may give final approval of final plat/plans subject to any special conditions as authorized by this chapter, provided that the proposed development and the final development plat/plan conforms to the requirements of this chapter. If the application for a final development plat/plan is approved, the planning commission shall sign a certificate of approval on all final plat/plans. Recording of the final plat/plan/plan shall be done in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Planning commission disapproval. The planning commission may find the final plat/plan in conflict with the regulations of this chapter, requiring the disapproval of the final plat/plan. A statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be placed on five copies of the final plat/plan/plan with one copy being returned to the subdivider, one copy to the county health department, one copy to the fire chief, one copy to the building official or city manager, and one copy being attached to the records of the planning commission. The original plat/plan shall be returned to the applicant. In addition, the minutes of the planning commission shall reflect the reasons for denial and record the individual vote of the members. No construction permit shall be issued to an applicant who has been denied approval of a development application. Any applicant who has been denied approval by the planning commission may appeal the decision to the board of adjustment or resubmit a new application in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VII, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-46. - Final plat/plan specifications. 
Each final plat/plan application shall be accompanied by five copies of the plat/plan prepared in compliance with the preliminary plat/plan and the following specifications: 
(1)  Original tracing specifications. The final plat/plan or plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale shall be 100 feet to one inch on sheets of 36 inches by 24 inches. If the complete plat/plan or plan cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown in sections on more than one sheet with an index map at a reduced scale. A reproduction of the original tracing must be submitted. 
(2)  Additional specifications. The final plat/plan or plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Primary control points with necessary descriptions and locations of such angles, bearings and similar data necessary for proper location. 
b.  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and property lines of residential lots and other sites with sufficient data to determine readily and to reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line and setback line, whether curved or straight. This shall include, but not be limited to, the radius, length of arc, internal angles, and bearing of the tangents and tangent distances for the centerline of curbed streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary or curved streets. All dimensions shall be given to the nearest 1/100 of a foot, and all angles shall be given to the nearest minute. 
c.  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 
d.  Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements. 
e.  Block numbers and lot numbers. 
f.  Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or reserved. 
g.  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
h.  Location and description of monuments and markers. 
i.  Names and owners of record of adjoining land. 
j.  Reference to recorded subdivision plat/plans of adjoining plat/planted land by record and name. 
k.  Title, numerical scale, north arrow, and date. 
l.  Certification by the building official or city manager that the developer has complied with one of the following alternatives: 
1.  All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable regulations; or 
2.  A performance bond has been approved and accepted by the city council in sufficient amount to ensure the completion of all required improvements in accord with the requirements of this chapter. 
Notation of the necessary certifications shall be placed on the final plat/plan as specified below. 
m.  Engineer's or surveyor's certification: A signed certification by a registered state professional engineer certifying to the accuracy of the survey and the plat/plan shall be placed on the final plan or plat/plan as follows: 
"In my opinion this plan/plat/plan is a correct representative of the land plat/planted and has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law and has been calculated for closure by latitudes and departures and is found to be accurate within one foot in ____________ feet. 

 
n.  Owner's certification: A signed certification of ownership shall be placed on the final plat/plan as follows: 
"Owner's Certification:  State of Georgia, County of Tattnall. 
"The undersigned certifies that he is the owner of the land shown on his plat/plan/plan and acknowledges this plat/plan and allotment to be his free act and deed and dedicates to public use forever all areas shown or indicated on this plat/plan as streets, alleys, easements or parks. 

 
o.  Health department certification: A signed certification of the county health department shall be placed on the final plat/plan/plan in every instance except when the subdivision is developed with a public sanitary sewer system and/or public water. 
"I certify that the general lot layout shown on this plat/plan/plan has been approved by the Tattnall County Health Department for development with…. 

 
NOTE: The blanks in the above certification statement shall be completed by the director of the health department, or his representatives, to indicate whether approval is based upon the use of individual sewer systems, individual water supplies, a community sewer system, a community water supply, or a combination thereof. 
p.  Certification of final approval by planning commission: Certification of final approval by the planning commission shall be placed on the final plat/plan/plan only after every item of this regulation has been complied with and shall state the following: 
"I certify that all the requirements for final approval of this plat/plan/plan have been fulfilled in accordance with the regulations of the City of Glennville, Georgia, and the requirements of the City of Glennville Planning Commission. 
"Name ____________ , Chairman (Secretary) of (for the Chairman of) the City of Glennville Planning Commission. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ " 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. VIII, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 46-47—46-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-81. - General design requirements. 
(a)  Land suitability. The selection of an area for any subdivision or planned unit development should be located strategically on lands that are suitable for the types of development proposed. Factors relevant to selection of an area for subdivision or planned development shall be considerate of land use related criteria stated in section 62-119. Other factors shall include, but not be limited to, the suitability of land as it relates to flooding, proper drainage, steep slopes, bedrock, topography, utility easements or other features or problems which may create unfavorable development conditions. 
(b)  General site design guidelines. The proposed development must be designed so as to produce an environment of stable and desirable character not out of harmony with the surrounding neighborhood. The review by the planning commission shall consider the following design elements: 
(1)  Privacy. Personal and individual privacy shall be maintained and balanced with the provision of public and common areas. 
(2)  Variety. Interest and variety shall be sought by means of street design and changes in and mixtures of building types, heights, facades, setbacks, planting, or size of open space. The design shall be harmonious as a whole and not simply from street-to-street. 
(3)  Traffic and parking. Through or commercial traffic should not be encouraged within a subdivision or a planned unit development of less than 20 acres. Proposed local or internal streets should curve to discourage the fast movement of traffic. Shared parking facilities shall be encouraged where the same parking spaces can be utilized by two or more different land uses. Group parking areas should be screened so that vehicles are substantially hidden from the street. 
(4)  Flexibility. Modification of either development intensity or basic dimensional standards shall be permitted under the options provided for under planned unit development standards and those as determined by the planning commission. 
(c)  Naming requirements. 
(1)  Street naming. The purpose of naming streets is to provide an orderly process for identifying geographic areas and for orienting users of the street system. Naming requirements for streets shall be observed as follows: 
a.  Approval. Street names and address numbers shall be subject to the approval of the building official or city manager. 
b.  Duplication of names. Street names shall not duplicate nor be closely approximated phonetically to any name of an existing city street or road. 
c.  Continuity of names. Any street or road which is a continuation, an approximation or logical continuation of any existing dedicated street or road or shall bear the same name. 
d.  Small culs-de-sac. Small culs-de-sac which have less than five interior lots may be omitted for name purposes, when the house numbers are continuous with those of the street or road to which they have access. 
e.  Street name designations. Street name designations shall be used as follows: 
1.  Boulevard or parkway: shall be reserved for streets or roads designated on the highway classification map which are planned to have a median divider of sufficient size to allow for landscaping. 
2.  Avenue or road: shall be reserved for streets or roads of substantial continuity such as major or minor arterials designated on the highway classification map. 
3.  Street or drive: shall be reserved for streets of less continuity such as collector streets and roads as designated on the highway classification map. 
4.  Court, place, circle, way or terrace: shall be reserved for streets and/or roads with no continuity. 
(2)  Name of subdivision or planned unit development. Any proposed name for a subdivision or planned unit development shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision or planned unit development. The planning commission shall have final authority to designate the name of a subdivision or planned unit development which shall be determined upon acceptance of the concept plan. 
(d)  Access. 
(1)  Intent. All subdivisions and planned unit developments shall provide adequate public access for street, utility, and pedestrian systems which shall be designed and constructed to facilitate efficient movement and circulation, to ease congestion, and to promote safety. 
(2)  Design standards. Where a major subdivision or planned unit development borders on or contains an existing proposed primary arterial, the planning commission may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
a.  Subdivided lots bordering a primary arterial shall back onto the primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street. No access to these types of lots shall be provided from the primary arterial, and screening in the form of a buffer or screen shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
b.  Where there exists a marginal access or service road separated from the primary arterial, a planting or a grass strip shall be established and maintained and there shall be access thereto at appropriate points. 
c.  The development shall have at least two entrances from a public street that are at least 100 feet apart (as measured from accessway centerline to accessway centerline along the intersecting street line). The planning commission may require additional accessways as it deems necessary to accommodate safe entrance, egress, and emergency access to the development, and for the purpose of accommodating emergency, rescue, or other critical public safety vehicles. 
(e)  Comprehensive plan consistency. All subdivisions and planned unit developments, and those requirements and standards that apply are intended to serve as a device to further the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan. The review of a subdivision or planned unit development provides a comprehensive means of addressing a wide range of issues for a broad geographic area. The use of a theme or development concept will provide a basis for relating the proposed development request to standards provided for in all municipal land development regulations and the comprehensive plan. The policies of the comprehensive plan's land use element, including the future land use map, in conjunction with the preceding policies of other comprehensive plan elements, shall form the basis for reviewing proposed planned unit developments. 
(f)  Modification of zoning standards for planned unit developments. The basic design and dimensional standards provided for each zoning district by the city zoning chapter for any planned unit development may be modified on the recommendation of the building official or city manager to the planning commission (and as applicable the city council), so that the property under consideration may be developed in a reasonable manner and without detriment to the public welfare and interest. Any modification is subject to review of a preliminary and/or final plat/plan, or a revised development plan. Modifications may be authorized by the planning commission to facilitate and promote innovative design options. Such innovative design options include the following: 
(1)  Cluster residential development option. The purpose for cluster development is to provide flexibility and options in planned unit development design. The objectives of cluster development are to create an improved living environment which is varied, functional, cost effective, aesthetically pleasing, and capable of preserving the unique natural, physical, or cultural features of a site. Any planned unit development utilizing the cluster development option is subject to the provisions set forth in this section. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the building official or city manager, the planning commission shall determine whether a proposed cluster development complies with all the objectives, requirements and standards of this section. All cluster developments shall comply with the following general requirements: 
a.  Development intensity. The development intensity for a cluster development shall not exceed standards and requirements for the applicable zoning district is located, as applied to the developable land area of the proposed development site. However, an increase in development intensity on a portion or portions of the property may be allowed through a reduction in required lot sizes, as long as any resulting residual land is preserved as common open space as specified in the zoning chapter. 
b.  Density bonus. The planning commission may allow an increase in permissible development intensity of not more than ten percent if the proposed cluster development will result in substantial recreational improvements to the developable portions of the common open space. Substantial recreation improvements shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Jogging/walking trails with exercise stations and benches and landscaping where appropriate. 
2.  Ball fields, tennis courts, or basketball courts. 
3.  Landscaped picnic area with tables, shelters and grills/pits for cooking. 
4.  An outdoor swimming pool with protective fences. 
5.  A clubhouse or other common indoor activity center. 
A density bonus consistent with these provisions also may be granted if the open space will be designed to protect and preserve any rare or endangered plant or species habitat on the property. Finally, the planning commission, upon recommendation of the building official or city manager, may grant a ten percent density bonus if at least half of the bonus dwelling units will be permanently priced such that they can be afforded by a household earning 80 percent of the county's median household income. Where the density bonus is related to the provision of affordable housing units, appropriate restrictive covenants shall be placed on the affordable units to ensure that they will remain permanently affordable. Also, the planning commission may require that the designated affordable bonus housing units be distributed at random throughout the development to ensure that the affordable units are constructed and maintained in a manner commensurate with the market rate units. In determining the amount of density bonus to be extended for the aforementioned optional improvements, the planning commission may consider other factors including, but not limited to, those specified in section 46-46(2). 
c.  Minimum size. A cluster development shall consist of not less than 20 dwelling units, unless the development is considered by the planning commission to be a logical extension of an existing or approved cluster development and will be designed to be compatible with said neighboring development. 
d.  Types of dwellings. A cluster development may consist of a mix of all residential dwelling unit types permitted within the applicable zoning district. 
e.  Open space. All open space shall be integrated into the development design such that it enhances the privacy and convenience of individual homes within the development. At no point shall an open space be less than 25 feet in width. 
f.  Buffers. All buffers shall comply with standards specified in the city zoning chapter. However, the planning commission may require a buffer strip of at least 25 feet along any or all property boundaries to provide a natural separation between different housing types. Any required buffer shall be permanently vegetated and maintained as common open space. No designated buffer strip may be improved in order to acquire a density bonus. 
g.  Public utilities, infrastructure, easements. All public utilities, infrastructure, easements and access requirements shall be provided as specified under by this chapter. 
h.  Drainage. The planning commission may require the construction of stormwater detention or retention areas within cluster developments to prevent runoff and erosion and sedimentation impacts on neighboring developments. Where such drainage improvements are required, adequate maintenance provisions shall be included in the restrictive covenants, association bylaws or city development regulations. Any stormwater detention or retention areas shall be considered open spaces; however, they must be maintained in a natural or vegetated state, and they may not be used to satisfy the 50 percent developable land area requirement for open space within the development, as required in the city zoning chapter. 
i.  Maintenance of common areas. Every cluster development shall include provisions for maintenance of all areas within the development under common ownership. 
j.  Pedestrian access. Where a proposed cluster development contains multiple improved recreational facilities, adequate provision for safe pedestrian access to such facilities and open space areas shall be provided. The planning commission may require sidewalks for any cluster development if the potential traffic volumes and pedestrian activity warrant such improvements or if the development represents an extension or expansion of an adjoining residential development that contains sidewalks. Furthermore, any proposed or required sidewalks within a cluster development shall tie into existing public sidewalks that adjoin the proposed development. 
k.  Compliance with state laws. All units within a cluster development under common ownership shall satisfy all applicable regulations of the "Georgia Condominium Act" (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq.). 
l.  Dimensional requirements. Cluster developments shall be constructed in accordance with the preliminary plat/plan as approved by the planning commission. Within a cluster development, the planning commission may authorize the following changes to dimensional requirements: 
1.  Lot size reductions. The maximum reduction in lot sizes shall not exceed 35 percent in any zoning districts. 
2.  Lot width reductions. The maximum percentage reduction in required lot widths shall be the same as for lot sizes in the respective zoning districts. 
3.  Coverage and impervious surface ratios. The maximum lot coverage shall be 30 percent for each lot in all cluster developments. In addition, no more than 40 percent of all land within the cluster development may be covered by impervious surfaces, including roads, sidewalks, paved parking areas, and structures. 
4.  Front yard requirements. The minimum permitted front yard setback shall be 25 feet. No reduction in front yard setbacks shall be allowed for lots fronting on a collector or arterial highway. 
(2)  Zero lot line option. Upon review and approval by the planning commission, the side yard setback requirements for single-family (detached) dwelling lots may be reduced to allow a zero side yard setback on one side of a lot, provided that the following conditions are met: 
a.  Any reduction in one side yard requirement shall result in a corresponding increase in the side yard requirement for the opposite side yard. In this manner, the overall side yard requirement of the district shall be met. 
b.  Front yard, rear yard and corner side yard requirements of the general zoning district shall not be modified. 
c.  Side yard setback requirements shall not be modified for an individual lot unless it is part of a block in which each lot's side yard setback is to be modified. The arrangement of modified side yard requirements shall allow for an open side yard area between each dwelling unit. 
d.  The zero lot line provisions shall not apply to accessory buildings that are not attached to the primary residential structure. 
e.  The developer of a subdivision for which modifications to the side yard setback requirements are requested shall furnish to the planning commission a copy of proposed deed restrictions, conditions or covenants. Such covenants shall include as minimum provisions: 
1.  A maintenance easement of at least four feet in width, which will allow for the maintenance of exterior dwelling walls facing a zero setback line. 
2.  A requirement that dwelling walls facing a zero setback be windowless. 
(3)  Mixed use development option. The purpose for a mixed use development option is to encourage the development of large tracts of land as planned communities or neighborhoods; to preserve natural features; to encourage efficient development of land and public improvements; and to promulgate flexible and innovative design options. A mixed use development option allows a variety of land uses under the premise that, in the collective, each differing land use has an orderly relationship to one another. 
a.  Development intensity. The development intensity for a mixed use development shall not exceed standards and requirements for the applicable zoning district in which it is located, as applied to the developable land area of the proposed development site. However, an increase in development intensity on a portion or portions of the property may be allowed through a reduction in required lot sizes, as long as any resulting residual land is preserved as common open space as specified in the city zoning chapter. 
b.  Density bonus. The planning commission may allow an increase in permissible development intensity of not more than ten percent if the proposed mixed use development will result in substantial public improvements. Substantial public improvements shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Innovative parking lot design encouraging landscaping and pedestrian access. 
2.  Where residential uses are proposed, if at least 20 percent of the dwelling units will be permanently priced such that they can be afforded by a household earning 80 percent of the county's median household income. Where the density bonus is related to the provision of affordable housing units, appropriate restrictive covenants shall be placed on the affordable units to ensure that they will remain permanently affordable. Also, the planning commission may require that the designated affordable bonus housing units be distributed at random throughout the development to ensure that the affordable units are constructed and maintained in a manner commensurate with the market rate units. In determining the amount of density bonus to be extended for the aforementioned optional improvements, the planning commission may consider factors such as those specified in section 62-119. 
c.  Open space. Every mixed use development shall contain common open space equal in area to the total area reduction in individual lot sizes. At a minimum, all open spaces provided shall be in compliance with the city zoning chapter. All open space shall be integrated into the development design such that it enhances the compatibility of land uses within the development. At no point shall an open space be less than 25 feet in width. 
d.  Buffers. All buffers shall comply with standards specified in the city zoning chapter. However, the planning commission may require a buffer strip of at least 50 feet along any or all property boundaries to provide a natural separation between different land uses. Any required buffer shall be permanently vegetated and maintained as common open space. No designated buffer strip may be improved in order to acquire a density bonus. 
e.  Public utilities, infrastructure, easements. All public utilities, infrastructure, easements and access requirements shall be provided as specified by this chapter. 
f.  Drainage. The planning commission may require the construction of stormwater detention or retention areas within mixed use developments to prevent runoff, erosion, and sedimentation impacts on neighboring developments. Where such drainage improvements are required, adequate maintenance provisions shall be included in the restrictive covenants, association bylaws, or rules for the development as prescribed in city development regulations. Any stormwater detention or retention areas shall be considered open spaces; however, they must be maintained in a natural or vegetated state, and they may not be used to satisfy the 50 percent developable land area requirement for open space within the development, as required in the city zoning chapter. 
g.  Maintenance of common areas. Every mixed development shall include provisions for maintenance of all areas within the development under common ownership. 
h.  Pedestrian access. Where a proposed cluster development contains multiple improved recreational facilities, adequate provision for safe pedestrian access to such facilities and open space areas shall be provided. The planning commission may require sidewalks for any mixed use development if the potential traffic volumes and pedestrian activity warrant such improvements or if the development represents an extension or expansion of an adjoining residential development that contains sidewalks. Furthermore, any proposed or required sidewalks within a mixed use development shall tie into existing public sidewalks that adjoin the proposed development. 
i.  Dimensional requirements. Mixed use developments shall be constructed in accordance with the preliminary plat/plan as approved by the planning commission. Within a mixed use development, the planning commission may authorize the following changes to dimensional requirements: 
1.  Lot size reductions. The maximum reduction in lot sizes shall not exceed 25 percent in all applicable zoning districts. 
2.  Lot width reductions. The maximum percentage reduction in required lot widths shall be the same as for lot sizes in the respective zoning districts. 
(4)  Planned business center option. The purpose for a planned business center option is to provide for a range of professional, administrative, research and manufacturing uses; the operation of which is quiet and clean in order to preserve natural features; to encourage efficient development of land and public improvements; and to promulgate flexible and innovative design options. This option allows a variety of non-residential and non-commercial land uses under the premise that, in the collective, each differing land use has an orderly relationship to one another. 
a.  Development intensity. The development intensity for a planned business center shall not exceed standards and requirements for the applicable zoning district, in which it is located, as applied to the developable land area of the proposed development site. However, an increase in development intensity on a portion or portions of the property may be allowed through a reduction in required lot sizes, as long as any resulting residual land is preserved as common open space as specified in the city zoning chapter. 
b.  Density bonus. The planning commission may allow an increase in permissible development intensities (including floor area and impervious surface ratios) of not more than ten percent if the proposed planned business center will provide for substantial public improvements. Substantial public improvements shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Innovative parking lot design encouraging landscaping and pedestrian access. 
2.  Jogging/walking trails with exercise stations and benches and landscaping where appropriate. 
3.  Landscaped picnic area with tables, shelters and grills/pits for cooking. 
4.  A clubhouse or other common indoor activity center. 
c.  Open space. Every planned business center shall contain common open space equal in area to the total area reduction in individual lot sizes. At a minimum, all open spaces provided shall be in compliance with the city zoning chapter. All open space shall be integrated into the development design such that it enhances the compatibility of land uses within the development. At no point shall an open space be less than 25 feet in width. 
d.  Buffers. All buffers shall comply with standards specified in the city zoning chapter. However, the planning commission may require a buffer strip of at least 50 feet along any or all property boundaries to provide a natural separation between different land uses. Any required buffer shall be permanently vegetated and maintained as common open space. No designated buffer strip may be improved in order to acquire a density bonus. 
e.  Public utilities, infrastructure, easements. All public utilities, infrastructure, easements and access requirements shall be provided as specified under this chapter. 
f.  Drainage. The planning commission may require the construction of stormwater detention or retention areas within planned business center to prevent runoff, erosion, and sedimentation impacts on neighboring developments. Where such drainage improvements are required, adequate maintenance provisions shall be included in the restrictive covenants, association bylaws, or city development regulations. Any stormwater detention or retention areas shall be considered open spaces; however, they must be maintained in a natural or vegetated state, and they may not be used to satisfy the 50 percent developable land area requirement for open space within the development, as required in the city zoning chapter. 
g.  Maintenance of common areas. Every planned business center shall include provisions for maintenance of all areas within the development under common ownership. 
h.  Pedestrian access. Where a proposed cluster development contains multiple improved recreational facilities, adequate provision for safe pedestrian access to such facilities and open space areas shall be provided. The planning commission may require sidewalks for any mixed use development if the potential traffic volumes and pedestrian activity warrant such improvements or if the development represents an extension or expansion of an adjoining residential development that contains sidewalks. Furthermore, any proposed or required sidewalks within a mixed use development shall tie into existing public sidewalks that adjoin the proposed development. 
i.  Dimensional requirements. Planned business centers shall be constructed in accordance with the preliminary plat/plan as approved by the planning commission. Within a planned business center, the planning commission may authorize the following changes to dimensional requirements: 
1.  Lot size reductions. The maximum reduction in lot sizes shall not exceed ten percent in all applicable zoning districts. 
2.  Lot width reductions. The maximum percentage reduction in required lot widths shall be the same as for lot sizes in the respective zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. IX, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-82. - General requirements for streets and rights-of-way. 
All new streets constructed as a result of a subdivision or a planned unit development shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Topography and arrangement. Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades (eight percent or greater) and curves shall be avoided. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be developed under planned requirements, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions. All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing county road and street system. The use of curvilinear streets, culs-de-sac, or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use shall result in a more desirable layout. 
(2)  Existing streets. Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. 
(3)  Frontage on improved roads. No planned unit development shall be approved unless the area to be developed shall have frontage on and access from an existing dedicated public street or road. 
(4)  Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner to deny access from adjacent property to such street. 
(5)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 200 feet shall not be permitted, unless the intersected street has separated dual lanes without median breaks at either intersection. 
(6)  Grading and improvement plan. Roads shall be graded and improved and shall conform to local construction standards and specifications, and shall be approved as to design and specifications in accordance with appropriate plat/plan approval. 
(7)  Intersections. Unless otherwise noted, required distances between streets shall be measured from centerline-to-centerline. The following standards shall also apply: 
a.  Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed new intersection of two new streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet from the end of the curve to the street intersection. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point, unless specifically approved by the planning commission. 
b.  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Where streets intersect major streets, their alignments shall be continuous. Intersection of major streets shall be at least 800 feet apart. 
c.  Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets shall be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector or arterial street shall be at least 25 feet. 
d.  Intersections shall be designed at a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than two percent rate at a distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
e.  In a corner lot, there shall be no obstruction to vision between the height of three feet and ten feet above the average grade of each street within the triangular area formed by the intersection of two road rights-of-way and a line joining them at points 25 feet away from their intersection. 
(8)  Alleys and service drives. Alleys or service drives may be required on any lots used for multifamily, commercial, industrial, or mixed use developments. They shall not be provided in single-family residential areas except where the developer provides information to the planning commission of the need for a alley or service drive. 
(9)  Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the planned project in conformity with other requirements in this chapter. Where the planning commission finds it practicable, it may require the dedication of the other half of the street when the adjoining property is developed. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. X, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 46-83—46-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREET DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 46-101. - Street and road standards enumerated. 
Each new street or road shall be classified and designed for its entire length to meet the standards for the following street classes and land uses described as follows: 
(1)  Minimum right-of-way (in feet). 

 
(2)  Minimum width traveled route (in feet). 

 
WS (with shoulders - roll type curb) 
WC (with curbs - concrete vertical firm curbs) 
(3)  Maximum grade (percent). 

 
(4)  Minimum grade (percent). 

 
(5)  Minimum radius of curve (in feet). 

 
(6)  Minimum length of vertical curves. 
Local road: 100 feet. 
Collector road: 200 feet, but not less than 50 feet for each one percent in grade. 
Arterial road: 300 feet, but not less than 50 feet for each one percent in grade. 
(7)  Minimum length of tangents between reverse curves (in feet). 

 
(8)  Minimum sight distance (in feet). 

 
(9)  Minimum turnaround diameter (in feet). 

 
(10)  Required design speed (miles per hour). 

 
* Design speeds for these streets shall constitute minimum requirements. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XI, §§ 1101—1110, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-102. - Minimum length of cul-de-sac. 
The minimum length of a cul-de-sac shall be as follows: 
(1)  Permanent. A permanent cul-de-sac shall be six times the minimum lot width, serving no more than 12 families and not exceeding 800 feet in length. 
(2)  Temporary. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be 12 times the minimum lot width, serving no more than 24 families, and not exceeding 1,000 feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XI, § 1111, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 46-103—46-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR LOTS AND BLOCKS 

Sec. 46-121. - Design principles. 
Block design shall conform to sound design principles and the length, width and the shape shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Zoning district requirements as to lot size. 
(2)  Topographic conditions. 
(3)  Need for safe, convenient access and traffic circulation. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XII, § 1201, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-122. - Design standards for blocks. 
The following standards shall apply to block design: 
(1)  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots with appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, or waterways. 
(2)  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be appropriate to the type of development contemplated and conducive to the existing street system, but block lengths for residential areas shall not exceed 2,200 feet or 12 times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district, nor be less than 400 feet in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials and collectors shall be at least 1,000 feet in length. 
(3)  In long blocks, the planning commission may require the reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic. Pedestrian ways, or crosswalks may be required by the planning commission through the center of blocks more than 800 feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. Blocks designed for commercial, industrial, or mixed uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined suitable by the planning commission for prospective use. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XII, § 1202, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-123. - Design standards for lots. 
The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the proposed subdivision or planned unit development and shall conform to the development standards for the applicable zoning district, unless appropriate modifications have been approved. Other standards shall include the following: 
(1)  No lot shall be subdivided by a city or county boundary. 
(2)  Every lot shall abut a street. 
(3)  Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth to width ratio of three to one shall normally be considered a maximum. 
(4)  Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be specifically designed for such purposes, and shall conform to the development standards for the applicable zoning district, unless appropriate modifications have been approved. 
(5)  Where parcels of land are subdivided into unusually large lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further subdivision. 
(6)  Flag lots may be allowed on a limited basis where warranted by physical conditions of land form, existing lot pattern or unusual shape or size of parcels. Unless it can be demonstrated that the use of flag lots is a component of innovative site planning and design, the number of flag lots that may be permitted in any subdivision or planned unit development shall be limited in volume according to the following the scales of development, as follows: 
Subdivisions of two to 10.5 acres: one flag lot 
Subdivisions of 10.6 to 24.5 acres: two flag lots 
Subdivisions of 24.6 acres and above: three flag lots 
The narrow strip of land connecting the main portion of a flag lot shall not be less than 30 feet wide at any point so long as five-foot side lot utility easements are provided adjacent to the flag lot lines. The narrow strip of land shall also provide for practical vehicular and utility access. It shall not be used to help satisfy the minimum lot area requirement for any zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XII, § 1203, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-124. - Boundary markers required. 
(a)  The applicant shall place permanent boundary markers or monuments for reference in any planned unit development as required herein, and as approved by a registered land surveyor. 
(b)  Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street intersections, angle points of curves and lot corners. They shall be spaced to be within sight distance of each other, the sight lines being wholly contained within the street limits. 
(c)  The external boundaries of a subdivision or planned unit development shall be monumented in the field by monuments of stone or concrete, not less than 30 inches in length, not less than four inches square or five inches in diameter, and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded; or by iron rods or pipes at least 30 inches long and two inches in diameter. These monuments shall be placed not more than 1,400 feet apart in any straight line and at all corners, at the end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in any line, and at all angle points along the meander line, said points to be not less than 20 feet back from the bank of any river or stream, except that when such corners or points fall within a street, or proposed future street, the monuments shall be placed in the side line of the street. 
(d)  All internal boundaries and those corners and points not referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be monumented in the field by like monuments as described above. These monuments shall be placed at all block corners, at each end of all curves, at a point where a river changes its radius, and at all angle points at any line. 
(e)  The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at least 30 inches long and seven-eighths of an inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least 30 inches long. These monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream lot line, with a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the bank of the river or stream. 
(f)  All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time the planning commission recommends approval of the final plan. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XII, § 1204, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 46-125—46-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-161—46-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 46-181. - Generally. 
Prior to the approval of the final plat/plan, installation of street and utility improvements shall be made. The developer, at his own expense, shall be required to have installed street and utility improvements as required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1301, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-182. - Road surfacing and improvements. 
After all necessary sewer, water, and other underground utilities have been installed, the developer shall install curbs and gutters (where applicable) and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways to the widths described in this chapter. Said surfacing shall be of such character as is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be approved by the city road engineer or the state department of transportation. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1302, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-183. - Shoulder, curb and gutter. 
Shoulders, curb, and gutters shall be installed on all applicable streets in a subdivision or planned unit development, but requirements shall vary according to street hierarchy and character of development (residential, non-residential, mixed-use) as indicated in the street design standards of this chapter. Curbing may also be required for: 
(1)  For stormwater management. 
(2)  Stabilizing the pavement edge. 
(3)  Delineating parking areas. 
(4)  Providing ten feet on either side of drainage inlets. 
(5)  Intersections. 
(6)  Corners. 
(7)  Tight curve radii. 
Where curbing is not required, edge delineation and stabilization shall be furnished to ensure safety and to prevent pavement separation. Where curbing is required, edge delineation shall be waived and shoulder and/or drainage swales used when it can be shown that shoulders are required by state law; soil or topography make the use of shoulders and/or drainage swales favorable; where it is in the best interest of the community to preserve its rural character by using shoulders and/or drainage swales instead of curbs. Flexibility regarding curb type shall be permitted as long as the curb type accommodates the system of drainage proposed. Shoulders shall measure four feet in width on each side for all applicable streets and shall be located within a right-of-way. Shoulders shall consist of stabilized turf or other materials as determined by the city road engineer or the state department of transportation. The width of swales shall be determined by site-specific conditions. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1303, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-184. - Stormwater management. 
The development should contain adequate stormwater management facilities to accommodate on-site the runoff that would be generated by a ten-year storm event. The planning commission may request assistance from the county soil conservation district, or the city engineer in evaluating the applicant's proposed measures to comply with this requirement. Any costs associated with this evaluation assistance shall be paid by the applicant. All drainage improvements shall tie into any available or natural drainageways along the adjoining public streets. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1304, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-185. - Street lighting. 
Installation of street lights may be required in accordance with design and specifications standards recommended by the local electric public utility system. However, the compatibility with the following guidelines shall be considered in developing a street lighting plan for a planned unit development: 
(1)  Lighting for safety should be provided at intersections, along walkways, at entryways, between buildings, and in parking areas. 
(2)  Spacing of street lights shall be equal to four times the height of the standard. 
(3)  The maximum height of the standard shall not exceed the maximum building height permitted, or 25 feet, whichever is less. 
(4)  The height and shielding of lighting standards shall provide proper lighting without hazard to drivers or nuisance to residents, and the design of lighting standards shall be of a type appropriate to the development and the community. 
(5)  Spotlights, if used, shall be placed on standards pointing toward the building and positioned as not to blind the residents, rather than on the buildings and directed outward which creates dark shadows adjacent to buildings. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1305, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-186. - Location of electrical utilities. 
It is desirable for all proposed wire or cable utilities to be located underground throughout any proposed planned unit development. In those instances in which it is not feasible to provide underground utilities, the applicant must demonstrate infeasibility to the satisfaction of the planning commission. The planning commission shall have the authority to waive such requirements, at its discretion. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1306, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-187. - Easements. 
Where easements are provided along rear lot lines for utilities (both private and public), such easements shall be at least ten feet wide. Proper coordination shall be established between the developer and appropriate utility companies for the establishment of utility easements on properties adjoining the planned unit development. Where topographical or other conditions make it impractical to place utilities on the rear lot lines, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. These easements shall, through deed covenants, be maintained clear of dense shrubbery, trees or fences. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1307, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-188. - Installation of water utilities. 
All subdivisions or planned unit developments must be connected to the public water system if they are within 1,000 feet of an available and appropriate system connection. Water mains for both domestic use and fire protection within the development shall be properly connected with the public water system. If public water is not available, an alternate water supply must be approved by the county health officer. The lines shall be constructed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots shown on the subdivision plat/plan. The lines shall be installed in conformance with the technical standards as established by the city engineer. The city may incur the cost for any difference in the cost of the laying of oversized pipe and outfall systems which are needed in excess of the required water and sewer facilities needed to exclusively serve the new subdivision as determined by the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1308, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-189. - Installation of sewer utilities. 
A publicly connected sanitary sewer system shall be installed when a subdivision or planned unit development is within 1,000 feet of an available and appropriate system connection, or where the cost of installing such a system does not exceed 150 percent of the cost of installing septic tanks for all lots in the subdivision. Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sewerage system, they must contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal fields approved by the county health officer. All sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the state department of public health. The city may incur the cost for any difference in the cost of the laying of oversized pipe and outfall systems which are needed in excess of the required water and sewer facilities needed to exclusively serve the new subdivision as determined by the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1309, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-190. - Sidewalks required. 
The location of sidewalks shall be provided in each subdivision as follows: 
(1)  R-1A residential: none. 
(2)  R-1B residential: none. 
(3)  R-2 residential: only on one side of the street if subdivision or planned unit development has more than 20 dwelling units or has mixed uses. 
(4)  R-3 residential: only on one side of the street if subdivision or planned unit development has more than 20 dwelling units or has mixed uses. 
(5)  Other zoning districts: as required by the commission. 
Unless otherwise specified, all sidewalks shall be four inches thick with a minimum width of four feet. A 30-inch grass planting strip shall be provided between the back of the curb and the sidewalk. All sidewalks shall slope one-fourth of an inch to the foot toward the curb. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1310, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-191. - Street signs required. 
(a)  All new or existing roads, public or private, which are included in a subdivision shall be furnished and installed with street name signs. All necessary traffic signs (slow, stop, caution, school bus stop, etc.) will be furnished and installed at proper locations. Materials for signs shall be approved by the planning commission, and all expenses incurred will be borne by the developer at no cost to the city. 
(b)  All streets shall be designated by name on a street sign post approved by the planning commission with such post having a set of nameplates/planes of an approved material one above the other with a clearance of seven feet. The post shall be located to be visible for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. At cross-street intersections in all zoning districts other than an R-1A, R-1B, or agricultural district, two street sign posts shall be located diagonally across the intersection from each other. Only one street sign post shall be required at T-street intersections. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1311, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-192. - Water supply requirements for fire suppression. 
The city fire chief shall compute the minimum water supply needed for any degree of fire control for proposed developments, and will see that adequate fire flows are available to meet the needs indicated. In areas supported by public or community water systems, fire hydrants shall be distributed throughout any development with a distance of no less than 1,000 feet of distance between each hydrant. Fire protection shall be furnished for any developments connected to the public water supply system, and minimum fire flows shall be computed based on standards promulgated by the city fire chief. For those proposed developments which will not have immediate access to the public water supply system, such standards and computations should be based on the National Fire Protection Association Standards on Water Supply for Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting (ANSI/NFPA No. 1231; 07/1989). 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIII, § 1312, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 46-193—46-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES AND ASSURANCES 

Sec. 46-221. - Purpose of division. 
Improvement responsibilities and assurances shall be provided to ensure the proper installation and maintenance of required improvements. The nature and duration of any arrangement requiring the documentation of improvement responsibilities and assurances shall be structured to achieve this goal without adding unnecessary costs to the developer. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIV, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-222. - Application. 
Before recording final subdivision plat/plans, and as a condition of final plat/plan approval, the planning commission may approve and shall accept in accordance with the standards adopted by the chapter the following assurances: 
(1)  The furnishing of a performance assurance in an amount not to exceed 120 percent of the estimated or projected cost of installation for improvements. 
(2)  For a planned unit developments of more than 20 lots or ten acres, provisions for a maintenance assurance shall be made for a period not to exceed two years after the final acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 25 percent of the cost of the improvement. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities will automatically own the utilities to be installed, or the improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance assurance to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance assurance shall be required by the planning commission. 
(3)  The time allowed for the installation of the improvements for which the performance assurance has been provided may be extended by the building official or city manager, upon the recommendation of applicable department or agency heads, provided that the applicant has demonstrated a good faith effort to complete the improvements in accordance with the approved construction schedule. 
(4)  Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, the developer may notify the planning commission, on behalf of the building official or city manager, in writing that such substantial completion has taken place. The building official or city manager, or his designated agent, may inspect all improvements to assure compliance with applicable standards. The building official or city manager shall prepare and file a report on the status of the affected improvements. If approved, the building official or city manager may notify the development party in writing that the specified improvements satisfy all applicable requirements. If only partially approved, or disapproved, the building official or city manager shall notify the developer in writing regarding any deficiencies concerning specified improvements, and shall indicate any corrective action to be taken. Where partial approval is granted, the developer shall be released from all liability except for that portion of improvements not yet approved. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIV, § 1401, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-223. - Performance and maintenance mechanisms. 
Performance and maintenance assurances may be provided by a variety of means including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Security bond. The applicant may obtain a security bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the state. 
(2)  Letter of credit. The applicant may provide an irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution. 
(3)  Escrow account. The applicant shall deposit cash or other instruments readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the city or in a bank escrow account. 
(4)  Property. The applicant may provide as an assurance land or other property. 
(5)  Development improvement agreement. An applicant may provide as an assurance an improvement agreement between the applicant, lender and the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 99-05B, art. XIV, § 1402, 10-6-1998) 
Chapter 50 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(14). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business, which is the major and principal source of such business at a single location. Businesses occupying space at the same location as a multiple-line business under a separate name or another business entity shall not be considered a part of the multiple line business. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such person's compensation or whose employer issues to such persons for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099; and, is any individual who, for compensation, exerts substantial effort within the state for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
Location or office means a fixed place located within the city from which a person conducts business, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site located in the city for less than six months for the purpose of serving a single customer or project which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes in the city. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Person means sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, for-profit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes all nonprofit organizations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations means as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5, but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee means a fee, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or another name, which are required by the local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to the regulation of an occupation, profession or business. Such fee shall approximate the cost of regulatory activity by the city. The regulatory fee cannot include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-101, 10-6-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-2. - Administrative fee. 
A non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee on file in the clerk's office is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-102, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 50-3. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)  Businesses and persons engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in Appendix A must pay a non-refundable regulatory fee in accordance with the rate set forth in Appendix A to Ordinance No. 99-04B. The regulatory fee is an exercise of the police power of the city. The regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee unless the business regulated is subject to an occupational tax as determined in this chapter. 
(b)  If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after April 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be reduced 25 percent of the regulatory fee for each successive three month period thereafter, with a minimum proration of 25 percent of the annual fee for all certificates issued on or after October 1 in any year. 
(c)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this chapter shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown on request. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-103, 10-6-1998) 
Editor's note— Appendix A to Ordinance No. 99-04B is not printed herein but is on file in the clerk's office. 
Sec. 50-4. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state. The occupation tax shall be determined according to the number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time position basis or full-time equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation, any employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. In addition to the employee tax method, a flat fee of $15.00 shall be applied uniformly to persons, businesses and practitioners whose location for occupation tax purposes is within the city limits. The occupation tax and flat fee shall be computed in accordance with the schedule on file in the clerk's office. 
(1)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(2)  A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this section shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
a.  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
b.  A business or practitioner with no location or office in this state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in this state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of the applicability of this subsection. 
c.  A business or practitioner which has locations in this state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local governments. 
d.  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(3)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after April in any year, the occupation tax and flat fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be reduced 25 percent for each successive three-month period thereafter, with a minimum proration of 25 percent of the annual fee for all certificates issued on or after October 1 in any year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(4)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31 the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the clerk. 
(5)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this chapter only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(6)  Depository institutions located within the city limits shall pay a business license tax at a rate not to exceed 0.25 percent of gross receipts as defined and allocated according to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(7)  Newly established businesses, occupations or practitioners within the corporate limits may not use or cause to be transferred an existing occupational tax certificate. Such newly established businesses, occupations or practitioners shall be liable for payment of an occupational tax subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-104, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 50-5. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this chapter shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any designated city official upon request. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-105, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 50-6. - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations as defined in this chapter shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 50-4 or shall pay an occupation tax of $250.00 per practitioner. On the tax return for 1995 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before November 1 prior to the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-106, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 50-7. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.; 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Non-profit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; 
(10)  Any non-profit organization or facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this section shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-107, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 50-8. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-108, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 50-9. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-109, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 50-10. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)  On or before November 1 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this occupation tax shall file with the city clerk on a form approved by and available from the city a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)  Persons, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the clerk or make available within 30 days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fees. 
(c)  The business registration of each business operated in the city's jurisdiction shall identify the line of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city and that line of business being noted by the city on the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-110, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 50-11. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-111, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 50-12. - Date due; penalty. 
(a)  Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this chapter shall be due and payable annually on January 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)  Any person, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this chapter which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was required is subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax, and an additional 1.5 percent will be imposed for each additional month of delinquency thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-112, 10-6-1998) 
Sec. 50-13. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The clerk may issue executions against persons, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  The clerk shall issue executions against persons, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee become delinquent. The execution shall be levied by clerk upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code, Charter and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charge whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full, together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)  Persons, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a $25.00 fine with each day of non-compliance considered as a separate offense. 
(e)  Persons, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to either a fine as prescribed herein, and/or the suspension of the right to conduct business. 
(f)  Persons, businesses or practitioners subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fees imposed by this chapter shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(g)  Persons, businesses or practitioners subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fees imposed by this chapter who fail to comply with this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the city cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the city in the case of a delinquent occupational tax, as prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-04B, § 5-113, 10-6-1998) 
Secs. 50-14—50-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURER LICENSE FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-45, adopted July, 8 2014, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 50-41—50-46, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted Jan. 8, 1991, §§ 1—6. 

Sec. 50-41. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2015 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the City of Glennville, Georgia in the amount of $50.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 50-42, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the City of Glennville, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Res. No. 14-45, 7-8-2014) 
Sec. 50-42. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 2015 and for each year thereafter. 
(Res. No. 14-45, 7-8-2014) 
Sec. 50-43. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2015 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fee imposed by section 50-41. 
(Res. No. 14-45, 7-8-2014) 
Sec. 50-44. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2015 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A § 33-8-8-2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 50-41. 
(Res. No. 14-45, 7-8-2014) 
Sec. 50-45. - Due date for license fees. 
License fee imposed in sections 50-41 and 50-42 shall be due and payable on the first day of 2015 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Res. No. 14-45, 7-8-2014) 
Sec. 50-46. - Administrative provisions. 
The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of the ordinance from which this article derives to the Insurance Commissioner of the State of Georgia within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Res. No. 14-45, 7-8-2014) 
Sec. 50-47. - Effective date. 
This article shall become effective January 1, 2015. 
(Res. No. 14-45, 7-8-2014) 
Secs. 50-48—50-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUCTIONS, THRIFT STORES AND CONSIGNMENT STORES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 15-12A, adopted Mar. 11, 2015, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 50-81—50-86, pertained to auctions, and derived from Code 1982, § 5-210(1)—(6). 
State Law reference— Auctions generally, O.C.G.A. § 43-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 50-81. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Business means any business that accepts items for auction, sale or consignment basis. 
Minor means any person younger than 18. 
Owner means any business owner to include his/her employees that accepts items for auction. sale or consignment basis on behalf of the business. 
Property owner/seller means person offering the property for sale or consignment. 
Report means written records used by business detailing items purchased or consigned, i.e., consignment sheets, receipt, etc., that includes signature of property owner/consignor. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-82. - License required. 
Each person who desires to conduct an auction, thrift store or consignment within this city shall be required to obtain a license therefore from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-83. - Fee established. 
The business license fee for each auction licensed under this article shall be $150.00. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-84. - License application. 
(a)  Application for a license under this article shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  A statement setting forth when, where, and for how long the business sale will be conducted; 
(2)  A certified copy of the state auctioneer's license of the person, if applicable, who is to conduct the auction; and 
(3)  A full and true inventory of all the articles to be sold at the auction sale, together with an affidavit that all information contained in the application is true and that the inventory contains a true listing of all the articles to be sold at said auction, if applicable. 
(b)  No auction sale shall be held except as set forth in the application and affidavit, and no other articles shall be sold except those included in the sworn inventory unless a new affidavit shall be filed listing the additional goods to be sold. No other person shall be allowed to conduct the auction sale except such person listed in the affidavit unless a new affidavit is filed setting forth such other person who may be employed to conduct such auction and cry off such goods, if applicable. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-85. - Bond. 
Every owner for a license under this article shall file with the city clerk a surety bond running to the city with surety acceptable to and approved by the city clerk, conditioned that the said owner, if issued a license hereunder, will comply fully with all of the provisions of the ordinances of this city and the statutes regulating and concerning auctions, auctioneers. Thrift stores or consignment stores will render true and strict accounts of all his sales to any person employing him to make the same, will not practice any fraud or deceit upon bidders or purchasers of property from him at any auction sale or suffer or permit any person in his employ to practice any such fraud or deceit, and will pay all damages which may be sustained by any person by reason of any fraud, deceit, negligence or other wrongful act on the part of the licensee, his agent or employees in the conduct of any auction or in the exercise of the calling of auctioneer. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state which conforms to the above requirements may be permitted by the clerk in his discretion in lieu of a bond. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-86. - Cappers, boosters, or by-bidders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act or to employ another in any auction sale as a by-bidder or what is sometimes known as a "capper" or "booster," or to make or to accept any false or misleading bid, or to pretend to buy or sell any article sold or offered for sale at such business. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-87. - Maintenance of records required; contents; terms. 
(a)  Every owner shall maintain records which shall contain in legible English the following information: 
(1)  For purchases or consignments received from individuals for all items on sequenced numbered reports as specified under Secretary of States' Rules and Regulations for the State of Georgia for Georgia Auctioneers Commission, Conduct of Auctions, 55-5-.01 — Responsibilities of the Auctioneer as well as in this Code: 
a.  An executed contract, which shall include: 
i.  The name(s) and address(es), telephone number(s), and signature(s) of the seller(s) of the property offered; 
ii.  The name(s) and address(es), telephone number(s), and signature(s) of the auctioneer (owner) in charge of the sale; 
iii.  Date of execution; 
iv.  Proposed date of and place that the auction is to be held; 
v.  Terms of compensation; 
vi.  Date of proposed settlement. 
b.  A closing statement which shall include: 
i.  The name(s) and address(es) of the seller(s) of the property offered; 
ii.  The price at which the property sold; 
iii.  The date and place of said auction; 
iv.  The date the proceeds were delivered to said owner; 
v.  Signature(s) of the seller(s); and 
vi.  List of items sold. 
c.  Photocopy of driver's license or other form of identification of seller. 
(b)  Reports shall be submitted to the Glennville Police Department via hand-delivery, fax or email no less than weekly on or before 5:00 p.m. of Wednesday of each week. 
(c)  Items purchased or consigned must be identified individually by sequenced number of report or grouped together collectively with identifiable sequenced number attached. 
(d)  The records required by this Code section shall be maintained for a period of not less than three years. 
(e)  The records required by this Code section shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-88. - Identification required. 
(a)  Each owner shall required that any person selling or placing articles on consignment shall display evidence of acceptable identification such as a duly issued state driver's license or identification and the owner shall photocopy the driver's license or other such evidence of identification on the required form for the transaction. 
(b)  The owner will have the affirmative duty to compare all pictures, physical descriptions and signatures on the identification presented and shall not transact any business with a person who in the owner's opinion appears to be presenting false or altered identification. If the identification presented is not a State of Georgia issued identification, the owner will have the affirmative duty of providing the listed address from the identification as well as current Georgia address on the transaction paperwork. The owner is required to check the customer's identification for each transaction. If the records show identification other than that presented. this must be corrected during the current transaction. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-89. - Holding period of items. 
Every owner will cause all item s purchased or consigned to be held from immediate sale or auction until items are either released by appointed law enforcement officer of the City of Glennville or waiting period not to exceed ten calendar days has expired. The items will remain onsite until either released by police officer or ten calendar days has expired. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-90. - Police holds on materials purchased or consigned. 
Whenever a law enforcement officer shall have probable cause to suspect any property listed in the report is stolen property or constitutes evidence of a crime or that any individual has committed a crime or that possession of the property is criminal, the owner shall be notified in writing not to sell, destroy, alter or remove the property from the physical boundaries of the business facility. These hold notices will be provided by law enforcement in writing and will specifically identify the items corresponding to the sequenced report number to be held. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-91. - Exclusions. 
Items that shall be excluded from hold shall include the following: 
(1)  Items purchased from storage units and/or estate sales. However, documentation of purchase or consignment shall be provided. 
(2)  Clothing. 
(3)  Household goods to include pots, pans, flatware, sheets, pillows, trinkets, decorations, etc. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-92. - Minors. 
No owner shall purchase or accept consignment for any property from a minor. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-93. - Stolen goods. 
It shall be the duty of every owner to report to the police any article placed with him/her that he/she shall have reason to believe the item(s) was stolen or lost and found by that person attempting to place the item for auction. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-94. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article, or other laws, ordinances, or regulation as may be passed by the city in regulating the business, shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the city business license issued hereunder. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-95. - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this article shall be held to apply to auction sales conducted by trustees or referees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators, receivers or other public officers acting under judicial process, nor to the sale of real property at business. 
(Res. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Secs. 50-96—50-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BILLIARDS OR POOL ROOMS 

Sec. 50-121. - License requirement. 
(a)  Each person keeping, operating or maintaining a billiard table, pool table or any other table of like character within the corporate limits of the city for use by the public shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. Said license shall be classified as a "premises where alcoholic beverages will be sold, consumed used or where patrons have consumed alcoholic beverages" or a "premises where sale of alcoholic beverages, the use thereof, consumption or possession is prohibited." 
(b)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall visit the Tattnall County Sheriff Department for fingerprinting. The sheriff department will process the fingerprints through Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) for determination of any past criminal activity. The sheriff department will provide the city results of investigation. 
(c)  The chief of police will review the Georgia Crime Information Center's background report of the applicant and provide recommendations to the mayor and council. 
(d)  After its final investigation, the mayor and city council shall grant or deny the license applied for. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1992, § 1; Res. No. 10-41, 7-13-2010; Res. No. 11-01, 8-3-2010) 
Sec. 50-122. - Fees established. 
The annual business license fee for each operator of a billiard or pool room in the city shall be an amount on file in the clerk's office for the first table, and an amount on file in the clerk's office for each additional table. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1992, § 2) 
Sec. 50-123. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Premises where alcoholic beverages are sold, consumed, used or where patrons have consumed alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or manager of any billiard or pool room in the city to permit such establishment to be open for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight through 6:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and from 12:00 midnight Saturday through 6:00 a.m. Monday. 
(b)  Premises where sale of alcoholic beverages, the use thereof, consumption or possession is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or manager of any billiard or pool room in the city to permit such establishment to be open for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., Monday through Thursday, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m., Friday through Saturday, and between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday through 8:00 a.m. Monday. Should the owner of any establishment allow patrons to consume, use or possess alcoholic beverages on said premises he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine up to $500.00 or six months in jail. This subsection shall likewise apply to controlled substances and shall also include patrons who have consumed alcohol or controlled substances away from said premises but while upon said premises have alcohol or controlled substances within their system. It being the intent of this licensing classification to provide recreation facilities for the youth of the city and it is declared by this article to be detrimental to their health and welfare to be in business establishments where patrons are either consuming, using or in possession of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances or have the same within their system. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1992, § 3) 
Sec. 50-124. - Minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge or control of any pool room or billiard room open to the public for which alcoholic beverages are sold, consumed, used or where patrons have consumed alcoholic beverages to permit into such room any individual under the age of 21 years, whether for the purpose of playing billiards or pool or not. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1992, § 4) 
Sec. 50-125. - Clear view of premises required. 
The owner, operator or manager of any billiard or pool room in the city shall not permit to be used on such premises any screens, shades, partitions or other devices of like character which shall have the effect of obstructing the view through the windows or doors of the place where the billiard or pool tables are kept. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1992, § 5) 
Sec. 50-126. - Doors. 
The doors of a billiard or pool room licensed under this article shall be kept unlocked whenever the tables are in use, or when any person other than the proprietor or his agent is present in such place. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1992, § 6) 
Sec. 50-127. - Gambling. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or manager of any billiard or pool room open for public use to allow gambling of any kind to occur upon such premises. 
(Ord. of 3-3-1992, § 7) 
Secs. 50-128—50-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS 

Sec. 50-161. - License required. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct or operate a circus, carnival or public exhibition, as such terms are defined in section 50-162, without having first obtained a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-211(1)) 
Sec. 50-162. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carnival means amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, food dispensing facilities and sideshows. 
Public exhibition means circuses, menageries, sideshows and other similar itinerant amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
(Code 1982, § 5-211(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-163. - Fees established. 
The daily application fee imposed on each circus, carnival, or public exhibition operating within the city limits shall be as follows: 
For circuses\$50.00 
For carnivals\50.00 
For sideshows and concessions\15.00 
For rides\15.00 
For other public exhibitions\15.00 
(Code 1982, § 5-211(3)) 
Sec. 50-164. - Conditions of issuance. 
No license under this article shall be issued until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The operator and sponsor of the circus, carnival, or public exhibition have each assumed full responsibility for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean and free of trash, paper and other debris, and have placed trash containers in adequate number and in convenient locations for the use of the public. 
(2)  All rides have been inspected for mechanical, structural, electrical, and other hazards by the appropriate officers and employees of the city, and adequate safeguards have been placed to protect both operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electrical switches and other possible or potential hazards. 
(3)  The applicant has placed on file with the city clerk a certificate or certificates of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or exhibition. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 for each person, and $300,000.00 for each accident. 
(Code 1982, § 5-211(4)) 
Sec. 50-165. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the fire chief to see that proper inspections and patrols are made of the premises used for the activities licensed herein. 
(Code 1982, § 5-211(5)) 
Secs. 50-166—50-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 

Sec. 50-201. - Plumbers. 
No master, contracting, or journeyman plumber, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-14-2 shall be permitted to engage in any plumbing business in this city unless such person shall hold a valid certificate of qualification issued to him by the division of master plumbers and journeyman plumbers. 
(Code 1982, § 5-203(1)) 
Sec. 50-202. - Electrical contractors. 
No electrical contractor, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-14-2 shall be permitted to engage in any electrical contracting business in this city unless such person shall hold a valid license issued to him by the division of electrical contractors. 
(Code 1982, § 5-203(2)) 
Sec. 50-203. - Conditioned air contractors. 
No conditioned air contractor, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-14-2, shall be permitted to engage in any warm air contracting business in this city unless such person shall hold a valid certificate of qualification issued to him by the division of conditioned air contractors or by the county in which this city is located. 
(Code 1982, § 5-203(3)) 
Sec. 50-204. - General contractors. 
All general contractors who contract with this city for any public work exceeding $1,000.00 in amount shall be required to obtain a performance and payment bond in the amount and manner specified by law. 
(Code 1982, § 5-203(4)) 
Secs. 50-205—50-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES AND FIRE SALES 

Sec. 50-241. - License required. 
Any person selling or offering to sell any goods within this city at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be a going-out-of-business sale, or removal of business sale, or a fire and other altered stock sale, as such terms are defined in this section, shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-206(1)) 
Sec. 50-242. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
Going-out-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued including, but not limited to, the following sales: adjuster's; adjustment; alteration; assignee's; bankrupt; benefit of administrator's; benefit or creditors'; benefit or trustees; building coming down; closing; creditor's; committee; creditor's end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced out of business; insolvents'; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver's; trustee's quitting business. 
Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article. 
Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the city, or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5-206(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-243. - Persons exempted. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auctions. 
(4)  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this article have not been complied with. 
(Code 1982, § 5-206(3)) 
Sec. 50-244. - License application. 
Application for a license under this article shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale, if other than the applicant; 
(2)  The true name and address of the person from whom such owner purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition; 
(3)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held; 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy; 
(5)  The dates on which and the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted; 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reasons for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted; 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising such sale, together with the proposed content of any advertisement; and 
(8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale, as disclosed by the applicant's records. Such inventory shall be attached to and become a part of the required application. All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges, and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
(Code 1982, § 5-206(4)) 
Sec. 50-245. - License fee established. 
The business license fee for each person conducting a sale regulated by the provisions of this section shall be $50.00, or set by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 5-206(5)) 
Sec. 50-246. - Restriction on license issuance. 
No license shall be issued to any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this article, at the location stated in the application within one year from the date of such application. 
(Code 1982, § 5-206(6)) 
Sec. 50-247. - Conditions of license issuance. 
A license shall be issued under this article on the following terms: 
(1)  Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(2)  Saleable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(3)  Surrender of general license. Upon being issued a license under this article for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the city clerk all other business licenses he may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this article. 
(4)  Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license under this article operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application. 
(5)  Nontransferability. Any license provided for in this article shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Code 1982, § 5-206(7)) 
Sec. 50-248. - Duties of licensee. 
A licensee under this article shall: 
(1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions, whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license. 
(2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or publicity incident thereto. 
(4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and present such duplicate copy to inspecting officials upon request. 
(5)  Segregate non-inventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale, apprising the public of the status of all such goods. 
(Code 1982, § 5-206(8)) 
Secs. 50-249—50-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - JUNK DEALERS AND JUNKYARDS 

Sec. 50-281. - License required. 
Each junk dealer, as such term is defined in section 50-282, who does business within this municipality shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-209(1)) 
Sec. 50-282. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business premises or premises means the area of a junkyard as described in a junk dealer's license or application for license, as provided for in this article. 
Junk means old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but "junk" shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as byproducts, waste or scraps from the operation of his own business, or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing processes. 
Junk dealer means a person who operates a junkyard, as defined in this section, within the city. 
Junkyard means a yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk as defined in this section, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be used for charity. 
(Code 1982, § 5-209(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-283. - License application. 
Application for a license under this article shall be made as provided in this chapter except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  Trade names used during the previous five years by the applicant and each person signing the application, along with the locations of prior establishments; 
(2)  Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the application during the previous five years; 
(3)  The name, residence address, and telephone number of each person employed or intended to be employed in the business as of the time the application is filed; 
(4)  A sketch of the actual premises to be used in connection with the business, giving distances in feet and showing adjoining roads, property lines, buildings and uses; and 
(5)  A description of the materials with which any buildings to be used in connection with the licensed business are or are to be made; a sketch giving distances, showing the location of such buildings on the business premises; and a diagram or plan giving distances and heights, showing floors, exits, entrances, windows, ventilators and walls. 
(Code 1982, § 5-209(4)) 
Sec. 50-284. - Review of license application. 
No action on any application for a license to operate a junkyard shall be taken by the city council until the planning commission has reviewed such application and forwarded its recommendation thereon to the clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-209(5)) 
Sec. 50-285. - License fee established. 
The annual business license fee for each junk dealer doing business in this municipality shall be on file in the clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 5-209(5)) 
Sec. 50-286. - General operating requirements. 
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(2)  No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business. 
(3)  No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(4)  No weeds shall be permitted to attain a height of more than four inches. 
(5)  No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk as defined herein and is in use in the licensed business. 
(6)  No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway, curb or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(7)  Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height and shall be arranged to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes. 
(8)  No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business shall be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 
(9)  Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises. 
(10)  No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any incinerator not meeting the requirements of the building code; and no junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in the open except in accordance with the provisions of section 22-32. 
(11)  No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the licensed business on any Sunday, Christmas, Thanksgiving, or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(12)  The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoors) shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid, vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of eight feet measured from ground level. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind excepting one sign of the licensee not exceeding four by eight feet in size. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business. 
(13)  The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by any police officer at any reasonable time. 
(14)  No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance; nor shall any junkyard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the community or of any residents close by. 
(Code 1982, § 5-209(6)) 
Sec. 50-287. - Records. 
Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in a permanent type register kept on the business premises, giving the name and residence address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a description of the junk acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data shall be held available for inspection by any police officer. 
(Code 1982, § 5-209(7)) 
Sec. 50-288. - Minors. 
No junk dealer shall have any business dealings as a junk dealer with a minor, nor shall a junk dealer's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a junk dealer employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1982, § 5-209(8)) 
Sec. 50-289. - Stolen goods. 
Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things of value which may have been lost or stolen shall upon demand produce such article or thing to any member of the police department for examination. 
(Code 1982, § 5-209(9)) 
Sec. 50-290. - Vehicles. 
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 5-209(10)) 
Secs. 50-291—50-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MASSAGE 

Sec. 50-321. - License required. 
Each person engaging in or carrying on the business of massage within the corporate limits of this city, as such term is defined in section 50-322, shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(1)) 
Sec. 50-322. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person over 21 years of age, other than a masseur, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons. 
License means the authorization granted by the mayor and council to allow a person to engage in the business of massage in this city. 
Massage means any method of treating the superficial parts of a patron for medical, hygienic, exercise or relaxation purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating with the hands or any instrument, or by the application of air, liquid or vapor baths of any kind whatever. 
Masseur means any person who engages in the practice of massage as defined in this section. The use of the masculine gender shall include in all cases the feminine gender as well. 
Masseur's permit means the permission granted by the mayor and council to a person to engage in the practice of massage as defined in this section. 
Patron means any person over 18 years of age who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he will pay money or give any other consideration therefor. 
Recognized school means any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 70 hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school following the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-323. - License application. 
Applications for a license to engage in the business of massage shall be made as provided in article I of this chapter except that the application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  The name, style and designation under which the business or practice is to be conducted; 
(2)  The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted; 
(3)  A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all masseurs and employees in the business and the name and residence addresses of the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business; 
(4)  The following personal information concerning the applicant and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business: 
a.  Name, complete residence address, and residence telephone numbers; 
b.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
c.  Written proof of age; 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex; 
e.  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size; 
f.  The massage or similar business history and experience including, but not limited to, whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation; 
g.  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted, and the offense for which convicted, and the circumstances thereof; 
h.  A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the police chief or his authorized representatives; 
i.  Information on educational background, including a diploma, certificate, or other written proof of graduation from a recognized school by the applicant or by the person who shall be directly responsible for the operation and management of the massage business, if such person graduated from such a school; 
(5)  Such other information, identification, and physical examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the chief of police to discover the truth of the matters herein required to be set forth in the application; 
(6)  Authorization for the city, its agents, and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license; 
(7)  The names and addresses of three adult residents of the county who will serve as character references, which such references must be persons other than relatives and business associates; and 
(8)  Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(3)) 
Sec. 50-324. - License fee. 
The annual business license fee for persons engaging in the business of massage in this city shall be $250.00. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(4)) 
Sec. 50-325. - Public hearing. 
Upon the filing of an application for a massage business license, the city clerk shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant individually and to the general public by publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(5)) 
Sec. 50-326. - Inspection of premises. 
(a)  All premises proposed to be used by licensees hereunder shall be inspected by the chief of police or his authorized representatives prior to the issuance of a license for the purposes of ensuring that such premises comply with all the building and sanitation requirements set forth in the regulations and laws of the city and have adequate ventilation, heating and illumination. 
(b)  The police chief shall provide for the periodic inspection of all massage businesses to assure that such establishments continue to operate in full conformity with all regulations and laws of this city. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(6)) 
Sec. 50-327. - Limitations on issuance. 
No license to engage in the business of massage shall be issued if the chief of police or the city clerk finds that: 
(1)  The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city, or, in the case of a check or bank draft, has not been honored with payment upon presentation. 
(2)  The applicant or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business has been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit, unless the conviction therefor occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application. 
(3)  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the license application or in any document required by the city in conjunction therewith. 
(4)  The applicant has had a massage business license denied, revoked or suspended for any reason by the city or any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application. 
(5)  The applicant or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business is not over the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(7)) 
Sec. 50-328. - Masseur's permit. 
No person shall practice massage as a masseur, employee or otherwise, unless such person shall have obtained and shall have then in force a valid masseur's permit issued by the city as provided in this section: 
(1)  Application. An application for a masseur's permit shall be made to the city clerk in writing on a form furnished by the city clerk and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name, complete residence address, and residence telephone numbers; 
b.  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant; 
c.  Written proof of age; 
d.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex; 
e.  Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the date of application and at least two inches by two inches in size; 
f.  The massage or similar business history and experience including, but not limited to, whether or not such person in previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reasons therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation; 
g.  All criminal convictions, other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted, and the offense for which convicted and the circumstances thereof; 
h.  A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the police chief or his authorized representatives; 
i.  Information on educational background, including the diploma, certificate or other written proof of graduation from a recognized school where the theory, method, profession or work of massage is taught, if the applicant graduated from such a school; 
j.  A statement in writing from a licensed physician in the state that he has examined the applicant and believes the applicant to be free of all communicable diseases; 
k.  Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person deemed necessary by the chief of police to discover the truth of the matters herein required to be set forth in the application; 
l.  Authorization for the city, its agents, and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; and 
m.  A written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city. 
(2)  Fee. Each application for a masseur's permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $75.00. 
(3)  Police investigation of applicant. The chief of police shall require an investigation of each applicant for a masseur's permit. Such investigation shall be made to determine the moral character and fitness of the applicant. The police chief may, in his discretion, require a personal interview of the applicant, and such further information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall bear on the investigation. A report of such investigation and a copy of the police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application and forwarded to the mayor and council. 
(4)  Consideration of application. The mayor and city council shall upon consideration of the application and the report required to be attached thereto approve or reject the application. 
(5)  Issuance. Upon approval of an application for a masseur's permit, the city clerk shall issue a permit to the applicant, which permit shall be signed by the city clerk and contain the name, address, age and signature of the applicant. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(8)) 
Sec. 50-329. - General operating requirements. 
(a)  Display of license and permits. Each person licensed under this article shall display his license, and the permit of each and every masseur employed in the establishment, in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the massage business. 
(b)  Recordkeeping. Every person who operates a massage business or practices or provides a massage shall at all times keep an appointment book in which the name of each and every patron shall be entered, together with the time, date and place of service, and the service provided. Such appointment book shall be available at all times for inspection by the police chief or his authorized representatives. 
(c)  Supervision. A licensee under this article shall have the premises supervised at all times when open for business. Any business rendering massage services shall have one person who qualifies as a masseur on the premises at all times while the establishment is open. The licensee shall personally supervise the business, and shall not violate, or permit others to violate, any applicable provision of this article. The violation of any such provision by any agent or employee of the licensee shall constitute a violation by the licensee. 
(d)  Doors capable of being locked. No person who operates a massage business or practices or provides a massage shall permit any massage service or practice to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or other area within a massage establishment that is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
(e)  Minors. No person shall permit any person under the age of 21 years to come onto or remain on the premises of any massage business establishment, as masseur, employee or patron. 
(f)  Alcoholic beverages. No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide, keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided, or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage business. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(9)) 
Sec. 50-330. - Revocation or suspension of license and permit. 
Any massage business license or masseur's permit issued under this article shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the chief of police for violation of any provision of this article, or for any grounds that would warrant the denial of issuance of such permit in the first place. The chief, upon such revocation or suspension, shall state his reasons in writing, specifying the particular grounds for such revocation or suspension. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(10)) 
Sec. 50-331. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state, or persons working under the direction of any such persons or in any such establishment, nor shall this article apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business. 
(Code 1982, § 5-214(11)) 
Secs. 50-332—50-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PARADES 

Sec. 50-361. - Registration and permit. 
Any person who wishes to organize, form, or conduct a parade shall be required to register such parade with the city clerk at least 45 days in advance of the event to obtain approval and permit for such. 
(Code 1982, § 5-212(1); Res. No. 15-10, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 50-362. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any march, ceremony, demonstration, exhibition or procession of any kind upon any public street of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5-212(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-363. - Permit application. 
Application for a permit to conduct a parade shall be made at city hall, shall be signed by the person responsible for the conduct of the parade, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The time proposed for the parade; 
(2)  The route of the proposed parade; 
(3)  The number of vehicles (if any) and number of persons whose participation is anticipated in the proposed parade; 
(4)  The name and address of the person or organization sponsoring or promoting the proposed parade; and 
(5)  The name and address of the person making the application for a parade permit. 
(Code 1982, § 5-212(3); Res. No. 15-10, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 50-364. - Review of permit application. 
Applications shall be forwarded to the mayor and council, who shall review the information, set forth in the application and as certain the following: The extent of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to be anticipated at the time and place of and on the route of the proposed parade; the availability of police forces to escort the proposed parade and to direct traffic in conjunction with the proposed parade; and whether or not, in the light of all the circumstances, the proposed parade will unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public. 
(Code 1982, § 5-212(4); Res. No. 15-10, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 50-365. - Disposition. 
In the event the mayor and council determines in view of all the circumstances that the proposed parade will unreasonably burden and interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, they shall deny the request for a parade permit; and if they determine on the contrary, that the proposed parade will not unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, they shall grant the parade permit. In either case, the mayor and council shall indicate their disposition on the application and applicant shall be notified of the action taken. 
(Code 1982, § 5-212(5); Res. No. 15-10, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 50-366. - Exemption. 
The provisions of this article shall be inapplicable to any parade which is conducted under the supervision of a practicing mortician in conjunction with any funeral. 
(Code 1982, § 5-212(6)) 
Sec. 50-367. - Event insurance/waiver. 
All applications will be required to include and be signed by authorized representative the following "Hold Harmless Agreement": 
"To the fullest extent permitted by law, ____________ shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City of Glennville (Owner) and their respective officials, officers, supervisors, and employees from and against all claims, damages, demands, losses, expenses, fines, causes of actions, suits, or other liabilities (including all costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, consequential damages, and punitive damages), arising out of or resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or arise from, the issuance of permits or permitted uses of city facilities." 
(Res. No. 15-10, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 50-368. - Incurred cost to the city. 
Any parade planned by an organization or individual that requires use, supervision, security, etc., of city personnel to include Glennville Police Department and Street Department will be subject to reimbursement to the city for any incurred cost. 
(Res. No. 15-10, 4-7-2015) 
Secs. 50-369—50-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - PAWNBROKERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 

Sec. 50-401. - License required. 
Each pawnbroker doing business within this city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-207(1)) 
Sec. 50-402. - License fee established. 
The annual business license fee for each pawnbroker doing business in this city shall be on file in the clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 5-207(2)) 
Sec. 50-403. - Review of license application. 
No action on any application for a pawnbroker's license shall be taken by the city council until the chief of police has reviewed such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-207(3)) 
Sec. 50-404. - Limitation on license issuance. 
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery. 
(Code 1982, § 5-207(4)) 
Sec. 50-405. - Weapons. 
No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any blackjack, sawed-off shotgun or other weapon which under the laws would be illegal, and no pawnbroker shall display in his window or shop any such weapons for sale. 
(Ord. of 3-6-1990) 
Sec. 50-406. - Recordkeeping. 
Each pawnbroker licensed hereunder shall make a computer-generated daily report, in such format as prescribed by the city manager, chief of police, or his/her designee of every transaction pledged, traded, bought, or sold to the operator/dealer transacting business that occurred during the 24-hour period, and shall show the name and address of any person who bought, sold, traded or otherwise disposed of or received any item; the date and time of transaction; the amount paid or advanced, or the item traded; the full description with photographed articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry; and all identifying names, ranks and numbers; and a description of persons trading, buying, selling or pawning, including the name, address, race, weight, height, and copy of officially authorized photograph identification. 
These daily reports shall be filed electronically daily by posting online to the following law enforcement LeadsOnLine, website www.leadsonline.com or any other electronic reporting system as directed by the Glennville Police Department. Where technological problems prevent posting the daily report electronically, a printed report shall be delivered, emailed, or faxed to the Glennville Chief of Police in lieu thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 5-207(5); Res. No. 17-16, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 50-407. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1982, § 5-207(7)) 
Sec. 50-408. - Stolen goods. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him, or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-207(8)) 
Secs. 50-409—50-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Peddlers generally, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 50-441. - License required. 
Each peddler and itinerant merchant as such terms are defined in section 50-442, who does business within this city shall be required to obtain a license from the clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-204(1)) 
Sec. 50-442. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant merchant means any person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, boat or public room in any hotel, lodging house, apartment or shop within the city for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
Peddler means any person, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden produce, farm products or provisions who offers and exposes the same for sale, or who, without travelling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, other vehicle or conveyance. 
(Code 1982, § 5-204(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-443. - License application. 
Application for a license under this article shall be made as provided in article I of this chapter but shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  The fingerprints of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business, or in lieu thereof at least three letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the county in which the business is to be conducted, certifying to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or other evidence which establishes the good character and business responsibility of such person or persons to the satisfaction of the mayor and council; 
(2)  The places in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that said business shall be conducted; 
(3)  The places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant within the six months next preceding the date of said application conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted; 
(4)  A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the city; the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise; where the goods or property to be sold are manufactured or produced; and where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed; 
(5)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and, if required by the clerk, copies of all said advertising whether by handbills, circulars, newspaper advertising or otherwise, shall be attached to said application as exhibits thereto; and 
(6)  Whether or not the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor, or the violation of any ordinance, the nature of such offense, and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(Code 1982, § 5-204(4)) 
Sec. 50-444. - Bond. 
Before any license shall be issued for engaging in a transient or itinerant business as provided in this article, the applicant for such license shall file with the clerk a bond running to the city in the sum set by the council, executed by the applicant, as principal, and two sureties upon which service of process may be made in the state; said bond to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all of the provisions of the ordinances of this city and the statutes of this state regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, and will pay all judgments rendered against said applicant for any violation of said ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with all judgments and cost that may be recovered against him by any person or persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting such business with 
such applicant, whether said misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents, or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or circulated with reference to the goods, wares, and merchandise sold or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use of the aggrieved person. Such bond must be approved by the city attorney, both as to form and as to the responsibility of the sureties thereon. 
(Code 1982, § 5-204(5)) 
Sec. 50-445. - Service of process. 
Before any license as herein provided shall be issued for engaging in business as a peddler or itinerant merchant in this city, the applicant for such license shall file with the clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the clerk his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for an on behalf of said applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under said license and the bond given as required by this section, or for the performance of the conditions of said bond, or for any breach thereof, which said instrument shall also contain recitals to the effect that said applicant for said license consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon said agent, and when so made shall be taken and held to be a valid as if personally served upon the person or persons applying for the said license under this article, according to the law of this or any other state, and waiving acknowledgment of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the city clerk, as herein provided, the clerk shall send to the licensee at his last known address, by registered mail, a copy of said process. 
(Code 1982, § 5-204(6)) 
Sec. 50-446. - License fee established. 
The business license fee for each peddler and itinerant merchant doing business in the city shall be for daily, weekly, monthly and yearly amounts, all on file in the clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 5-204(7)) 
Sec. 50-447. - Duty to exhibit license. 
All persons obtaining a license under the provisions of this article shall be required to exhibit such license at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1982, § 5-204(8)) 
Sec. 50-448. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
No licensee under this article, nor anyone on his behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any other sound device including any loud-speaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(Code 1982, § 5-204(9)) 
Secs. 50-449—50-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - CHARITABLE SOLICITORS 

Sec. 50-481. - Registration required. 
Any person who wishes to solicit donations or contributions for, or to sell any insignia or novelty on the streets of the city on behalf of, or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, religious, social, patriotic, civic club or organization shall be required to register such solicitation or sale with the chief of police at least 48 hours in advance of such event and to obtain a permit therefor. Certification letter from state highway department that solicitation is authorized on state highway (indicating highway number/location, date and time). 
(Code 1982, § 5-205(1); Amd. of 11-7-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 50-482. - Form of registration. 
The registration required by this article shall be in writing, shall be signed by the chief officer of the club or organization, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and object of the charitable, religious, social, patriotic, civic club or organization conducting or sponsoring the solicitation or sale to which the registration relates; 
(2)  The day or days on which the solicitation or sale will take place; 
(3)  The object for which the funds to be derived from the solicitation or sale will be utilized; and 
(4)  The name and address of the chief officer of the club or organization conducting or sponsoring the solicitation or sale. 
(Code 1982, § 5-205(2)) 
Sec. 50-483. - Exemption. 
This article shall not apply to any locally established organization or church operated exclusively for charitable or religious purposes if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies of any such organization or church. 
(Code 1982, § 5-205(3)) 
Sec. 50-484. - Duty to exhibit license. 
Charitable solicitors shall be required to exhibit their permits at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1982, § 5-205(4)) 
Sec. 50-485. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to execute a registration which contains any false statement, and it shall be unlawful for any person to solicit donations or contributions or sell any insignia or novelty on the streets of the city purportedly in behalf of, or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, religious, social, patriotic, civic club or organization which does not in fact exist. 
(Code 1982, § 5-205(5)) 
Secs. 50-486—50-520. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - USED CAR DEALERS 

Sec. 50-521. - License required. 
Any used car or used motor vehicle dealer, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-47-2, who does business within this city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-208(1)) 
Sec. 50-522. - License fee established. 
The annual business license fee for each used car or used motor vehicle dealer doing business in the city shall be on file in the clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 5-208(2)) 
Sec. 50-523. - Review of license application. 
No action on any application for a license under this article shall be taken by the city council until the chief of police has reviewed such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-208(3)) 
Sec. 50-524. - Restriction on license issuance. 
No license under this article shall be issued to any applicant who has not been licensed by the state board of registration of used car dealers. 
(Code 1982, § 5-208(4)) 
Sec. 50-525. - Recordkeeping. 
Each used car or used motor vehicle dealer licensed hereunder shall keep a record of all motor vehicles offered for sale, exchange or disposal to the public, which record shall show the make of said motor vehicle, the year of its manufacture, its serial number, its engine number, and which record shall always be kept available for the chief of police or police officer within the city and open to his inspection at any time. It shall be the further duty of every such person to immediately report to the chief of police the presence in his place of business of any motor vehicle on which the serial or engine number has been defaced or altered. 
(Code 1982, § 5-208(5)) 
Sec. 50-526. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make inspections from time to time for the purpose of seeing that the records required herein are being kept. 
(Code 1982, § 5-208(6)) 
Sec. 50-527. - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to apply to any individual making an isolated sale of his own vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 5-208(7)) 
Secs. 50-528—50-560. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 50-561. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Yard sale means the sale of personal or household items of an individual who is a resident of the city including, but not limited to, personal clothing items, appliances, recreational items, lawn and garden items, and any and all personal items of individuals or family members that may have been acquired or accumulated for the personal use of the individual or its family members which may have been used or maintained in or about the family residence. The disposal or sale of motor vehicles or other items purchased for the specific intent of resale to the general public shall be excluded under the definition herein. It is the intent and design of this definition to allow for the sale and disposal of personal items of individuals which were accumulated during the normal course of providing for the family unit. Any person or individual desiring to sell items or merchandise for profit or business purposes are excluded under the terms of this definition. 
(Code 1982, § 5-215(1)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-562. - Registration required. 
Any person, persons or organizations who wish to conduct a yard sale in the city on behalf of themselves, or under the sponsorship of any charitable, religious, social, patriotic or civic club organization shall be required to register such yard sale with the city at least 48 hours in advance of such event and to obtain a permit thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 5-215(2)) 
Sec. 50-563. - Limitation on number of yard sales to be conducted. 
The number of yard sales to be conducted by any one individual is to be limited to two days per year. The number of yard sales to any charitable, religious, social, patriotic, civic club or organization shall be limited to two days per year. The yard sale conducted during any portion of one day shall be considered as one day and the total number of yard sales authorized may be allocated over any number of days during a one-year period so long as the amount of days do not exceed the amount allowable under this article. 
(Code 1982, § 5-215(3)) 
Sec. 50-564. - Form of registration. 
The registration required by this article shall be in writing, shall be signed by the individual or the chief officer of the club or organization, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the individual; the name and object of the charitable, religious, social, patriotic, civic club or organization conducting or sponsoring the yard sale to which the registration relates; 
(2)  The day or days on which the yard sale will take place; 
(3)  The location of the yard sale; and 
(4)  The name and address of the chief officer of the club or organization conducting or sponsoring the yard sale. 
(Code 1982, § 5-215(4)) 
Sec. 50-565. - Exemption. 
This article shall not apply to any established business which is operating under a business permit issued by the city for the sale of related items. 
(Code 1982, § 5-215(5)) 
Sec. 50-566. - Duty to exhibit. 
Individuals or organizations conducting yard sales shall be required to exhibit their permit at the request of any citizen or authority of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5-215(6)) 
Sec. 50-567. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to execute a registration which contains any false statement, and it shall be unlawful for any person or organization to conduct a yard sale in the city without first obtaining said registration. Any person conducting a yard sale without first registering the same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not more than $25.00. 
(Code 1982, § 5-215(7)) 
Sec. 50-568. - Additional days. 
Any individual, charitable, religious, social, patriotic, civic club organization desiring to hold a yard sale in excess of the days allowed under section 50-563 must obtain a permit from the city as required in section 50-562 with an additional fee of $10.00 per day. 
(Code 1982, § 5-215(8)) 
Secs. 50-569, 50-570. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES COMPENSATION 

Sec. 50-571. - Compensation. 
Due compensation for telephone companies that maintain and operate lines and facilities occupying municipal streets and rights of way and serve end user retail customers within the city. 
(1)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(2)  Regarding any telephone company that maintain and operate lines and facilities occupying municipal streets and rights of way and does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights of way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, 8-4-2009) 
Sec. 50-572. - Authorized designee. 
The city manager or designee, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1, et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this article. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this article. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights of way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, 8-4-2009) 
Secs. 50-573—50-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - CITY OF GLENNVILLE HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 50-601. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Glennville Hotel-Motel Excise Tax Ordinance". 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-602. - Definitions. 
The following works, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Glennville and variously, the incorporated territory of the city wherein the city is empowered to impose the tax provided for in this article by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk or his/her designee of the City of Glennville. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the operator's prospective tax liability based upon tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the operator and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the dates of occupancy, and the amount of rent charge for each date, together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method of payment. 
Guestroom means any room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel and/or motel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motel hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and the possession of the room or apartment in a hotel. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the City of Glennville, including but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub lessee, and lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right to occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit and includes the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Quarterly period means a calendar quarter of any year. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3) et seq. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-603. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3) there is hereby levied an excise tax in the amount of five percent of the rent for the occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the city, unless an exemption is provided under section 50-604. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after [February 2,] 2010, although such occupancy is pursuant to a contract, lease, or other arrangement made prior to such date. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-604. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No tax shall be levied as provided in this article upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of more than 30 consecutive days or for meeting rooms. 
(b)  No tax shall be levied as provided in this article for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(c)  No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident. 
(d)  No tax shall be collected from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-605. - Registration of operator, form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel and/or motel in this city shall immediately register with the clerk of the city, on a form provided by such clerk. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date this article becomes effective and the tax is imposed as set forth in section 50-603, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and other such information that would facilitate the collection of the tax as the clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner, in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The clerk shall, after such registration; issue without charges a certificate or authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-606. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator renting guestrooms in the city shall collect a five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 50-604. The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other taxes applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-607. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of the tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for each monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. An operator who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less, and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Return; time of filing; operators required to file. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the clerk showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, and amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the clerk. 
(d)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-608. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Re-computation of tax; authority to make; basis of re-computation. If the clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any operator, the clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the clerk's possession or that may come into the clerk's possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate as provided by section 50-608(b). 
(c)  Service of notice of determination. The city clerk or a designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of the determination. The notice shall be addressed to the operator at the operator's address as it appears in the records of the clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addresses. 
(d)  Time limit for mailing notice of determination. Except in the cases of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-609. - Determination if no return in made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the operator failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information that is or may come into the possession of the clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 50-609(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 50-608(b). 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-610. - Administration of article/recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Required records. Every operator renting guestrooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts and certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Such records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Application for sales tax audit reports. Each year, in the month of January, the city clerk shall request in writing from the state commissioner of revenue any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, of if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports, contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the [filing] of reports by any person or class of persons having in any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, the basis for exemption, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-611. - Proceeds. 
The net proceeds from the collection of the tax imposed by this article, after deductions by the city for the actual costs of administration of the article, may be used as follows: restricted funds, 40 percent for promotion of tourism, conventions, and trade shows; unrestricted, 60 percent may be used by the city for any legal purpose. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010; Res. No. 18-18, 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 50-612. - Violation and penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished pursuant Section 1-11 of this code. Any operator or any person who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the clerk or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 50-613. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Method of collection. The city clerk shall be charged with the responsibility for collection of the tax. In collecting the tax, the city clerk shall have available the following two methods: 
(1)  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court costs, filing fees, attorney fees and other legal fees and costs incident thereto. 
(2)  The city may enforce the collection of any amount due by imposition of a lien on the buildings or structures in which the lodgings or accommodations were furnished. The lien shall be perfected by filing on the lien docket in the clerk's office of Tattnall County, and such lien may further be enforced and collected in accordance with the procedures established in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and all other applicable statutes relating to collection of a delinquent ad valorem tax lien by a municipality. The lien shall include all interests, court costs, filing fees, attorney fees and other legal fees and costs incident thereto. 
The two remedies herein are intended to be mutually exclusive and the city clerk may choose whichever method is deemed most appropriate and effective to collect the delinquency. The city clerk may further utilize both methods if necessary to collect the delinquency, provided any amount collected in excess of the amount actually due to the city for the delinquency and costs of collection shall be refunded to the person or institution from which collection was obtained. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out the operator's business or quits the business, the operator's successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the clerk showing that the city has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold a portion of the purchase price as required, the operator shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by the operator to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Tax credit or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset by the clerk. If the operator or person determines that the operator has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the clerk, the operator will have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or the operator's administrators or executors. 
(Res. No. 10-19, 2-2-2010) 
Secs. 50-614—50-700. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - BONA FIDE COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 50-701. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the City of Glennville Bona Fide Coin Operated Amusement Machine Ordinance. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-702. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2) are prohibited in the city, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a) through (k). 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-703. - Gambling places prohibited. 
Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A.§ 16-12-20(3) are prohibited in the city, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-704. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d) where one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
(b)  Bona fide coin operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. Examples of bona fide coin operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Pinball machines; 
(2)  Console machines; 
(3)  Video games; 
(4)  Crane machines; 
(5)  Claw machines; 
(6)  Pusher machines; 
(7)  Bowling machines; 
(8)  Novelty arcade games; 
(9)  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
(10)  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
(11)  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
(12)  Basketball machines; 
(13)  Shuffleboard machines; 
(14)  Kiddie ride games; 
(15)  Skee-Ball &reg; machines; 
(16)  Air hockey machines; 
(17)  Roll down machines; 
(18)  Trivia machines; 
(19)  Laser games; 
(20)  Simulator games; 
(21)  Virtual reality machines; 
(22)  Maze games; 
(23)  Racing games; 
(24)  Coin operated pool table or coin operated billiard table as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; and 
(25)  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
The term "coin operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
(1)  Coin operated washing machines or dryers; 
(2)  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
(3)  Gas and electric meters; 
(4)  Pay telephones; 
(5)  Pay toilets; 
(6)  Cigarette vending machines; 
(7)  Coin operated vending machines; 
(8)  Coin operated scales; 
(9)  Coin operated gumball machines; 
(10)  Coin operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
(11)  Coin operated massage beds; and 
(12)  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
(c)  Location means a business within the city that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and business licenses and the entire office or area of the business in any one location owned or leased by the same proprietor or proprietors where the lessor or lessors allow the space to be used for business purposes. 
(d)  Location owner or location operator means an owner or operator of a business where one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, or shall have the same definition as found in the Official Code of Georgia, Annotated, Section 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-705. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having obtained an amusement game room license, without first having paid the applicable occupation tax and obtained an occupational tax certificate required under this article. A separate amusement game room license must be obtained for each location in the jurisdiction which bona fide coin operated amusement machines are operated. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-706. - Issuance of license. 
Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and age of the applicant and the date of the application; 
(2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; 
(3)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(4)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; and 
(5)  List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant. 
(6)  A criminal history check of the owner(s) and all employees shall be required. Any persons previously convicted of a felony within the last two years shall be prohibited from owning and/or working in an amusement game room. 
Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide the license with a copy of this article. The city shall not require a fee for an amusement game room license or registration. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31st of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with the fee schedule on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-707. - Occupation tax required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate application form, paid the required occupational tax and obtained an occupational tax certificate. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-708. - Minimum distance requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for business licensed to sell alcohol set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. At a public meeting, the mayor and council may waive the application of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served or sold at such location. 
(b)  Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for businesses licensed to sell alcohol as set out in section 4-121 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. At a public meeting, the mayor and council may waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served at such location. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-709. - Number of bona fide coin operated amusement machines at a location. 
No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than six Class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both at the same location. At a public meeting, the mayor and council may, after consideration of the nature and character of the business, waive the applicability of this provision to an individual location. 
The hours of operation for all amusement game rooms shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-710. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin operated amusement machines and from business. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the Class B amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. 
(b)  Any location owner or location operator subject to Official Code of Georgia, Section 50-27-84(b)(1) is hereby required to provide a monthly report to the city clerk, City of Glennville. Such report shall indicate the monthly gross retail receipts for each business location located within the jurisdiction of the city and shall be due by the twentieth day of each month, subsequent to the month in which the sales have taken place. In addition, each owner or operator must allow the local government an annual audit of the reports from the owner or operator to the Lottery Corporation. 
(c)  No location owner or location operator may derive more than 50 percent of such location owner's or location operator's monthly gross retail receipts for this business location in which the Class B machines are situated from such Class B machines and any location owner or location operator found in violation of such provision may be fined and may have any city issued license suspended or revoked as allowed under this article. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of gross retail receipts requirement. Any violations of this provision shall be reported to the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-711. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or substantially similar language: 
'GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE.' 
(b)  Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. 
(c)  The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-712. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
Bona fide coin operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-78. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71 (a.1) and (b). The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the State Commissioner of Revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71 or § 50-27-78. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-713. - License suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The city may suspend or revoke the city issued license of any location owner or location operator to manufacture, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of the Official Code of Georgia, Section 16-12-35, subsection (e), (f), or (g). 
(b)  The city may suspend or revoke the license of any location owner or location operator of any other license granted by the municipality as a penalty for the conviction of the business owner or business operator of a violation of the Official Code of Georgia, Section 16-12-35, subsection (e), (f), or (g). 
(c)  The suspension or revocation of licenses under this Code section shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
(1)  No license which has been issued or which may be issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause and after hearing and upon prior three-day written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(2)  The term "due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
(A)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any felony, any law, administrative regulation or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics, or tax laws. 
(B)  Conviction of, or the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by, the licensee or any of his employees or any person holding an interest in the license for any sex offense when the licensed business is for on-premises consumption. 
(C)  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as a condition for the possession, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
(D)  Material falsification of any fact given in an application for a license issued under this chapter or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefore. Any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented. 
(E)  Failure to meet or maintain any standard prescribed by this article as a condition or qualification for holding a license. 
(F)  Any other factor known to or discovered by the city whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, any of the licensee's employees or any person holding an interest in a license, has engaged in conduct at or involving the licensed business or has permitted conduct on the licensed premises that constitutes a violation of federal or state law, local ordinance or administrative regulations involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or narcotics for all alcohol licensed businesses and including any sex offense under state law or local ordinances with respect to businesses licensed for on-premises consumption. With respect to this section, it shall be rebuttable presumed that the violated act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aid in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence that such licensee could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(3)  Notice of suspension or revocation proceedings shall be served on the person named as licensee in the application. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by first class mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its address as provided by the licensee to the municipality. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(4)  The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the mayor of the city council. The hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice in the state who is disinterested in the proceeding. 
(5)  Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The city attorney shall present the city's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross examine all witnesses offered by the city, and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the hearing officer shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. 
(6)  The hearing officer shall make his final determination within ten business days of the completion of the hearing. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the hearing officer's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to sanction, if any. Such sanction may include one or more of the following: revocation of the license, suspension of the license for no more than 12 months, imposition of a probationary period not to exceed 12 months, and/or a civil monetary penalty not to exceed the amount allowed under the City Charter. Progressive sanctions, depending on the severity of the violation, are encouraged but not required. Where the remaining term of the license is less than 12 months, imposition of suspension or probation for a period in excess of the term of the existing license shall be applied to any renewal license. A subsequent violation within a probationary period shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of license renewal. A total of three separate and unrelated violations within 24 months, whether or not within a probationary period, shall be grounds for permanent revocation. 
(7)  The hearing officer's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court. 
(8)  Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the city manager, in consultation with the chief of police. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and non-appealable. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-714. - Criminal penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)  Penalties for violation of the provisions of sections 50-707, 50-708, 50-709, 50-710, 50-711 and 50-712 of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, or other court of competent jurisdiction are as follows: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Second offense: Fine not to exceed $750.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location for not more than three months, or both. 
(3)  Third offense: Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation, suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location, or suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for not more than six months, or any combination of these penalties. 
(b)  The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the city, or the judge of any other court of competent jurisdiction. Suspension or revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city may be imposed by the mayor and council after a public hearing as described in section 1-11 of this article. 
(c)  Offering one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for the offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-715. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin operated machines in violation of law or ordinance. 
The municipal court of the city, or any other court of competent jurisdiction is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin operated amusement machines: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $250.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-716. - Operating regulations. 
All businesses operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All bona fide coin operated amusement machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(b)  Inspection. The City of Glennville Code Enforcement Officer or Chief of Police may inspect or cause the inspection of any location in which any such bona fide coin operated amusement machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and may inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(c)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any location owner or location operator to open the location to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(d)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an amusement game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
(2)  Create or cause to be created any disturbance of the peace, as defined by law; 
(3)  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
(4)  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
(5)  Shirt and shoes required. All location owners and location operators shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their location. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-717. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)  Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current amusement game room license and occupational tax certificate issued by the city. 
(b)  The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the city. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license if they are going to operate in the same or different location in the city. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 50-718. - Enforcing officer. 
The City of Glennville Code Enforcement Officer or Chief of Police is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements of this article. 
(Res. No. 14-04, § 1, 9-3-2013) 
Secs. 50-719—50-799. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - EVENTS 

Sec. 50-800. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Events means: 
(1)  Organization that has planned activity for solicitation of funds from the general public. 
(2)  Individuals or organizations use of public facilities. 
Quarters are defined as January—March, April—June, July—September, and October—December. 
(Res. No. 15-09, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 50-801. - Registration required. 
(a)  Any person(s) or organization(s) must be registered in accordance with O.C.G.A, § 43-17-5 or be exempt from charitable registration in accordance with O.C.G.A., § 43-17-9, where applicable in this section. 
(b)  Any person, persons or organizations who wish to conduct an event in the city on behalf of them, or under the sponsorship of any charitable, religious, social, patriotic or civic club organization shall be required to register such event with the city a minimum of 45 days in advance of such event and obtain a permit thereof or executed contract as applicable. 
(Res. No. 15-09, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 50-802. - Number of events allowed. 

 
*Applications for bucket drives will be accepted no more than 45 days prior to the first of each calendar quarter (listed below) for the proposed events. Applications will be approved by order of receipt. 

 
(Res. No. 15-09, 4-7-2015; Res. No. 17-10, 10-4-2016) 
Sec. 50-803. - Approval of events. 
The approval authority for all events is the mayor and city council or their designee. 
(Res. No. 15-09, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 50-804. - Incurred cost to the city. 
Any event planned by an organization or individual that requires the use, supervision, security, etc., of city personnel to include Glennville Police Department, Fire Department and Street Department will be subject to reimbursement to the city for any incurred costs. 
(Res. No. 15-09, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 50-805. - Event insurance/waiver. 
All applications will be required to include and be signed by authorized representative the following "Hold Harmless Agreement": 
"To the fullest extent permitted by law, shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City of Glennville (Owner) and their respective officials, officers, supervisors, and employees from and against all claims, damages, demands, losses, expenses, fines, causes of actions, suits, or other liabilities (including all costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, consequential damages, and punitive damages), arising out of or resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or arise from, the issuance of permits or permitted uses of city facilities." 
(Res. No. 15-09, 4-7-2015) 
Sec. 50-806. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to execute a registration which contains any false statement. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit donations or contributions on the streets of the city purportedly in behalf of, or under the sponsorship of, any charitable, religious, social, patriotic, civic club or organization which does not, in fact, exist. 
(Ord. No. 15-12A, 3-11-2015) 
Sec. 50-807. - Penalty for violation of article. 
If any person is convicted of violating this article, they shall be subject to section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 15-09, 4-7-2015; Res. No. 17-10, 10-4-2016) 
Secs. 50-808—50-899. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - COMMERCIAL FILM PRODUCTION 

Sec. 50-900. - Definition. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Commercial film production activities means the use of motion picture, videotaping, sound recording, or other moving image or audio recording equipment that involves the advertisement of a product or service, the creation of a product for sale, or the use of actors, models, sets, or props. For purposes of this definition, creation of a product for sale includes a film, videotape, television broadcast, or documentary of participants in commercial sporting or recreation event created for the purpose of generating income. 
(Res. No. 18-14, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 50-901. - Permits required. 
(a)  No commercial film production activities of any type may take place within the City of Glennville without a commercial film production permit. Failure to present a permit upon request by an authorized city official may result in the immediate termination of any filming activity and potential fines and penalties as established in this article. 
(b)  Exceptions. The following persons are not required to obtain a permit: 
(1)  News media. 
(2)  Not-for-profit agencies; and 
(3)  Students engaged in completing school projects. 
(Res. No. 18-14, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 50-902. - Applications. 
Any person/agency intending to conduct commercial film production activities in the city upon public or private property, where authorization is sought to conduct activities that are ordinarily prohibited by local law, where state and/or federal permission or authorization is required, where city services are required, or public parking is required shall complete the current commercial film production application, approved by city council, provided by the city for consideration of approval. The film production application form will not be processed until it is submitted with all required information and payment of application fee(s). 
The application and rules related thereto shall be approved by the city council and shall be on file with the city. The current commercial film production application, as approved by council, including all production guidelines and restrictions contained therein, shall be adhered to in all respects. 
(Res. No. 18-14, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 50-903. - Consideration of commercial production applications. 
(a)  City manager approval of productions. The city manager may approve applications without consulting mayor and city council where: 
(1)  All production will account for not more than five days in any 30-day time period; 
(2)  The production will impact not more than two city blocks; and 
(3)  Not more than 25 parking spaces will be impacted by the production. 
(b)  Upon application made, within five business days, the city manager shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions. 
(c)  Productions taking place for six or more days shall complete and submit the application and the city council shall approve, deny or approve with conditions within 28 days of the city's receipt of a completed application. 
(d)  Where an application has been approved by city council, the applicant may seek an amendment to the permit, without having to secure city council's approval, by seeking written permission from the city manager, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Extend the permit time frame by not more than three days, so long as none of the days fall on a recognized city holiday; 
(2)  Expand the footprint of any production provided the expanded production remains within the same city block(s) as approved by the city block(s) as approved by the city council; 
(3)  The activity sought is not in direct conflict with any specific restriction placed on the applicant, as approved by city council; and 
(4)  Not more than ten city parking spaces are required. 
(e)  Where an application seeks approvals or amendments outside of any authority granted the city manager as herein expressed, the applicant must seek approval from the city council. 
(Res. No. 18-14, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 50-904. - Non-compliance. 
In the event there is a violation of this article, in addition to ceasing any commercial film production activity, or other necessary actions as deemed necessary by the city manager or the police chief, violators will be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Continuing film activities in violation of this article, or without a permit is a separate violation for each day of film, production activity. 
(Res. No. 18-14, 1-2-2018) 
Chapter 54 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 30; abandonment of motor vehicles, § 30-10; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; off-street parking and loading, § 62-531 et seq. 

Sec. 54-1. - Adoption of Uniform Rules of the Road by reference. 
Pursuant to chapter 6 of title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-373, except for O.C.G.A. § 40-6-270, of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Ord. No. 4-111, § 1, 1-2-1990) 
Sec. 54-2. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 4-111, § 2, 1-2-1990) 
Sec. 54-3. - Parking on Howard Street. 
Parking on Howard Street shall be prohibited from South Main Street (U.S. Highway # 301) east to state highway # 144. 
(Ord. of 2-15-1977) 
Sec. 54-4. - List of city roadways approved for use of speed detection devices. 
The City of Glennville is hereby requesting that the following roadways be approved for the use of speed detection devices: 
LIST OF ROADWAYS  for  CITY OF GLENNVILLE 

ON-SYSTEM 

 
*SCHOOL ZONES ARE EFFECTIVE*  A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time—SCHOOL DAYS ONLY.     P.M. from 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time—  SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
(Ord. No. 01222001, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 08-47, 6-3-2008; Res. No. 10-15, 11-3-2009; Res. No. 17-17, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 54-5—54-54. - Reserved. 
Sec. [54-]55. - Community transportation vehicle ordinance. 
Sec. [54-]55-1. Short title. 
This article shall be known as the City of Glennville Community Transportation Vehicle Ordinance. 
Sec. [54-]55-2. Findings and intent. 
This resolution is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Motorized carts, personal transportation vehicles, electric personal assistive mobility devices and other similar vehicles are not designed or manufactured to be used on public highways, streets and roads, (hereafter "public roads") and the City of Glennville in no way advocates their operation on the public roads within its jurisdiction. Adoption of this resolution is not to be relied upon as a determination by the City of Glennville that operation of motorized carts, personal transportation vehicles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, low-speed vehicles, and other similar vehicles on public roads is safe or advisable if done in accordance with this article. By regulating such operation the city is merely addressing safety issues. All persons who operate or ride in motorized carts, personal transportation vehicles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, low-speed vehicles, and other similar vehicles on public roads do so with their own judgment and at their own risk, and must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the City of Glennville has no liability in negligence, nuisance or under any other cause of action for losses resulting from the use of motorized carts, personal transportation vehicles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, low-speed vehicles, and other similar vehicles on roads, sidewalks, rights-of-way or other public property under this article. Any person who operates motorized carts, personal transportation vehicles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, low-speed vehicles, and other similar vehicles is responsible for procuring appropriate insurance as may be required by any State of Georgia law or this chapter as a condition of operating motorized carts, personal transportation vehicles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, low-speed vehicles, and other similar vehicles on the roads of the City of Glennville. 
Sec. [54-]55-3. Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the definitions respectively ascribed to them in this article. 
All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. ORAll-Terrain Vehicle shall have the same definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(3). 
Dealer means a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging vehicles who has an established place of business in this state. ORDealer shall have the same definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(11). 
Electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD) means a self-balancing, two nontandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (1 horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds. OR Electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD) shall have the same definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(15.6). 
Gross weight means the unladen weight of the vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Low-speed vehicle (LSV) means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. ORLow-Speed Vehicle (LSV) shall have the same definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(25.1). 
Motorized cart means every motor vehicle having no less than three wheels and an unladen weight on 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hours. ORMotorized cart shall have the same definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(32). 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled other than an electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD). ORMotor Vehicle shall have the same definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(33). 
Personal transportation vehicle means any motor vehicle with a minimum of four wheels, capable of a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 miles per hour with a maximum gross vehicle unladen or empty weight of 1,375 pounds and capable of transporting not more than eight persons. The term does not include mobility aids, including power wheelchairs and scooters, which can be used indoors and outdoors for the express purpose of enabling mobility for a person with a disability. The term also does not include any all-terrain vehicle. ORPersonal Transportation Vehicle shall have the same definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(43.1). 
Public road means the entire width between the boundary lines of every right-of-way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel within the boundaries of the City of Glennville, including streets and alleys. 
Sidewalk means that portion of public property of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a railway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use only by pedestrians. 
Unladen weight means the weight of a vehicle without load as per the manufacturer's specifications for such vehicle. 
Valid motor vehicle driver's license means any current and valid certificate issued by the state, other state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits persons to operate motor vehicles on the public roads of the state. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. ORVehicle shall have the same definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(75). 
Sec. [54-]55-4. Nomenclature. 
Any personal transportation vehicle, as defined by this chapter, which also qualifies as a motorized cart, as defined by this chapter, shall only be considered a motorized cart under this chapter and be subject only to the requirements, including registration, equipment, and inspections for motorized carts under this chapter. 
Sec. [54-]55-5. Motorized cart registration. 
(a)  A fee of $15.00 to register each and every motorized cart for use on public roads will be charged by the City of Glennville to cover the costs of implementing and maintaining this article. It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized cart that is operated on public roads, rights-of-way or other public property in the jurisdiction of the City of Glennville to register the motorized cart with the city within ten business days of the date of purchase. A grace period of 30 calendar days will be allowed for current owners of motorized carts upon adoption of this resolution. 
(b)  Registration with the City of Glennville shall include a record of the model, make, any vehicle identification number or serial number on such motorized cart, the name and address of the owner, a contact phone number, and any other such information as the city shall require, all of which shall be maintained by the Chief of Police, City of Glennville. 
(c)  Upon registration with the City of Glennville each motorized cart shall be issued a license decal from the city signifying such registration. The decals must be affixed to the driver's side of the motorized cart in such a manner as to be visible at all times and shall remain permanently with such motorized cart unless the motorized cart is sold or the license is destroyed. 
(d)  The failure to have a registration license decal affixed to a motorized cart for use on public roads, rights-of-way or other public property in the City of Glennville shall be a violation of this article and subject the owner of such motorized cart to the penalties set forth in section 1-11. 
(e)  If the motorized cart for use on public roads, rights-of-way or other public property is not registered with the city within ten business days of purchase it shall be considered and unregistered motorized cart and subject the owner of such motorized cart to penalties set forth in section 1-11. Furthermore, any motorized cart for use on public roads not registered within ten business days of purchase shall be assessed a late registration fee of $30.00. 
(f)  The decal issued by the city shall be non-transferrable from the motorized cart for which is it was obtained. 
(g)  Upon transfer of the motorized cart to the ownership of another person, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of the change in ownership at a cost of $15.00. If the registration is not transferred within ten business days it shall be considered and unregistered motorized cart and subject the owner of such motorized cart to penalties set forth in section 1-11. Furthermore, any motorized cart for use on public roads not registered within ten business days of purchase shall be assessed a late registration fee of $30.00. 
(h)  Motorized cart dealers and distributors, along with other commercial establishments, may rent motorized carts to the public for use on designated public roads, rights-of-way or other public property. Each such establishment renting motorized carts shall be required to register each such motorized cart in accordance with this section and shall maintain a written record of each person who rents each cart. Renters shall be required to furnish positive identification, shall be provided a copy of this article to read, and must be at least 16 years of age. The registration fee and transfer fees and regulations, along with all licensing and operation regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this article as pertains to motorized carts. 
(i)  Only those persons 18 years of age and older may register a motorized cart. Motorized cart registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(j)  Any owner or operator registering a motorized cart with the city agrees to abide by all of the requirements of state law and this code. By registering a motorized cart with the city the owner or operator verifies that the vehicle qualifies to be classified as such under state law and this code. 
(k)  The city council may, at its discretion, and by resolution, waive registration requirements for special events of a limited duration to which out-of-city residents may bring motorized carts as participants. Such special events shall last no longer than seven calendar days. 
Sec. [54-]55-6. Personal transportation vehicle equipment and inspections. 
(a)  All personal transportation vehicles shall have a braking system sufficient for the weight and passenger capacity of the vehicle including a parking brake, a reverse warning device functional at all times when the directional control is in the reverse position, a main power switch which shall render the power circuit inoperative when the switch is in the ‘off’ position or the key or other activating device is removed, such key or other activating device only being removable in the ‘off’ position, head lamps, reflex reflectors, tail lamps, a horn, a rearview mirror, safety warning labels, and hip restraints and hand holds. 
(b)  All personal transportation vehicles which do not also qualify as motorized carts shall comply with all applicable provisions of Article 1, Chapter 8, Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Sec. [54-]55-7. Personal transportation and low-speed vehicle registration. 
(a)  Any personal transportation vehicle which does not also qualify as a motorized cart, low-speed vehicle, or other motor vehicle required to be registered by Georgia law shall register such motor vehicle with the State of Georgia, as required by law, before being allowed to operate within the boundaries of the City of Glennville. 
(b)  Only registered personal transportation vehicles may be operated on designated public property within the boundaries of the city, subject to limitations provided in this article. 
Sec. [54-]55-8. Motorized cart operation regulations. 
(a)  Motorized carts may only be driven on designated public roads, rights-of-way or other public property of the city. 
(1)  The designated public roads shall include all public roads within the jurisdiction of the city (excluding US 25/301; GA 23/144,) which have a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less. 
Note: GA Highway 23/144 from the intersection of Tillman and Barnard Street to the intersection of Church and Barnard Street shall be considered designated public road for travel of motorized carts. 
(2)  Designated rights-of-way or other public property includes all public rights-of-way and public property of the city. 
(b)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time with the exception of: 
(1)  Residents of Lakeview may travel on the sidewalk East side of US 301/25 from Oliver Lane to Banks Street. 
(2)  Residents of Deloach Lane and Camelot Subdivision may travel on the sidewalk West of US 301/25 from Deloach Lane to Gordon Street. 
(c)  No person shall operate a motorized cart on a public road of the City of Glennville unless that road is designated for motorized cart use by this article. The city shall post appropriate signs directing motorized carts and other explicitly allowed vehicles to cross only at designated crossings. 
(d)  No motorized cart may cross any street, road or highway which is part of US Highway 301/25 (Veterans Boulevard) or State Highway 23/144 (Barnard Street) with the exception of the below listed crossings. 
(1)  Intersection of US 301/25 and Barnard Street (traffic light). 
(2)  Intersection of GA 144 (Barnard Street) and Tillman Street. 
(3)  Intersection of GA 144/23 (Barnard Street) and Church Street. 
(e)  Motorized carts may cross streets, roads and highways which are part of the City of Glennville street system only at crossings or intersections as outlined in (d) above. 
(f)  Motorized carts may only be operated on public roads, rights-of-way or other public property which are part of the City of Glennville street system during daylight hours unless the motorized cart complies with equipment regulations which may be promulgated by the Commissioner of Public Safety of the State of Georgia. 
(g)  Motorized cart owners shall maintain their motorized carts in a manner which ensures that an unobstructed view from the driver's seat to the rear is maintained at all times the motorized cart is in operation on public roads. 
(h)  The maximum occupancy of a motorized cart traveling on public roads, sidewalks, paths, rights-of-way or other public property shall be one person per designated seat. 
(i)  All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the designated public roads, rights-of-way or other public property of the city. 
Sec. [54-]55-9. Personal transportation vehicle, low-speed vehicle and all-terrain vehicle operation regulations. 
(a)  Only personal transportation vehicles which also qualify as a motorized cart may be operated on the public roads within the territorial boundaries of the city. Such personal transportation vehicles must comply with all of the requirements for motorized carts under state law and this article. 
(b)  Low-speed vehicles shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(c)  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the designated public roads, sidewalks, paths, rights-of-way or other property accessible to the public in the city. 
(d)  Low-speed vehicle being operated on the highways of the state, including city roads and rights of way, shall display an amber strobe light which shall be visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet from the front and rear of such vehicle. 
(e)  No low-speed vehicle shall be permitted to operate on any public and State road within the territorial boundaries of the city where the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour. Except as prohibited by law, low-speed vehicles shall be permitted to cross over streets of which the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour as long as the low-speed vehicle is traveling from one street with a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less to another street with a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less. 
(f)  No all-terrain vehicle shall be permitted to operate on any public roads, sidewalks, paths, rights-of-way or other public property of the city. Violations will be prosecuted under the Code of Georgia, Title 40, Chapter 7, pertaining to "off-road vehicles". 
Sec. [54-]55-10. Gasoline-powered motorized carts and personal transportation vehicles. 
(a)  Every gasoline-powered motorized cart and personal transportation vehicle shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. 
(2)  The exhaust system in its own shall be securely fastened, including the consideration of missing or broken brackets or hangers. 
(3)  The engine and power mechanism of every gasoline-powered motorized cart or personal transportation vehicle shall be so equipped, adjusted, and tuned, as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any gasoline-powered motorized cart or personal transportation vehicle to operate or permit the operation of such gasoline-powered motorized cart or personal transportation vehicle on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric conditions, which is placed on the gasoline-powered motorized cart or personal transportation vehicle by the manufacturer, to render the device unserviceable by removal, alteration, or other interference with its operation. 
(c)  All gasoline-powered motorized carts or personal transportation vehicles shall be maintained in working order and kept in good condition and shall be subject to inspection by city officials at reasonable times and intervals. 
(d)  All gasoline-powered motorized carts or personal transportation vehicles shall be maintained in such condition so that they are incapable of "backfiring", or otherwise operating so as to make loud noises; or create noise as a result of an operators equipping the gasoline-powered motorized cart or personal transportation vehicle with a certain device. 
Sec. [54-]55-11. Motorized cart operator licensing regulations. 
(a)  Those persons possessing a valid motor vehicle driver's license issued by the state, other state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits such person to operate a motor vehicle on the highways of the state may operate and drive a motorized cart on designated public roads, rights-of-way or other permitted public property of the city. 
(b)  Those persons who are 15 years of age but not yet 16 years of age may drive a motorized cart if he/she holds a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-5-24, as may be amended, and he/she is accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(c)  Those persons who are 12 years of age but not yet 15 years of age may drive a motorized cart on the designated streets if they are accompanied in the front seat by a parent, grandparent or legal guardian which holds a valid motor vehicle license. 
Sec. [54-]55-12. Personal transportation and low-speed vehicle operator licensing regulations. 
Only those persons possessing a valid motor vehicle driver's license issued by the state, other state of the United States of America, or international agency which permits such person to operate a motor vehicle on the public roads of the state may operate a personal transportation vehicle or low-speed vehicle on the public roads within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(a)  Those persons who are 15 years of age but not yet 16 years of age may drive a personal transportation or low speed vehicle if he/she holds a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.C. G. A. § 40-5-24, as may be amended, and he/she is accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(b)  Those persons who are 12 years of age but not yet 15 years of age may drive a personal transportation or low speed vehicle on the designated streets if they are accompanied in the front seat by a parent, grandparent or legal guardian. 
Sec. [54-]55-13. Insurance. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a motorized cart is liable for his or her own actions. Any person who operates or owns a motorized cart is responsible for procuring liability insurance and verifying coverage in terms enough to cover risk involved in using such motorized cart on designated public roads, rights-of-way or other public property of the city. 
(b)  The owner or operator of a personal transportation vehicle which does not also qualify as a motorized cart shall keep proof or evidence of required minimum insurance coverage in the personal transportation vehicle at all times during the operation of the motor vehicle as required by state law. 
(c)  The owner or operator of a low speed vehicle shall keep proof or evidence of required minimum insurance coverage in the low speed vehicle at all times during the operation of the motor vehicle as required by state law. 
Sec [54-]55-14. Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(a)  Blocking of public access to any public roads, sidewalks, recreation paths, rights-of-way or other public property of the city shall be prohibited, except for permitted events. 
(b)  All operators and passengers of motorized carts, low-speed vehicles, personal transportation vehicles, and other motor vehicles shall remain seated at all times during the operation of motor vehicle. 
Sec. [54-]55-15. Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court or other court of appropriate jurisdiction and, upon conviction, punished as provided in the Code of Glennville, Georgia. 
(b)  In addition to enforcing sanctions against the operator, any violation of this article shall be charged against the registered owner of the vehicle, and all fines and penalties shall be levied against the registered owner of the vehicle as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, warning. 
(2)  For the second offense committed within one year of conviction for a first offense, a fine of not to exceed $50.00; and 
(3)  For a third offense committed within one year of conviction for a second offense for a vehicle, a fine of not to exceed $100.00, and if a motorized cart the registered owner's motorized cart city registration shall be revoked. The registered owner cannot thereafter register a motorized cart for use in the city for a period of two years following the third conviction. Additionally, such person shall be prohibited from operating a motorized cart or personal transportation vehicle on the public roads, rights-of-way, or other public property for a period of two years. 
(c)  Any violation by an operator of a low-speed vehicle shall be charged against the operator according to the provisions of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia and this Code. Any violation by an owner of a low-speed vehicle shall be charged against the owner according to the provisions of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia and this Code. 
(d)  Any violation by and operator of a personal transportation vehicle, EPAMD, or other motor vehicle may be charged against the operator according to this Code or according to the provisions of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Res. No. 12-10, 2-7-2012; Res. No. 16-01, 7-7-2015) 
Chapter 58 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 22; floods, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 46; public utilities, § 62-58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Adjustment of water and sewer rates generally. 
The water and sewer rates of the city will be adjusted November 1, 2000, to reflect the fees and rates as set forth on Schedule A to Ordinance No. 00-14, which is made a part of this section by reference. 
(Ord. No. 00-14A, § 1, 10-3-2000) 
Editor's note— The schedule referred to in this section is not printed herein but is on file in the clerk's office. 
Sec. 58-2. - Annual adjustment of water and sewer rates. 
(a)  The water and sewer rates of the city will be adjusted August 15, 1998, and annually thereafter, on July 1 of each following year; provided, however, that the fees and charges subject to this section shall be reviewed with a cost of service study prior to January 1, 2003, and every five years thereafter, for adjustments to the fee schedule not reflected in the procedure outlined in this section. 
(b)  The basis for this annual adjustment shall be determined by the city council. 
(c)  Unless otherwise determined by the city council, the size of the annual adjustment will be equal to the percentage change in the Atlanta Area Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers, as complied and published by the federal government in one 12-month period. The comparison month will be January of each year. After the percentage adjustment has been made, the new dollar amount will be rounded off to the nearest 1/20 of a dollar, and the new dollar amount of the fee will go into effect on the following July 1. 
(d)  Rate structures are on file in the clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 99-01B, §§ 1—4, 8-4-1998) 
Sec. 58-3. - Applicant fees for use of water. 
(a)  Inspection of premises where water desired. The applicant for the use of water shall pay to the city clerk a fee of $20.00 for the inspection of the premises where water is desired. 
(b)  New tap and service connection within corporate limits. After inspection for a new tap and service connection by any consumer within the corporate limits of the city, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee on file in the clerk's office. Pavement breaks: A pavement break shall be $35.00 for the first foot plus $10.00 for each additional foot. 
(c)  New tap and service connection outside corporate limits. After inspection for a new tap and service connection by any consumer outside the corporate limits of the city, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee on file in the clerk's office. Pavement breaks: A pavement break shall be $35.00 for the first foot plus $10.00 for each additional foot. 
(Ord. No. 98002-B, §§ 14-104, 14-105, 9-2-1997) 
Sec. 58-4. - Disposition of funds derived from water and sewer systems. 
The city shall record and account for revenues derived from the water and sewer systems separately from revenues derived from other sources. Such funds shall be disbursed as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 58-5. - Deposit before service turned on—Required. 
Before water service is turned on and city utility services are provided, utility deposits shall be made with the city according to a schedule of deposits and subject to exceptions and provisions as adopted in the revenue ordinance. The deposit fee will be established and updated by the city council. Copy of established fee will be maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 58-6. - To bear no interest; to be accounted for separately; permitted use. 
Deposits made under section 58-5 of this Code bear no interest and shall be recorded and kept separate in the city's accounting system and shall be used by the city only for the purpose of applying such deposit to past due utility charges of the user. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 58-7. - Investment. 
If and when the accumulation of deposits made under section 58-5 of this Code amounts to a sum which, in the judgment of the city manager, should be invested in interest-bearing securities, then and in that event such fund or so much thereof as the city manager may see fit to set aside for that purpose shall be invested in such securities as may be legal investment for trust funds under the Laws of Georgia. The interest derived from such investments shall be credited to the water and sewer fund. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 58-8. - Refund. 
In the event a user discontinues the use of water services furnished by the city and such user owes no unpaid utility bills to the city, the deposit made under section 58-5 of this Code shall be refunded to the user without interest. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, 7-10-2007) 
Secs. 58-9—58-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Sec. 58-41. - Municipal water works. 
The municipal water works shall be under the immediate control and supervision of the water superintendent, who shall perform all acts that may be necessary for the prudent, efficient, and economical management and protection of said water works, subject to the approval and confirmation of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1982, § 14-101) 
Sec. 58-42. - Inspections. 
The water superintendent, or his designated assistant, may enter the premises of any water taker at any reasonable time to examine the condition of the water pipes, meters and fixtures. 
(Code 1982, § 14-102) 
Sec. 58-43. - Applications for water. 
Application for the use of water shall be made to the city by the owner or agent of the property to be benefited, designating the location of the property and stating the purpose for which the water may be required. 
(Code 1982, § 14-103) 
Sec. 58-44. - Water and service lines. 
(a)  The city shall own and maintain the water line from the main to the curb box, and the property owner shall own and maintain the service line from the curb box to the premises served. 
(b)  All work upon the service line shall be performed by a licensed plumber. 
(Code 1982, § 14-105(2),(3)) 
Sec. 58-45. - Size of service tap. 
No service tap shall be more than three-fourths inch in diameter; provided, however, that the city council may grant special permission for larger taps where the water supply and service facilities are sufficient to permit such taps. Where a larger tap is permitted, the city council shall fix the tapping charge therefor. 
(Code 1982, § 14-106) 
Sec. 58-46. - Water meters. 
Each building or structure using water shall have a water meter installed by the city, which may be installed either in a curb box or inside of the building at the option of the property owner. All such meters are the property of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 14-107) 
Sec. 58-47. - Expense of maintaining and repairing meters. 
The cost of maintenance of water meters will be borne by the city, except that repairs will be made at the expense of the person who receives the supply through the meter when the damage is due by hot water backing into the meter or carelessness or accident on the part of consumers, tenants or employees of consumers. The cost of such repairs will be billed the consumer and must be paid within 30 days after the bill is presented, or the city may cut off the supply of water and water will not be turned on again until the charges are paid to the city, along with the charges as stated in 58-55. 
(Code 1982, § 14-108) 
Sec. 58-48. - Charges when meter fails to register. 
If a water meter should get out of order or fail to register, the consumer shall be charged at the average daily consumption as shown by the meter when in order. 
(Code 1982, § 14-109) 
Sec. 58-49. - Procedure when meter is inaccessible. 
If a meter reader is unable to procure a reading of a meter after two calls, due to the building being locked or vacant or the occupant not permitting entrance, or entrance to the premises is made precarious by a vicious dog or otherwise, or ingress to the meter is obstructed in any manner whatsoever, whether in the building or a vault, the water may be shut off by the city and an estimated charge made for the amount of water consumed. In case water is shut off for any of such reasons, it will not be turned on again until free access to the meter is provided and payment of arrearage is made, along with the charges as stated in section 58-55. 
(Code 1982, § 14-110) 
Sec. 58-50. - Control of, interference with meters, curb cocks, meter boxes and fire hydrants. 
All meters, curb cocks, valves, meter boxes and fire hydrants connected with the city water mains and service pipes, including those furnished at the expense of consumers or property owners, shall remain under the direct control of the water and fire department and it shall be unlawful for persons other than those authorized by the city to connect, disconnect or tamper with any such meter, or to turn off the water at the curb cock, valve or meter, or to open, move or tamper with any meter box, to tamper or turn on any fire hydrant. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or in any way meddle with any of the wells, reservoirs, conduits, basins or with the water in the same, or to make or knowingly permit any connection or tapping on his premises, except as authorized by this chapter. 
(Code 1982, 14-111; Ord. No. 08-09, 8-7-2007) 
Sec. 58-51. - Service line regulations. 
No more than one building shall be permitted to use a water service line. Only galvanized pipe or PVC shall be used for the installation of a service line and all service lines shall be installed at a depth of at least 12 inches below the surface of the ground. Each service line shall contain a stop and waste cock where the water may be turned off. 
(Code 1982, § 14-113) 
Sec. 58-52. - Water waste. 
Consumers shall prevent unnecessary waste of water and keep all water outlets closed when not in actual use. Hydrants, urinals, water closets, bath tubs and other fixtures must not be left running for any purpose other than the use for which they were intended. When any such waste occurs, the water service may be terminated. 
(Code 1982, § 14-114) 
Sec. 58-53. - Uses of hoses and other apparatus during fire alarms. 
During all fire alarms the use by persons other than municipal firefighters of hoses and other apparatuses maintaining a constant flow of water is absolutely forbidden. 
(Code 1982, § 14-116) 
Sec. 58-54. - Water bills. 
(a)  Water meters shall be read on the 20th day of each month, as nearly as possible, and bills shall be mailed on the first day of each succeeding month. All water bills shall be due on or before the tenth day of the month following the reading of the meter, and if not paid by the twentieth, a penalty (which is on file in the city clerk's office) shall be added thereto and paid by the water user. 
(b)  In the event of nonpayment and service cut off, the customer must pay the bill in full, the late payment charge, a cut off charge if applicable, and pay a deposit if it was either waived, previously refunded, or was used to make the payment, late payment charge, and/or the cut-off charge. 
(c)  When unforeseen circumstances occur such as water leaks resulting in excessive high utility cost, the city manager or her designee is authorized to work out a payment plan for customers that demonstrate the ability to pay, but in no event shall such payment plan exceed 90 days before the customer's account is totally current. Such a payment plan can only be entered into once in a 12-month period. Failure to meet any payment date of a payment plan shall terminate the payment plan, and the services shall be discontinued. 
(d)  The city manager or designee shall be authorized to make equitable adjustments in billing for wastewater services only in cases where leaks in pipes and plumbing facilities result in increased billings without fault on the part of the customer. Such adjustments shall be made based on an average of prior billings only after repairs have been made and certified by a licensed plumber, and shall be limited to two months' billings. 
(e)  Failure to receive water/wastewater billing does not relieve the customer from obligation. It shall be the customer's responsibility to check all the charges on the bill. If the customer is charged for any services not received, the city manager or designee shall adjust the charges for up to three months. Further, if the customer is receiving unauthorized services for which they are not being billed, the city manager or designee will adjust their bill for no more than three months. 
(Code 1982, § 14-118; Ord. No. 08-39, 3-11-2008; Res. No. 14-06, 9-3-2013) 
Sec. 58-55. - Discontinuance of service. 
If any bill for water as hereinabove provided is not paid within ten days of the due date, the water service may be cut off, and in no case shall it be reinstated to the same property until the delinquencies shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1982, § 14-119; Amd. of 7-6-2006) 
Sec. 58-56. - Charges for turning water on. 
(a)  If the water supply to any premises is turned off for any reason, a charge on file in the clerk's office shall be made for turning the water back on. 
(b)  When the water supply is requested to be turned on for the purpose of cleaning vacant premises, one month trash pickup will be included in the cost. A charge on file in the clerk's office shall be made for temporary water service. 
(c)  Requests for water to remain on while premises are vacant, customer will only be charged for water/sewer; garbage costs will be omitted while premises are vacant. A charge on file in the clerk's office shall be made for continued water service. 
(d)  When water supply is requested, and the requestor has outstanding water, sewer and garbage fees on file from a previous account, the outstanding amount must be paid in full. In addition the requestor must pay a deposit of two times the normal water/sewer deposit fee plus an application fee and any other standard fees before receiving new services. The normal water deposit fee is on file in the clerk's office. 
(Code 1982, § 14-120; Ord. No. 08-35, 2-5-2008; Res. No. 12-32, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 58-57. - Private well drilling. 
(a)  Title and purpose. This section shall be known as the "Private Well Drilling Ordinance." The purpose of this section is to prohibit the drilling of private wells (except those for irrigation purposes) within the corporate city limits of the city; to require that all new construction requiring water service to be connected to the city water system; to prohibit the connection of any water system supplied by a private well to the water system of the city; to provide penalties for violating this section; and to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrase, shall, for the purpose of this section, have the following meaning: 
City means City of Glennville. 
City Code means City of Glennville Code of Ordinances. 
Department means City of Glennville Water Department. 
Well means any means of drawing ground water for use or consumption. 
(c)  Offenses declared. Any violation of this section shall be punished as provide in section 58-58 of this Code. All new construction to be occupied as homes, residences, business, etc., shall be connected with the city water system. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow a house or business to be occupied or for any tenant to occupy a house or business unless the same is connected with the city water system. 
(d)  Existing wells. Any and all houses, homes and/or businesses that are connected to an existing well at the time of this section may remain on those wells until such time the wells are declared unserviceable; at which time the home, house and/or business shall be connected to the city water system. 
(Res. No. 09-16, 1-6-2009) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 09-16, adopted Jan. 6, 2009, renumbered § 58-57 as 58-58 and enacted new provisions to read as § 58-57. 
Sec. 58-58. - Penalty for violation of article. 
If any person is convicted of violating this article, they shall be subject to section 1-11. 
(Code 1982, § 14-121) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 09-16, adopted Jan. 6, 2009, renumbered § 58-57 as § 58-58. 
Sec. 58-59. - Use of public water required. 
(a)  Connection to public water. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the limits of the city and located within 200 feet of a public water system now in existence or hereafter constructed to which such house, building or property may be connected so water may be supplied is required at his own expense to connect such facilities directly with said line of public water supply in accordance with the provisions of this article within 60 days. In the event the property owner declines or does not hook up to the water system, said property owner shall be liable for a user charge which shall be the basis of flat monthly rate charge for the classification of said property. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2007(1)) 
Editor's note— Resolution No. 09-16, adopted Jan. 6, 2009, renumbered § 58-58 as new § 58-59. 
Secs. 58-60—58-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CROSS CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 58-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Auxiliary intake means any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source other than that normally used. 
Bypass means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant. 
Cross connection means any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings, in such manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back pressure valves, or because of any other arrangement. 
Interconnection means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other device which does or may contain sewage or other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this state or any other state or county. 
Public water supply means the waterworks system furnishing water to the city for general use and which supply is recognized as the public water supply by the state department of natural resources/environmental protection division. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-92. - Compliance with state law regulations. 
The city public water supply shall comply with chapter 391-3-5-.13 of the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water and PL 93-523 of the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, legally adopted in accordance with this chapter, which pertain to cross connections, and establish an effective, ongoing program to control these undesirable water uses. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 2) 
Sec. 58-93. - Prohibited connections. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection to be made; or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 3) 
Sec. 58-94. - Filing of non-existence statement required. 
Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public water supply, and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water supply or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from which the water stored therein is circulated through a piping system, shall file with the clerk a statement of the non-existence of unapproved or unauthorized cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections. Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection will be permitted upon the premises. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 4) 
Sec. 58-95. - Inspections; frequency. 
It shall be the duty of the city public water supply to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 5) 
Sec. 58-96. - Right of entry; furnishing of pertinent information. 
The water superintendent or authorized representative shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the city public water supply for the purpose of inspecting the piping systems thereof for cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnection. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 6) 
Sec. 58-97. - Approved protective devices; installation; inspection; testing; repairs. 
(a)  Where the nature of use of the water supplied a premises by the water department is such that it is deemed: 
(1)  Impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation; 
(2)  That the owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the system, or his designated representative, that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are such as to pose no threat to the safety or potability of the water supply; 
(3)  That the nature and mode of operation within a premises are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing; 
(4)  There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted, altered or disconnected; The city shall require the use of an approved protective device on the service line serving the premises to ensure that any contamination that may originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. The protective devices shall be a reduced pressure zone type backflow preventer approved by the city as to manufacture, model and size. The method of installation of backflow protective devices shall be approved by the city prior to installation and shall comply with the criteria set forth by the city. 
(b)  The installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to inspect and test the device or devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary by the city. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without the knowledge of the occupant of the premises. 
(d)  Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations or protection of life, property or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective device or devices. Where only one unit is installed and the continuance of service is critical, the city shall notify, in writing, the occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The water system shall require the occupant of the premises to make all repairs indicated promptly, and the expense of such repairs shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the premises. These repairs shall be made by qualified personnel, acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 8) 
Sec. 58-98. - Labeling of water not supplied by the public water system. 
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE  FOR DRINKING 
The minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters one inch high located on a red background. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 9) 
Sec. 58-99. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be subject to section 1-11. Each day of continued violation after conviction shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines and penalties, the city shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection, and service shall not be restored until such cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection has been discontinued. 
(Ord. of 7-11-1989, § 10) 
Secs. 58-100—58-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER CONSERVATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 11-12, adopted Dec. 7, 2010, repealed Ch. 58, Art. IV, Div. 1, §§ 58-131—58-136, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, Div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 

Sec. 58-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Address means the "house number" (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. "Even numbered addresses" means a house number ending with the number 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or no house number. "Odd numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being least severe and four being the most severe. 
(Res. No. 11-12, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 58-132. - Applicability of rule. 
These rules apply to any entity, and its customers, permitted by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) for water withdrawal or for operation of a drinking water system. 
(Res. No. 11-12, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 58-133. - Outdoor water use schedule during non-drought periods. 
(a)  Outdoor water use other than exempted activities shall occur only as follows: 
(1)  Odd-numbered addresses: outdoor water use in allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2)  Even-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(Res. No. 11-12, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 58-134. - Outdoor water use schedule during declared drought response levels. 
(a)  The director of the environmental protection division is authorized to make drought declarations. 
(b)  During declared drought conditions, outdoor water use other than activities exempted in 58-135 shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(c)  Declared Drought Response Level One —Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(1)  Scheduled days for off-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(3)  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
(d)  Declared Drought Response Level Two —Outdoor watering use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00a.m. 
(1)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
(2)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
(3)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways except when necessary for public safety. 
(e)  Declared Drought Response Level Three —Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(1)  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
(2)  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
(3)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
c.  Filing installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care or structural integrity. 
d.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. 
e.  Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. 
f.  Non-commercial fund-raisers, such as car washes. 
g.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(f)  Declared Drought Response Level Four —No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted in section 58-135, or as the EPD director may order. 
(Res. No. 11-12, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 58-135. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This rule shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Captured and re-use of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2)  Re-use of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(b)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor dater use schedules of this rule. 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(c)  Newly (in place less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following: 
(1)  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during Drought Response Level Four. 
(2)  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(d)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule. 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user fom a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and Declared Drought Response Level One. 
(3)  Irrigation of tees during times of non-drought and Declared Drought Response Levels One, Two and Three. 
(4)  Irrigation of greens. 
(e)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule. 
(1)  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers: During installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
(2)  Irrigation contractors: During installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustment only. 
(3)  Sod producers. 
(4)  Ornamental growers. 
(5)  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
(6)  Retail garden centers. 
(7)  Hydro-seeding. 
(8)  Power washing. 
(9)  Construction sites. 
(10)  Producers of food and fiber. 
(11)  Car washes. 
(12)  Other activities essential to daily business. 
(13)  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(Res. No. 11-12, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 58-136. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
Enforcement actions shall be taken on those users not complying with this article in the manner described in this article. 
(Res. No. 11-12, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 58-137. - Inspections. 
Duly authorized officers bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties with the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Res. No. 11-12, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 58-138. - Violations. 
(a)  Notice. Any person found to be violating the provisions of this article shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violation and shall be issued a warning ticket for this violation. 
(b)  Termination, reconnection fee. On second violation, water service shall be terminated and a reconnection fee of $50.00 will be charged. 
(c)  Subsequent violations. All subsequent violations shall be charged a reconnection fee of $200.00 for each violation. 
(Res. No. 11-12, 12-7-2010) 
Secs. 58-139—58-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSERVATION MEASURES 

Sec. 58-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, shower head, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 2(1), 6-5-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-172. - Prohibited residential construction. 
On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilet until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallon of water per minute. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 2(2), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 58-173. - Prohibited commercial construction. 
On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirement of section 58-172(1)—(5). 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 2(3), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 58-174. - Application of article provisions. 
The requirements of section 58-172 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or shower, or both. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 2(4), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 58-175. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair of renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 58-172, 58-173 and 58-174 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets faucets or showerheads required by this division were installed; 
(3)  Such system is well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or renovation who is entitled to exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the city building inspector. A fee on file in the clerk's office shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 2(5), 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 58-176. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This division shall be enforced by the office of the city building inspector. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this division shall be tried before the municipal court. Upon conviction, a violation of this division may be punished according to the provisions of section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 01-24, § 2(6), 6-5-2001) 
Secs. 58-177—58-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWERS 

Sec. 58-211. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
ASTM means the American Society of Testing and Materials, and any reference to "ASTM Specifications" or "ASTM Methods" shall mean specifications or methods published by this organization. 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
City council means the duly elected city council or its authorized representative. 
Garbage means solid wastes to include, but not limited to, waste from the preparation, cooking, and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Part per million (PPM) means a weight to weight ratio. The part per million value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage, presently owned or afterward acquired by the city. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
Significant user means any user discharging non-domestic waste or domestic waste in excess of 50,000 gallons per day or any industrial user designated by the city known to discharge incompatible or toxic wastes to the public sewer. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of longer duration than 15 minutes more than five times its average daily concentration or flow. 
Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
User means any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the sewerage works operated and maintained by the city. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1982, art. I, §§ 1-01—1-24) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-212. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct or malicious mischief. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1982, art. VI, § 6-01) 
Sec. 58-213. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
Agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article, and particularly as described in section 58-217(i). 
(Ord. of 1-1-1982, art. VII, § 7-01) 
Sec. 58-214. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article may be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  The city council may, at its discretion, establish a schedule of fines for violations of provisions of this article, and particularly as referenced in section 58-218(j). A listing of such fines shall be posted at the city hall and shall be available upon request from the clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1982, art. VIII, §§ 8-01, 8-02) 
Sec. 58-215. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  Deposit of objectionable waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city in any area under the jurisdiction of said city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste, except animal excrement on any property zoned "agricultural." 
(b)  Unlawful discharge to natural outlets. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Installation of suitable toilet facilities. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the limits of the city and located within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer now in existence or hereafter constructed to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity, is required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with said line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 60 days after date of official notice to do so. In the event the property owner declines or does not hook up to the sewer system, said property owner shall be liable for a user charge which shall be the basic or flat monthly rate charge for the classification of said property. 
(d)  Individual treatment process. Individual treatment processes employing septic tank-soil adsorption systems (ST/SAS) may be permitted for all houses, buildings or properties used for occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the limits of the city, provided that the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  The owner of such houses, buildings or properties has constructed the ST/SAS in compliance with the "Rules and Regulations for Individual Sewage Disposal Systems," as published by the state department of human resources, and can provide evidence that the ST/SAS constructed has been inspected and approved by an authorized representative of the state department of human resources. 
(2)  The closest boundary of the owner's property is located greater than 200 feet from any existing sewer operated by the city, or if said property boundary is closer than 200 feet from any existing sewer operated by the city, that such owner agrees in writing to pay to the city those monthly charges as required by the city, indicated in subsection (c) of this section. 
(3)  The size of the land parcel in the possession of the owner upon which the ST/SAS is to be constructed, shall not be less than county minimums. 
(4)  The layout plans for the ST/SAS for any new system to be constructed, including a map of the property illustrating the location, construction material and dimensions of septic tanks and drain lines, be submitted to the city prior to installation of the ST/SAS; said plans to be retained on file by the city. 
(5)  The owner of the property requesting permission to construct an ST/SAS provides written permission to allow authorized representatives of the city to enter upon the property of the owner, following proper notification, for the purpose of inspecting the ST/SAS to ensure acceptable operation of the facility. Inspection of the ST/SAS by the city shall be no more frequent than once per two-year interval, and shall not result in damage to the owner's property. 
(6)  If, upon a finding by the city, it is shown that the ST/SAS is not performing satisfactorily, the owner of the property shall take necessary remedial actions to improve the performance of the ST/SAS in conformance with requirements set forth by the city. 
(e)  Connection to public sewer. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the limits of the city and located within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer now in existence or hereafter constructed to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity, is required at his own expense to connect such facilities directly with said line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 60 days. In the event the property owner declines or does not hook up to the sewer system, said property owner shall be liable for a user charge which shall be the basis or flat monthly rate charge for the classification of said property. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1982, art. II; Ord. of 5-1-2007(2)) 
Sec. 58-216. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  Classes of building sewer permits. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city, similar to that on file in the clerk's office. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city. Information required of industrial users is described in section 58-218(d). 
(c)  Costs and expenses. All costs and expense incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the city line shall be borne by the owner. Any connection from the city property line into the public sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay the city a standard sewer tap fee as stated in section 58-219(g). 
(d)  Separate and independent building sewer per building; exception. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)  Use of old sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the city to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  Pipe and joint materials. The building sewer shall be cast iron pipe; ASTM Specifications A74; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM Specifications C13; PVC or Polyvinyl Chloride ASTM D-2661. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the city where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable grounds, the building sewer shall be cast iron pipe, except that non-metallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the city. 
(g)  Size and slope. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth of an inch per foot. 
(h)  Grade and alignment. Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
(i)  Lifting of sewage. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(j)  Pipe laying and backfill. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12; except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(k)  Joints and connections. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Cast iron pipe joints shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with molten lead (Federal Specification QQ-L-156) not less than one inch deep. Lead shall be run in one pouring caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be permitted on the joint material until after the joint has been tested and approved. Rubber joint cast iron pipe may be used as an alternate. All joints in vitrified clay or concrete pipe, or between such pipe and metals, shall be made with approved hot-pouring jointing material, as specified below or by using rubber gaskets or preformed factory-applied couplings, and shall have resilient properties in accordance with ASTM Specification C443-59T for concrete pipe, and ASTM Specification C425-64 for vitrified clay pipe, or the latest revisions thereof. Material for hot poured joints shall not soften sufficiently to destroy the effectiveness of the joint when subjected to temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit, and not be soluble in any of the wastes carried by the drainage system. The joint shall first be caulked tight with jute, hemp or similar approved material. Other jointing materials and methods may be used only by approval of the city. 
(l)  "Y" branches. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall install a "Y" branch in the public sewer to provide for the connection. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45 degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the city. 
(m)  Inspections. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection as required by the sewer permit. 
(n)  Guarding of excavations. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1982, art. III, §§ 3-01—3-14) 
Sec. 58-217. - Wastewater discharges. 
(a)  Discharge of unpolluted waters. No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Discharge to storm sewers and natural outlets. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  Prohibited waters and wastes. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of fat, oil or greases. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood and paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids or BOD of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(10)  Any wastes containing more than 1.0 ppm of sulfides as S. 
(11)  Any waste containing concentrations greater than the following: 
Chromium as Cr - 2.0 ppm 
Cyanide as CN - 0.1 ppm 
Copper as Cu - 1.0 ppm 
Nickel as Ni - 1.0 ppm 
Cadmium as Cd - 1.0 ppm 
Zinc as Zn - 1.0 ppm 
Lead as Pb - 1.0 ppm 
Mercury as Hg - 0.002 ppm 
(12)  Any heat in quantities that the temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit), unless the works is designed to accommodate such heat. 
(13)  Any mechanically ground paper from commercial or industrial facilities in such quantities which could interfere with wastewater treatment processes. 
(14)  Any waste containing any material in concentrations in excess of that allowable under federal or state pretreatment standards. 
(d)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors; maintenance. 
(1)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(2)  When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at his expense in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(e)  Control manholes. When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(f)  Measurements, tests and analyses. All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in subsections (c) and (e) of this section shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage," and shall be determined at the control manhole provided in subsection (e) of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(g)  Action by city upon prohibited discharge. If wastewaters containing any substance described in subsection (c) of this section are discharged or proposed to be discharged into the sewer system of the city, the city may take any action necessary to: 
(1)  Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater. 
(2)  Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this article. 
(3)  Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flow equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate these rules and regulations. 
(4)  Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any additional costs or expense incurred by the city for handling and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment system. 
(5)  Take such other remedial action as may be deemed desirable or necessary to achieve the purpose of this article. 
(h)  Pretreatment. 
(1)  Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows prior to discharge into any part of the wastewater treatment system is required, plans, specifications and other pertinent data or information relating to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall first be submitted to the city for review and approval. Such approval shall not exempt the discharge of such facilities from compliance with any applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any governmental authority. Any subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall not be made without due notice to and prior approval of the city. 
(2)  If pretreatment or control of waste flows is required, such facilities shall be maintained in good working order and operated as efficiently as possible by the owner or operator at his own costs and expense, subject to the requirements of these rules and regulations and all other applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(i)  Entry upon property by city agents. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes of the rules and regulations of this article, agents of the city, upon the presentation of credentials, may enter upon any property or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of: 
(1)  Copying any records required to be kept under the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Inspecting any monitoring equipment or method; and 
(3)  Sampling any discharge of wastewater to the treatment works. 
The city may enter upon the property at any hour under emergency circumstances. 
(j)  Protection from accidental discharge. Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's own costs and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify his facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(k)  Notification of accidental discharge. If, for any reason, a facility does not comply with or will be unable to comply with any prohibition or limitations in this article, the user responsible for such discharge shall immediately notify the city so that corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment system. In addition, a written report addressed to the city detailing the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the discharge and corrective action taken to prevent further discharges, shall be filed by the responsible industrial user within five days of the occurrence of the noncomplying discharge. 
(l)  Special agreements. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any concern whereby a waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1982, art. IV, §§ 4-01—4-14) 
Sec. 58-218. - Industrial discharges. 
(a)  Discharge report. Every significant industrial user shall file a discharge report at such intervals as are designated by the city. The city may require any other industrial users discharging or proposing to discharge into the treatment system to file such periodic reports. The discharge report shall include, but in the discretion of the city, shall not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass emission rate, production quantities, hours of operation, concentrations of controlled pollutants or other information which relates to the generation of waste. Such reports will also include the chemical constituents and quantity of liquid materials stored on site even though they are not normally discharged. In addition to discharge reports, the city may require information in the form of self-monitoring reports. 
(b)  Recordkeeping. All significant industrial users who discharge or propose to discharge wastewaters to the wastewater treatment system shall maintain such records of production and related factors, effluent flows and pollutant amounts or concentrations as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article and any applicable state or federal pretreatment standards or requirements. Such records shall be made available upon request by the city. All such records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency upon demand. A summary of such data indicating the industrial user's compliance with this article shall be prepared and submitted to the city as part of the user's annual discharge report. 
(c)  Sampling of discharge. Compliance determinations with respect to prohibitions and limitations may be made on the basis of either instantaneous grab samples or composite samples of wastewater. Composite samples may be taken over a 24-hour period, or over a longer or shorter time span, as determined necessary by the city to meet the needs of specific circumstances. Laboratory analysis of industrial wastewater samples shall be performed in accordance with the current edition of "Standard Methods," "Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Waste," published by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the "Annual Book of Standards, Part 23, Water, Atmospheric Analysis," published by the American Society of Testing and Materials. Analysis of those pollutants not covered by these publications shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. Sampling of industrial wastewater for the purpose of compliance determination with respect to prohibitions and limitations will be done at such intervals as the city may designate. However, it is the intention of the city to conduct compliance sampling or to cause such sampling to be conducted for all significant users at least once in every one-year period. 
(d)  Discharge permit required. All significant users proposing to connect to or discharge into any part of the wastewater treatment system must first obtain a discharge permit therefor. Industrial users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application to the city. In support of this application, the user shall submit the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and SIC number of the applicant. 
(2)  Volume of wastewater to be discharged. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those set forth in section 58-217, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. 
(4)  The time and duration of the discharge. 
(5)  Average peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. 
(6)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials and types of materials which are, or could be, discharged. 
(7)  Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production. 
(8)  Number, type of employees and hours of work. 
(9)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(e)  Enforcement of permit conditions; period of validity; extensions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced in accordance with this article, and applicable state and federal regulations. A permit may be issued for a period of less than one year, or may be stated to expire on a specific date. If the user is not notified by the city council 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit, the permit shall automatically be extended for six months. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the city during the life of the permit, as limitations or requirements are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Transfer of permit. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation. 
(g)  Violation of permit conditions; revocation. Any user who violates the following conditions of his permit or of this article, or of applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked. Violations subjecting a user to possible revocation of his permit include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Failure of a user to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of the conditions of the permit. 
(h)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  Generally. Whenever the city finds that any person has violated or is violating this article, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. 
(2)  Method of service; corrections. If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the city may order any person who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to show cause before the city council why service should not be terminated. A notice shall be served on the offending party, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the violation, and directing the offending party to show cause before said council why an order should not be made directing the termination of service. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(3)  Conduct of hearing. The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the city to: 
a.  Issue in the name of the city notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in any such hearings. 
b.  Take evidence. 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon. 
(4)  Testimony. At any public hearing, testimony taken before the city council or any person designated by it, must be under oath. 
(5)  Orders and directives. After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the party responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated, and such further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate. 
(i)  Discharges in violation of article or orders. Any discharge in violation of the substantive provisions of this article or an order of the city shall be considered a public nuisance. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city treatment system contrary to the substantive provisions of the article or any order of the city council, the council shall commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the county circuit court. 
(j)  Fine; costs. Any person who is found to have violated an order of the city council or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this article, and the orders, rules and regulations issued hereinunder, is subject to fine for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder. 
(k)  Public disclosure of information and data; exceptions. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(l)  Conformance with federal law. Notwithstanding the rules and requirements set forth in this article, all industrial users of the city sewer system shall be required to conform to requirements set forth in 40 CFR 403, "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Source Pollution." 
(Ord. of 1-1-1982, art. V, §§ 5-01—5-12) 
Sec. 58-219. - Sewer use charges. 
(a)  All users of the sewer system shall be subject to service charges and surcharge payments as adopted by the city. 
(b)  All users of the system shall pay a minimum charge for sewer service which is equal to or greater than his proportionate share of operation and maintenance costs for the system. 
(c)  The user charge system adopted by the city shall take precedence over any previous agreements with any user served by the city. 
(d)  The city shall maintain system revenue and expense records as required by federal guidelines, and make such records available as required by authorized agencies. 
(e)  The city shall provide for an updating and refinement of its user charge system not less frequently than biennially in order to assure proportionality of charges among user classes and adequacy of revenues to meet requirements. 
(f)  The city shall provide each user individually with a statement of his sewer use unit charge no less frequently than annually. In addition, a schedule of all sewer use fees shall be posted at city hall, and shall be available from the clerk. 
(g)  The tap fees for all connections to the public system operated by the city shall be established by the city council, shall be posted at city hall, and shall be available from the clerk. 
(Ord. of 1-1-1982, art. X, §§ 10-01—10-07) 
Chapter 62 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; community development, ch. 18; environment, ch. 22; floods, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Legislative intent of chapter. 
(a)  Authority. The city council in accordance with the authority now granted them by article 9, section 2, paragraph 4 of the state's constitution of 1983, and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2 et seq., as amended, hereby ordains, and enacts into law the articles and sections of this chapter. 
(b)  Purpose. The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth have been prepared in accordance with land use plans for the city to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city, to facilitate orderly and harmonious development, and to regulate the density of population and intensity of land use in order to provide for adequate light and air. In addition, this chapter has been prepared to provide for vehicle off-street parking to prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in the circulation of people and the loss of life, health or property from flood or other dangers. The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are also employed to protect transportation facilities, public facilities, residential areas, recreation and open space and the natural resources of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 101) 
Sec. 62-2. - Interpretation of chapter provisions. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health and welfare. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the building, structures or premises, upon heights of buildings or structures or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by any other ordinance, rates, codes, permits or regulations, or by easements, covenants, deed restrictions or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 102) 
Sec. 62-3. - Conflict with chapter provisions. 
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or interfere with any existing ordinance or enactment, or with any rule, regulations or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as the same may be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, provided that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use of buildings or land, or upon the height and bulk of buildings, or prescribes larger open spaces than are required by the provisions of such ordinance, enactment, rule, regulation or permit, then the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 103) 
Sec. 62-4. - Validity of chapter provisions. 
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or of any other part thereof. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 104) 
Sec. 62-5. - Definitions. 
(a)  Generally. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use or building means a use or building, located on the same lot as the principal building, which is clearly incidental and secondary to permitted use or building and which does not change the character of such use or building, including, but not limited to, private garages, living quarters for servants, bath houses, greenhouses, tool sheds, storage buildings, animal shelters. 
Alley means a public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulations. 
Alterations means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy, any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
Animated sign. A sign that utilizes moving structural elements, flashing or sequential lights, lighting elements, or other automated methods to create movement, the appearance of movement, or other special effects. Signs meeting the definition of and regulations governing changeable copy [signs] and traffic control devices and warning signs meeting the standards of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices are not considered animated signs. 
Billboard means any notice of advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, with an area of 300 or more square feet, as well as all those used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making anything known, the origin or place of sale of which is not on the lot with such display, except that governmental notices shall be considered to be billboards. 
Board means the zoning board of appeals. 
Boarding house means a building where for compensation lodging and/or meals are provided for not more than three persons. 
Buffer strip means a piece of land, varying in length and width, lying between two incompatible uses of land and containing open space, plantings, trees, a wall, fence or other suitable enclosures which provide property screening. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof, and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. This shall include tents, awnings or vehicles situated on private property and used for purposes of a building. 
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall, outdoor display for the purpose of making anything. 
Building inspector means the building inspector of the city as designated by the city council. 
Building line means a line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 
Building, main or principal, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
Building setback line means a line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the main or front wall of the building and the street right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto. Covered porches, whether enclosed or not, shall be considered as a part of the building and shall not project into the required yard. 
Business sign means an attached or freestanding structure on which is announced the business use of the premises and/or the name of the operator of the business. 
Centerline means a line of a street is surveyed and monumented by the city council or a line midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
Club means a building or facility owned or operated by a nonprofit corporation, association or persons for civic, educational or religious purposes, but specifically excluding any rendering of continuing service customarily carried on as a business. 
Day care center. Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution, or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, 19 or more children under 18 years of age, and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the State of Georgia department regulating the use of day care centers. 
Day care home, family. A private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care, fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, a maximum of six children to include any children considered normal residents of said dwelling, under 18 years of age. 
Day care home, group. Any place operated by any person(s), partnership, association or corporation wherein are received for pay for group care not less than seven nor more than 18 children under 18 years of age for less than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the State of Georgia department regulating the use of group day care homes. 
Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling, one-family, means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by one family. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families independent of each other, such as a duplex dwelling unit. 
Dwelling unit means a building, or a portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
Family means one or two persons or parents, with their direct lineal descendants and adopted children (and including the domestic employees thereof) together with not more than two persons not so related, living together in the whole or part of a dwelling comprising a single housekeeping unit. Every additional group of two or less persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate family for the purpose of this chapter. 
Flood hazard area means an area designated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or any succeeding agency where in a flood hazard may exist. Persons contemplating development in such areas should consult current flood hazard insurance directives for further information. 
Floor area means total gross area on all floors as measured to the outside surfaces of exterior walls, excluding crawl spaces, garages, carports, breezeways, attics without floors and opened porches, balconies and terraces. 
Floor space means floor area of all floors, as measured from the inside surfaces of the walls enclosing the part of a building occupied by a single occupant or shared by a distinct group of occupants, excluding therefrom common halls, stairwells, sanitary facilities and storage and other areas to which patrons do not have regular access. 
Front lot line means a line dividing a lot from any public highway, except a limited or controlled access highway to which the lot has no access. 
Garage means a fully enclosed building for the storage of motor vehicles, not including buildings in which fuel is sold or repair or other services performed. 
Gas station means a place where motor vehicle fuels are sold at retail. 
Height means the vertical distance from the highest point on a structure, excepting any chimney or antenna on a building, to the average ground level of the grade where the walls or other structural elements intersect the ground. 
Home occupation means a use conducted entirely within an enclosed dwelling, employing only the inhabitants thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to residential occupancy and does not change the character thereof. Specifically excluded is the storage and display of merchandise not produced by such home occupations, any activity involving any building alterations, window display, construction features, equipment, machinery or outdoor storage, any of which is visible from off the lot on which located. Such activity shall be confined to no more than 25 percent of the floor area of the residence, and shall not cause the generation of other than normal noise, pedestrian and vehicular traffic. One professional sign not over 200 square inches in area may be displayed. 
Hotel means a structure designed, used or offered for residential occupancy for any period less than one month, including tourist homes and motels but not including hospitals or nursing homes. 
Industrialized building (modular building) means any structure or component thereof, excepting a manufactured home, which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site and which has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof, and which bears the insignia of approval of the state department of community affairs in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Buildings Act of 1982, as amended. Industrialized or modular buildings or other such closed-construction structures which have not been approved by the state department of community affairs are deemed to be of inadequate construction by definition, and shall not be issued building or occupancy permits for authorized uses within the city. Industrialized buildings qualifying as a single-family dwelling shall be allowed in all residential districts, and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to the same housing standards, requirements, and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
Laundromat means a place where patrons wash, dry or dry clean clothing and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
LED sign. Any sign or portion thereof that utilize light emitting diode technology or other similar semi-conductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEP), or any other similar technology. 
Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
Lot means the contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where the severance creates any nonconformity of use or structure. 
Lot area means the area of land within the boundary of a lot, excluding any part under water, and, in addition, the area of land bounded by any front lot line, the centerline of the highway on which it fronts and the side lot lines intersect the front lot line at its ends extended to the centerline of the highway. 
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot line. 
Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as follows: 
(1)  Front lot line. In the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, or double frontage lot, the term "front lot line" shall mean that line separating said lot from either street. 
(2)  Rear lot line. That lot line opposite the front lot line. In case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line not less than ten feet in length and parallel to the front lot line, that when measured from a point farthest from the front lot line shall lie wholly within the lot. 
(3)  Side lot line. Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the land records at the county courthouse. 
Lot width means the distance between side lot lines measured at the building line. 
Major street means a street designed as a major thoroughfare on the major thoroughfare plan of the city. 
Manufactured home (mobile home, trailer) means any structure originally constructed to be transportable in one or more sections and built upon a frame or chassis which was designed to be used as a single-family dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to required utilities. Any such structure must adhere to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, and must bear the insignia of approval of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and shall not include unapproved modifications or additions which do not meet locally adopted construction or construction-related codes. A manufactured home shall be construed to remain a manufactured home, subject to all regulations applying thereto, whether or not wheels, axles, hitch or other appurtenances of mobility are removed and regardless of the nature of the foundation provided. This definition shall not include travel trailers or recreational vehicles when such vehicles are not used for permanent or semi-permanent living or sleeping quarters. Manufactured homes are not designed and shall not be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings within the city. 
Manufactured home, mobile home or trailer park means any lot, tract or parcel of land used, maintained or intended to be used, leased or rented for occupancy by two or more manufactured or mobile homes together with accessory structures provided in connection therewith. This definition shall not include manufactured or mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied manufactured or mobile homes are parked for the purpose of inspection and sale. 
Non-conforming building means a building or portion thereof, existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments hereto, and that does not conform to the height, area or yard regulations for the district in which it is located. 
Non-conforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nursing home means a structure designed or used for residential occupancy and providing limited medical or nursing care on the premises for occupants, but not including a hospital or mental health center. 
Off-street parking lot means a facility, other than for single-family dwellings, providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering, to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
Parking space means an area of definite length and width; said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles. 
Personal care home. A facility intended to provide living quarters and limited services for individuals who require social, medical, and/or mental health services in a community-based residential setting. Homes must be operated under a program authorized or directed by the State of Georgia department regulating personal care homes. 
Personal care home, family. A group home serving six or fewer residents (including any live-in or overnight staff), and located in a building that closely resembles a single-family dwelling. 
Personal care home, group. A group home serving fewer than 15 residents (including any live-in or overnight staff), and located in a building that may resemble a multifamily dwelling structure. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of the city. 
Public utility means any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public; gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation of water. 
Restaurant means a lot on which food or beverages are cooked or prepared and offered for sale and where consumption is permitted on the premises whether or not entertainment is offered, and includes establishments commonly known as bars, grilles, cafes, taverns, nightclubs, drive-ins and any fast food establishment permitting consumption on the premises. 
Sanatorium means an institution for rest and recuperation (as of convalescents); an establishment for the treatment of the chronically ill. 
Setback means the distance required to obtain the front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this chapter. 
Sign means any outdoor sign, light, display, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard or other thing which is designed, intended or used to advertise or inform, any part of the advertising or information contents. 
Single-family dwelling means a structure, except a mobile home, designed or used for residential occupancy by one family. 
Special exception (applied to a function of the zoning board) means allowing the granting of an exception to a provision of the chapter rather than a variance. The term "exception" is usually preceded by the modifying term, "special." This implies that within the framework of the chapter an unusual circumstance is anticipated and special provisions are set forth in the text which state that, when certain things happen, an exception can occur. Illustrative of this is the fact that a residential zone would probably be the best place for the location of a private school. The chapter text can anticipate this and establish the fact that a private school can be permitted as a special exception by the zoning board. The zoning board of appeals then has the responsibility of investigating the matter and making certain that the requirements set forth in the chapter are met. The term "exception" or "special exception" shall apply to a change in the "use" of property pursuant to provisions of division 2, article II of this chapter. 
Spot zoning means the awarding of a use classification to an isolated parcel of land which would be detrimental or incompatible with the existing zoning use of the surrounding area. 
Story means that portion of a building comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. The first floor of a two-story or multi-story building shall be deemed the story that has no floor immediately below it that is designed for living quarters or for human occupancy. Those stories above the first floor shall be numbered consecutively. 
Street means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground. 
Town house means a single-family dwelling constructed adjacent and connected to other single-family dwellings separated by a common firewall. 
Use means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
Variance means a modification of the literal provisions of the chapter granted when strict enforcement of the chapter would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted, a departure from the provisions of a zoning ordinance relating to setbacks, side yards, frontage requirements, and lot size, but not involving the actual use of structures. 
Comment: The hardship variance is granted because strict enforcement of the chapter as it applies to a specific lot would work an undue hardship and present practical difficulties. It is usually granted to decrease the dimension requirements, and the applicant generally must demonstrate the hardship is peculiar to his property and not to other properties in the zone. The city council must find that the variance can be granted without any adverse impact on the public good (the negative criteria). 
Yard means the open spaces on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and as follows: 
(1)  Front yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest line of the main building. 
(2)  Rear yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest line of the main building. 
(3)  Side yard. An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot to the nearest point of the main building. 
(b)  Rules of construction. 
(1)  Terms used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(2)  Terms used in the singular number include the plural, and terms used in the plural number include the singular. 
(3)  The term "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, political governing body, trust and company as well as an individual. 
(4)  The term "lot" includes the terms "plot" and "parcel." 
(5)  The term "building" includes the term "structure." 
(6)  The term "shall" is mandatory, not directory. 
(7)  The terms "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the terms "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(8)  The term "planning commission" shall refer to the planning commission of the city. 
(9)  The terms "city council" or "council" shall refer to the city council of Glennville. 
(10)  The terms "map," "zoning map" or "Glennville zoning map" shall mean the official zoning map of the city. 
(11)  The term "constructed" shall mean to form by putting together parts. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, art. II; Res. No. 11-15, 3-10-2011; Res. No. 14-05, 9-3-2013; Res. No. 17-29, 4-4-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 62-6—62-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-41. - Violations. 
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to take cognizance of violations of this chapter. He shall investigate each violation which comes to his attention whether by observation or by communication. He shall order in writing the correction of such conditions as are found to be in violation of this chapter. Failure to secure a zoning or use permit or board of appeals certificate when required, previous to erection, construction or alternation to a building, or change in use of land or building as provided in this chapter, shall be a violation of that chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2100) 
Sec. 62-42. - Fines and charges. 
For any and every violations of the provisions of this chapter, the owner, general agent or contractor of a building or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the owner, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises in which part such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the owner, general agent, contractor, or any other person, who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in any such violation, or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violations shall exist, shall be liable on conviction thereof to the provisions of section 1-11, and, whenever such person shall have been notified by the building inspector, or by service or warrant in a prosecution, or in any other manner that he is committing such violation of this chapter, each day that he shall continue such violation after such notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine. Such fines shall be collected by the institution of summary proceedings before a court. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2101) 
Sec. 62-43. - Remedies. 
In case any building, sign or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained; or any building, sign, structure or land is used; or any hedge, tree, shrub or other growth is maintained, in violation of this chapter or of any regulations made pursuant hereto, in addition to other remedies provided by law, any appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, may be instituted or taken to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2102) 
Sec. 62-44. - Building inspector. 
(a)  Enforcement of chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the building inspector, who shall also be the zoning officer, with the aid of the police department and other city agencies. 
(b)  Duties and powers. It shall be the duty of the building inspector and he shall have power to: 
(1)  Require that the application for a building permit and the accompanying plot plan shall contain all the information necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the proposed building complies with provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Require that an application for approval of placement of any manufactured or mobile home anywhere in the city be made on a form or forms developed for that purpose, and shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with this chapter. This application shall include all information necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the provisions and standards of this chapter as applicable to each such structure, including photographs or rendering of the front and side of the manufactured or mobile home, exterior finish, roof, skirting, or any other information deemed necessary to make determinations required by this chapter. 
(3)  Keep a permanent record of all plans and application for permits, and all permits issued with notations as to special conditions attached thereto. All records should be open for public inspection and shall be the property of the city. 
(4)  Require that no building permit, or approval for placement of a manufactured or mobile home, shall be issued until the building inspector has certified that the proposed building, alteration, placement or use complies with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms of this chapter. In carrying out such surveys, the building inspector or his representative may enter upon any land or buildings. 
(6)  Make written orders requiring compliance with the provisions of this chapter to be served personally or by registered mail. 
(7)  Temporarily approve, temporarily approve with conditions, or deny an application for placement of a manufactured or mobile home within ten days of receipt of the application and all requested and required supporting materials. Such determinations of temporary approval, temporary conditional approval or denial with specified conditions and reasons shall be made in writing, and the applicant served personally or by registered mail within five working days after such decision is made. If an application for placement of a manufactured or mobile home is denied in writing by the building inspector with specific reasons, the applicant may revise and resubmit his application and begin the process again as a new application. The applicant may also appeal such a decision of the building inspector to the board of appeals as specified in division 2 of this article. If an application for placement of a manufactured or mobile home is temporarily approved, or temporarily approved with conditions, this decision shall automatically be referred to the board of appeals for review and recommendation as specified in division 2 of this article. In no event, may any manufactured or mobile home be placed in the city until the entire board of appeals process has taken place as specified in division 2 of this article, the city council has issued final approval of the application for placement, and the building inspector has issued the certificate of occupancy. 
(8)  Maintain a map showing the current zoning classification of all land. 
(9)  Maintain a map and register showing the registration, identity, location and type of all nonconforming uses. 
(10)  Participate in all proceedings before the board of appeals, present facts and information to assist the board in reaching a decision, resist and oppose any deviations from standard provisions of this chapter and have decisions of the board reviewed in a court of proper jurisdiction when, in the judgment of the building inspector, such review is desirable. 
(11)  The building inspector shall have authority to issue permits only for construction, placement of manufactured homes and uses which are in accordance with the chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work for the erection or alteration of any building, or place a manufactured home in the city, until a building or placement permit has been duly issued therefor. Permits for construction, placement of manufactured and mobile homes, and uses which are a special exception to such general requirements shall be issued by the building inspector only upon completion of the board of appeals process and official action by city council. The building inspector shall issue no permits for the construction or use of any land or buildings, or placement of manufactured homes, unless it also conforms to the requirements of all other ordinances. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, §§ 1800, 1801) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 
Sec. 62-45. - Building or placement permits. 
No building shall be constructed or altered, or the use of any building and/or land changed, or a manufactured or mobile home placed in the city, until a permit has been secured from the building inspector. Any building or placement permit issued shall become invalid unless the work or action authorized by it shall have commenced within six months of its date of issue. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1802) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 
Sec. 62-46. - Certificate of occupancy. 
Upon completion of construction activity requiring a building permit, or upon completion of placement of a manufactured home in accordance with provisions of the chapter and placement permit, the owner, tenant or authorized agent shall obtain a certificate of occupancy. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy, or allow the use or occupancy, of any building, manufactured home, or premises without first obtaining a certificate of occupancy for said building, manufactured home or lands. The building inspector shall be responsible for issuance or non-issuance of the certificate of occupancy, and shall inspect and approve all work for conformity with the provisions of this chapter and any building or placement permit before issuing the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1803) 
Sec. 62-47. - Application for permits. 
All applications for building permits, placement permits and certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing by the owner or tenants or authorized agent, on such form or forms developed for that purpose or purposes, and shall be filed with the building inspector. The applications shall include all information and supporting materials necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the provisions and standards of this chapter including, but not limited to, those specified in section 62-44(b)(2) and the following: 
(1)  Shall include a statement as to the proposed use of the building and/or land. 
(2)  Shall be accompanied by working plans drawn to scale, showing the location of the building in relation to property and road lines. 
(3)  Shall give the name and address of the surveyor or other person competent to give such location and to state the road lines. 
In addition the building inspector may require certified "as-built" site plans or other information necessary to determine chapter and permit compliance before issuing a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1804) 
Sec. 62-48. - Variance. 
If the applicant desires the board of appeals to grant a variance, then in addition, the application shall be set forth the nature of the variance and shall state briefly the reasons why such variance should be granted. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1805) 
Sec. 62-49. - Appeals. 
An appeal from the decision of the building inspector shall be taken within 30 days. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1806) 
Sec. 62-50. - Fees. 
The applicant for a permit or certificate of occupancy shall, at the time of application, pay to the building inspector for the use of the city, a fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1807) 
Sec. 62-51. - Effect of private covenants. 
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to render inoperative any enforceable restrictions established by covenants running with the land, and which restrictions are not prohibited by or not contrary to the regulations herein established. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2400) 
Sec. 62-52. - Lots of record. 
A lot which is of record on the city plan or of record title upon a plan or separately described in a deed or recorded in the office for the recording of deeds of the county and which is in single and separate ownership at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and where such owner does not own adjoining land or lots and where it is not financially feasible to acquire adjoining land or lots from other owners, such lot may be used for a use permitted in the district in which it is located upon a finding by the board of appeals that the lot size is reasonably close to the minimum and maximum regulations required under this article and that owners of lots within 300 feet thereof, after 20 days' notice and hearing, do not object or will not be adversely affected thereby. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2401) 
Sec. 62-53. - Reduction of lot area. 
No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of the required open spaces shall be less than herein prescribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2402) 
Sec. 62-54. - Modification of front yard requirements. 
Where an unimproved lot of record is situated on the same street frontage with two improved lots or one unimproved and one improved lot, the front yard requirement for that district may be modified so that the front yard shall be an average of the existing and as required front yard. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2403) 
Sec. 62-55. - Vision clearance at corners, curb cuts, and railroad crossings. 
Notwithstanding any part of this chapter or any permit granted or any variance granted by the board of appeals, no type of structure, vehicle, tree, plant, vegetation, sign or fence, or any type of obstacle or any portion thereof shall be placed or retained in such a manner which would create a traffic hazard or would obstruct the vision clearance of corners, curb cuts or railroad crossing in any zone. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2404) 
Sec. 62-56. - Unsightly or unsanitary storage. 
No rubbish, salvage materials, junk or miscellaneous refuse shall be openly stored or kept in the open and no weeds shall be allowed to go uncut within any zones when the same may be construed to be a menace to public health and safety by the appropriate health department, or to have a depressing influence upon property values in the area. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2405) 
Sec. 62-57. - Accessory uses. 
Accessory uses authorized in this chapter shall include, but not by way of limitation, the following: 
(1)  Uses accessory to agriculture: Greenhouses, a roadside stand for the sale of products produced on the premises for use and the disposal thereof by marketing or otherwise. 
(2)  Uses accessory to dwellings: 
a.  Private garage, private parking space, private stables, barn, shelter for pets. 
b.  Private greenhouses. 
c.  Living quarters for household employees, caretakers or watchmen. 
d.  Professional office or studio of a doctor, dentist, healer, teacher, artist, architect, landscape architect, musician, lawyer, engineer, magistrate or practitioner of a similar character, or rooms for the home occupations listed below, provided that office, studio or rooms are located in a dwelling in which the practitioner resides, or in a building accessory thereto, and provided further that no goods are publicly displayed on the premises. The following home occupations shall be allowed: 
1.  Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for custom apparel and custom home furnishing. 
2.  Foster family care. 
3.  Any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise are not commercially created, exchanged or solid. 
4.  Tutoring. 
5.  Fine arts studio in which are created only individual works of art. 
(3)  Uses accessory to non-commercial recreational use: Customary recreational, refreshment and service uses and buildings in any non-commercial recreational area. Uses authorized in this chapter as accessory to a dwelling shall not be deemed to include a business, hospital clinic, animal hospital, barber shop, beauty parlor, other personal service shop, team room, hotel or similar use. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2406) 
Sec. 62-58. - Public utilities. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be constructed to limit or interfere with the installation, operation and maintenance of public utility structures or facilities in existence at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or which may hereafter be located within public easements or rights-of-way designated for such purposes. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2407) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 58. 
Sec. 62-59. - Projections into required yards. 
No building and no part of a building shall be erected within or shall project into any required yard in any district, except that: 
(1)  An unenclosed porch, not more than 14 feet in height, may be erected to extend into a required front or rear yard a distance of not more than ten feet, provided that in no case shall it extend into such front or rear yard more than one-half the required depth of the yard. 
(2)  A terrace, platform or landing place, not covered by a roof, canopy or trellis, which does not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may be erected to extend into a required yard a distance of not more than 12 feet, provided that it shall not extend into such yard more than 40 percent of the required depth or width of the yard. 
(3)  A porte-cochere, carport, may be erected over a driveway in a required side yard, provided that such structure is: 
a.  Not more than 14 feet in height and 20 feet in length. 
b.  Entirely open on at least three sides, exclusive of the necessary supporting columns and customary architectural features. 
c.  At least three feet from the side lot line. 
(4)  A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster of a building may project not more than 18 inches into a required yard. 
(5)  Open, unenclosed fire escapes, steps, bay windows and balconies may project not more than three feet into a required yard. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2408) 
Sec. 62-60. - Conversion of residential structures. 
The board of appeals may allow as a special exception the conversion of a single-family dwelling or other building into a dwelling for two or more families, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Each dwelling unit shall have not less than 700 square feet of floor area, plus an additional 100 square feet of floor area for each additional bedroom in excess of one. 
(2)  The lot area per family is not reduced thereby to an amount less than 75 percent of that required by this chapter for the district in which the designated lot is located. 
(3)  Fire escape and outside stairways shall, when practicable, be located to the rear of the building. Outside stairways shall be enclosed. A metal fire escape shall be provided for each floor above the second, leading to the ground. Each unit shall have two means of egress, both of which shall terminate in a public way or a court space leading to a public way. 
(4)  The board of appeals shall specify the maximum number of families permitted to occupy such buildings and may prescribe such further conditions and restrictions as the board of appeals may consider appropriate. 
(5)  The off-street parking requirements of this chapter shall be met. 
(6)  The conversion shall be authorized only for a large dwelling with relatively little economic usefulness as a conforming use. 
(7)  The structure shall be located within the boundaries of the R-2 or R-3 residential district and no other. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2409) 
Sec. 62-61. - Airport regulations. 
No building structure or sign may be erected, altered or used which would create a hazard to the air navigation of the Glennville Airport. All structures, buildings or signs to be erected within the instrument approach zones, non-instrument approach zones, horizontal zone and conical zone of the Glennville Airport shall conform to the use and height requirements of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), Part 77, "Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace." 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2410) 
Sec. 62-62. - Annexation-deannexation. 
In the event of changes in the city limits removing territory from the city, district boundaries shall be construed as moving with the city limits. In the event of annexation of new areas to the city, such areas shall be considered to be in the R-1A district until otherwise classified. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2411) 
Sec. 62-63. - Administrative standards. 
Whenever, in the course of administration and enforcement of this chapter it is necessary or desirable to make any administrative decision, then, unless other standards are in this chapter provided, the decision shall be made so that the result will not be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2412) 
Sec. 62-64. - Spot zoning. 
Spot zoning of an isolated parcel of land is prohibited unless deemed necessary under special circumstances to include historical value, environmental importance, or scenic value. 
(Res. No. 17-29, 4-4-2017) 
Secs. 62-65—62-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 62-81. - Appointment. 
The city planning commission shall function as and be the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1900) 
Sec. 62-82. - Powers and duties. 
When functioning as the board of appeals, the city planning commission shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals, where it is alleged there is error in any order requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the chapter, and applications for placement of manufactured or mobile homes, upon which such board is required to pass under this chapter. 
(3)  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the chapter, as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the chapter will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship on a finding by the board of appeals that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography. 
b.  The application of the chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship. 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved. 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the chapter; provided, however, that no variance may be granted or a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by the chapter. 
In exercising the above powers, the board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1901) 
Sec. 62-83. - Standard for action. 
In any instance where the board of appeals is required to consider an exception or variance in the chapter or map, or placement of a manufactured or mobile home, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the board shall, among other things: 
(1)  Assure itself that the proposed change is consistent with the spirit, purpose and intent of the chapter and consider the effect upon the public interest of granting or denying the application. 
(2)  Determine that the proposed change will not substantially injure or detract from the use of neighboring property or from the general character of the neighborhood, and that the use of the property adjacent to the area included in the proposed change or plan is adequately safeguarded. 
(3)  Determine that the proposed change will serve the best interests of the city, the convenience of the community, where applicable, and the public welfare. 
(4)  Consider the unnecessary hardship which will or may be inflicted upon the applicant by denial of his application. 
(5)  Consider the presence or absence in the neighborhood of conditions or uses which are the same or similar in character to the condition or use for which the applicant seeks approval. 
(6)  Consider the effect of the proposed change upon the logical, efficient and economical extension of public services and facilities such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection and public schools, and assure adequate arrangements for sanitation in specific instances. 
(7)  Safeguard the development of highway frontage insofar as possible to limit the total number of access points and encourage the frontage of buildings on parallel marginal roads or on roads perpendicular to the highway. 
(8)  Consider the suitability of the proposed location of an industrial or commercial use with respect to probable effects upon highway traffic, and ensure adequate access arrangements in order to protect major highways from undue congestion and hazard. 
(9)  Ascertain the adequacy of sanitation and public safety provisions, where applicable, and require a certificate of adequacy of sewage and water facilities from the county department of health in any case required herein or deemed advisable. 
(10)  Impose such conditions, in addition to those required, as are necessary to assure that the general purpose and intent of this chapter is complied with, which conditions may include, but are not limited to, harmonious design of buildings, planting and its maintenance as a sight or sound screen, and the minimizing of noxious, offensive or hazardous elements. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1902) 
Sec. 62-84. - Rules and procedures. 
The board of appeals shall make rules as to the manner of filing appeals or applications for special exceptions or for a variance from the terms of this chapter. 
(1)  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals after the notice of appeal shall be filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(2)  Whenever a person shall take an appeal to the board of appeals, he shall obtain the appropriate form therefor from the building inspector. It shall be the duty of the said person to complete the appeal form in its entirety; which form is then to be submitted to the city, together with the appropriate fees. 
(3)  In addition, a list of names and addresses of the owner, if he or his residence is known, or the occupier of every lot in the same street within 500 feet of the lot or building in question and of every lot not on the same street within 150 feet of said lot or building, shall be submitted with the appeal form; provided, however, that failure to provide such list of names provided by this subsection shall not invalidate any action taken by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1903) 
Sec. 62-85. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chair and at such times as the board may determine. The chair, or in his absence the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1904) 
Sec. 62-86. - Advisory opinion. 
In the exercise of the powers vested in it by this chapter, the board of appeals may, in its discretion, refer to any other agency of the city, county or state for an advisory opinion on any matter properly before it with respect to which it believes that such advisory opinion would be helpful to it in reaching its own determination. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1905) 
Sec. 62-87. - Notice of hearings. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appeal in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(b)  The board of appeals shall give at least 15 days' notice of any required public hearing in the following manner: 
(1)  By publishing a notice thereof in one newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(2)  By mailing a notice to those persons identified as owners or occupiers under section 62-84 by the person seeking relief from the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1906) 
Sec. 62-88. - Expiration of special exceptions and variances. 
Unless otherwise specified by the city council, a special exception or variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit thereunder within six months from the date of authorization thereof. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1907) 
Sec. 62-89. - Fees. 
A charge or fee on file in the clerk's office shall be paid by each applicant upon the filing of an application with the board of appeals for a special exception or variance from the terms of this chapter. The charge or fee shall be paid in advance to the secretary of the city council and shall be used to defray the necessary expenses of the board of appeals. If the applicant desires a stenographic record of the proceedings before the board of appeals, he shall so indicate upon his application and shall forward therewith an additional fee on file in the clerk's office which shall be applied against the cost of such service, the balance being returned if the charge for stenographic record is less than the deposit and an additional billing being made if the charge is greater in amount. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1908) 
Sec. 62-90. - Actions required. 
All appeals, requests for special exemptions and variances shall first be referred to the board of appeals for action. If the board of appeals fails to take action within 30 days of the public hearing required under section 62-117, the matter shall be referred to the city council for final determination as if the board of appeals had recommended approval. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1909) 
Sec. 62-91. - Actions advisory. 
Any decision, recommendation or other action of the board of appeals shall be considered advisory in nature, and shall be referred to the city council for final determination within a reasonable time period. Actions of the board of appeals shall not be binding upon the city council, except that a favorable vote of two-thirds of all members of the city council authorized to vote thereon shall be required to override any action proposed by the board of appeals. However, the city council may by simple majority vote to impose any additional or more stringent safeguards or special conditions before granting any appeal, special exemption or variance, so long as such safeguards or special conditions are reasonable and designed to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1910) 
Secs. 62-92—62-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS AND ZONING CHANGES POLICIES, PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS 

Sec. 62-111. - Generally. 
The city council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance, the boundaries of the use districts or zones established on the comprehensive zoning map or the regulations set forth in this chapter. Any proposed amendment, supplement or change shall first be submitted to the planning commission for its recommendation. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2200) 
Sec. 62-112. - Amendments. 
This chapter, including the comprehensive zoning map, may be amended by the city council on its own motion, on petition of an owner of property or on recommendation of the planning commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the city council shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2201) 
Sec. 62-113. - Procedures for amendment. 
Any person or persons, other than the city council or planning commission, desiring to submit a petition requesting a change in zoning shall file such petition with a plat of the subject property attached thereto, together with a payment in the amount on file in the clerk's office to cover administrative and advertising costs, with the building inspector. Such petition shall be signed by the petitioner who must be the owner of the property and shall state the name, address and telephone number of the petitioner, the present zoning classification of the property; the proposed classification of the property; the reasons for requesting the proposed change in zoning; the amount of any gift or campaign contribution made by the petitioner, or by any person who has a financial interest in the petitioner if the petitioner is a partnership, corporation or other business entity, to the mayor, any member of the city council or planning commission during the three years immediately preceding the filing of such petition, and said petition shall be accompanied by such disclosure as is required by O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq., if any. When a petition is filed, the building inspector shall forthwith deliver copies of such petition to the members of the planning commission and the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2202) 
Sec. 62-114. - Public hearing notification. 
The building inspector shall then prepare and cause to be published at least once in the Glennville Advance, a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city and its official organ, a notice of the public hearings which will be held by the planning commission and city council, stating the time, place and purpose of such hearings, the location of the property and name of the owner thereof, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. The publication of said notice shall be published at least 15 days and no more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearings. Public hearings shall also be held by the planning commission on proposed amendments to this chapter initiated by the city council or by the planning commission, and notice of such hearings shall be published as hereinbefore provided for notices of hearings on petitions of owners for rezoning. Such notices shall state the time, place and purpose of such hearings and, if rezoning of property is proposed, shall also state the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2203) 
Sec. 62-115. - Sign requirements for public hearings. 
Upon the filing of a petition for a change in zoning, and not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing thereon before the planning commission, the building inspector shall, cause to be erected in a conspicuous location on the subject property a sign. The required sign shall be at least nine square feet (three feet × three feet) in size and shall contain a message composed of black letters three feet high upon a white background which shall read as follows: 
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE  ZONE CHANGE 

 

 
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE  ZONE VARIANCE 

 
____________  City of Glennville 
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE  ZONING SPECIAL EXCEPTION 

 
____________  City of Glennville 
All signs, whether erected by a petitioner or by the city, shall be located to provide adequate exposure to the public, and after the hearing before the planning commission, the sign shall be maintained on the subject property by the party responsible for its erection until the city council has taken final action on the proposed rezoning. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2204) 
Sec. 62-116. - Notification to property owners within 500 feet. 
When any rezoning proceeding is initiated, the building inspector shall notify all persons owning property within a radius of 500 feet of the subject property by first class United States mail or personal delivery of the time, place and purpose of the hearing before the planning commission; provided, however, that the failure of the building inspector, through oversight, omission or lack of information, to give such notice to such a property owner shall not invalidate any action or recommendation of the planning commission, or any zoning decision of the city council in such proceeding, it being the intention of this section to notify, insofar as reasonably possible, those persons substantially interested in the proposed change in zoning classification that a public hearing is pending. Depositing such notices in the United States mail in properly addressed envelopes with adequate postage affixed or personal delivery at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing of which notice is given shall be deemed full compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2205) 
Sec. 62-117. - Planning commission meeting procedures. 
(a)  The hearings before the planning commission shall be public hearings as aforesaid, and be conducted as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  At the commencement of the hearing, the presiding officer shall give a brief explanation of the matter under consideration and the issue or issues to be determined. Following such explanation, the petitioner and proponents of the petition seeking a change in zoning, or the proponents of any other proposed amendment to this chapter, as the case may be, shall be afforded the first opportunity to present their case and evidence to the planning commission. After this presentment, all parties in opposition shall be afforded an opportunity to present their opposition and evidence, and, after all parties have been so heard by the planning commission, the planning commission may, but shall not be required to permit one person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the proponents, and one person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the parties in opposition, limiting the time for the presentation of such summarizes to the extent the planning commission chair deems appropriate. After all parties have been heard and such summaries, if any, have been completed, the planning commission chair shall close the floor to open debate and further evidence, and once the floor is closed to open debate and further evidence, and deliberation has begun by the planning commission on the issue before it, no further evidence may be presented on arguments made either for or against the proposed rezoning or other amendments to this chapter being considered without the expressed consent of the planning commission. Thereafter, the planning commission shall begin deliberations and shall take into consideration all evidence properly before it and all pertinent standards and factors set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  When a decision has been reached the planning commission shall make its written report on the proposed change in zoning or other amendment to this chapter to the city council, reporting the vote of each member of the planning commission thereon. If such report is not made within 30 days after the public hearing, the petition for rezoning or other amendment to this chapter shall be deemed to have been recommended for approval. Such reports of the planning commission shall be filed with the secretary of the city council who shall, upon the date said report is received, post a copy thereof as a regular notice at the place for posting such notices in city hall and forward a copy thereof to the petitioner for rezoning, if any, at the address shown in the petition for such rezoning. A copy of said report shall also be delivered to the building inspector. Should a petitioner fail to comply with any requirements of this chapter pertaining to the petition prior to the time said public hearing is held, the petition shall for said reason be denied by the planning commission without inquiring into its merits. If the petitioner desires to further pursue the matter of rezoning the property in question, the petitioner must file a new petition requesting a change in the zoning of the property in question; pay an additional sum on file in the clerk's office to cover administrative and advertising costs; and comply with all requirements of this chapter pertaining to a petition for rezoning, whereupon the planning commission shall proceed to hear said petition on its merits. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2206) 
Sec. 62-118. - City council meeting procedures. 
The hearings before the city council shall be public hearings as aforesaid and all discussions and deliberations shall be conducted in open meeting provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prohibit the city council from going into executive session for the purpose of discussing legal questions arising due to the matter under consideration with the city attorney in an attorney-client relationship. At the commencement of the hearing, the presiding officer whether the mayor or the mayor pro tem, or someone designated by the presiding officer, shall give a brief explanation of the matter under consideration and the issue or issues to be determined. Following such explanation, the petitioner and proponents of the petition seeking a change in zoning, or the proponents of any other proposed amendment to this chapter, as the case may be, shall be afforded the first opportunity to present their case and evidence to the city council. After this presentment, all parties in opposition shall be afforded an opportunity to present their opposition and evidence, and, after all parties have been so heard by the city council, the city council may, but shall not be required to permit one person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the proponents, and one person to summarize the evidence and arguments of the parties in opposition, limiting the time for the presentation of such summarizes to the extent the presiding officer deems appropriate. After all parties have been heard and such summaries, if any, have been completed, the city council shall close the floor to open debate and further evidence, whereupon the city council shall consider the issue to be determined and the evidence and arguments presented to it during the hearing, and make its decision by open ballot. Once deliberation begins by the city council on the issue before it, no further evidence may be presented or arguments made either for or against the proposed rezoning or other amendments to this chapter being considered without the express consent of the city council. Since one of the functions of the planning commission is to consider and plan for the long-range development of the city, the city council shall give great weight to the recommendations of the planning commission. However, such recommendations have advisory effect only and the city council shall not be bound by such recommendations. If the decision of the city council results in a rezoning of property or any other amendment to the chapter, such amendment shall be adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2207) 
Sec. 62-119. - Standards and factors to be considered in making zoning decisions. 
The city council recognizes that the proper discharge of its zoning powers requires the consideration and balancing of the public interest in protecting and promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of property. To ensure a proper balancing of the aforesaid interests, the planning commission in considering amendments to the chapter and applications to rezone property for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council, and the planning commission in considering or making any zoning decision including, but not limited to, decisions concerning amendments to the chapter and application to rezone property, shall consider the following standards and factors: 
(1)  The existing land use pattern and existing uses and zoning of nearby property. 
(2)  Whether existing boundaries of use districts or zones are illogically drawn in relation to existing conditions affecting the property. 
(3)  Whether changed or changing conditions make the passage of the proposed zoning appropriate. 
(4)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the location of the subject property and the development of adjacent and nearby properties. 
(5)  The suitability of the subject property for this purpose of the zoning. 
(6)  Whether the request is a logical extension of use district or zone boundary which would improve the pattern of uses in the general area. 
(7)  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the vicinity of the property. 
(8)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
(9)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby properties. 
(10)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions and the extent to which any such diminution promotes the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. 
(11)  The population density pattern and the possible increase in the use of, or the overloading of public facilities including, but not limited to, water and sewer systems, and streets. 
(12)  The cost to the local government in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining water service, sewer service, streets and public safety measures. 
(13)  Whether the request requires a major change in existing levels of public service which cannot feasibly be financed by the local government. 
(14)  Accessibility of public transportation to the property. 
(15)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of any then existing land use plan. 
(16)  Whether the property is likely to be used for the use requested. 
(17)  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it is related to the surrounding area. 
(18)  Impact on the environment including, but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality, water quality and quantity. 
(19)  Whether there exists a substantial need for the restrictions imposed or contemplated upon the use of the property which affects the public health, morals, safety or welfare of the city. 
(20)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner, and the relative loss to the public, as compared to the benefit gained by the individual property owner. 
(21)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(22)  Any other factors relevant to the balancing of the public interest in protecting and promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to unrestricted use of property. 
The board of appeals shall also consider such of the foregoing standards and factors as may be relevant to consideration of any issue before it on appeal. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2208) 
Sec. 62-120. - Miscellaneous policies and procedures. 
(a)  Any attorney at law who intends to participate in any public hearing before the planning commission, the city council or the board of appeals as attorney for any person shall, prior to the hearing, provide the person who will preside at such hearing with a written statement setting forth the names of the clients who he will represent during the hearing and the reason each client is interested in the issue to be determined at the hearing. Thereafter, the clients of such attorney shall be bound by statements, stipulations and arguments made in their behalf by such attorney, and their oral participation in the hearing shall be limited to giving testimony when questioned by their attorney involved in the hearing, or by a member of the city council. 
(b)  During any public hearing held by the planning commission, the city council or the board of appeals under the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector may appear in his capacity and provide such information, and make such comments and observations concerning the matter under consideration as may be appropriate or relevant. 
(c)  It is recognized that it is incumbent upon the members of the planning commission, the mayor and other members of the city council and the board of appeals to remain impartial and consider every issue that comes before them impartially and without favor or affection to anyone. It is also recognized that it is imperative, in order that the planning commission, the city council and the board of appeals be free from suspicion of prejudice or partiality, that interested parties refrain from approaching any member thereof privately, and the only legitimate want for anyone to influence or persuade the planning commission, the city council or the board of appeals in making a decision on an issue under consideration is to present his opinions, arguments and evidence at the public hearings required to be held. Should any person interested, either directly or indirectly, in a decision to be made by one of the boards or the city council on any zoning matter pending before them or which may come before it at some later date, attempt to discuss the merits of the issue to be determined with any other board member, or the mayor or members of the city council, or otherwise communicate or attempt to communicate with any board member or member of the city council either directly, in an effort to influence such member's vote on the issue when it comes before the body of which he is a member for determination, such board member or member of the city council shall immediately apprise such person of the impropriety of his conduct and decline to discuss such issue with such person in any way. It shall be unlawful for such person to persist in the effort to discuss the issue or otherwise communicate with the board member or member of the city council concerning the same, and any person so persisting shall be punished as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2209) 
Sec. 62-121. - Citizens protest against amendment. 
In case of a protest against such amendment, change, modification or repeal, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of either the area or the lots included in such proposed changes or of those within 100 feet of all external boundaries of such changes, such amendment, change or modification shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of two-thirds of all members of city council authorized to vote thereon. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2210) 
Sec. 62-122. - Limits on consideration of amendments. 
Upon defeat of an application for a change in zoning, the city council may not consider the property in question for rezoning amendment until at least six months has elapsed. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2211) 
Secs. 62-123—62-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NON-CONFORMING USES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10. 

Sec. 62-141. - Land. 
Any land, the existing lawful use of which at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located shall have such use considered as a non-conforming use, which may continue on such land but shall be subject to all other pertinent regulations covering non-conforming uses. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2300) 
Sec. 62-142. - Buildings. 
Any lawful building or the lawful use of any building existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that does not conform in use, height, location, size or bulk, with the regulations of the district in which it is located shall be considered a non-conforming building or use in its present location, but shall subject to all other pertinent regulations covering non-conforming uses. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2301) 
Sec. 62-143. - Buildings under construction. 
A building for which a valid building permit has been issued and/or is actually under construction to the extent of completion of footings may be completed as a non-conforming use. Buildings not under actual construction at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be built in conformity with its requirements. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2302) 
Sec. 62-144. - Change of use. 
A non-conforming building or use shall be considered as such unless and until it complies with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Such use shall not be changed to a use designated for a district having less restrictive regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2303) 
Sec. 62-145. - Discontinued use. 
A non-conforming use, when discontinued, may be resumed at any time within one year from such discontinuance, but not thereafter. The resumption may be of the same class of use but shall not be resumed as a non-conforming use of lower class. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2304) 
Sec. 62-146. - Extension. 
Any lawful non-conforming use of a portion of a building of which a lawful non-conforming use is made may be extended upon the lot occupied by such building and held in single and separate ownership on the effective date of the ordinance and further, such lawful non-conforming use may be continued in any new building erected upon the lot or tract held in single and separate ownership on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and further, such lawful non-conforming use may be continued on adjoining lots as a variance provided, in all such cases, that any structure, alteration, extension or addition shall conform with all the height, area, width, yard and coverage requirements for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2305) 
Sec. 62-147. - Change or resumption of non-conforming uses. 
The board of appeals shall have discretion to determine, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, what resumption to a change of a non-conforming use is of the same class and use and is permissible. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2306) 
Sec. 62-148. - Building destroyed by fire, explosion, accident or calamity. 
A non-conforming building which has been damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, accident or calamity (as contrasted to deterioration due to time or neglect) may not be rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction except in conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2307) 
Sec. 62-149. - Building condemned. 
A non-conforming building which has been legally condemned shall not be rebuilt or used except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2308) 
Sec. 62-150. - Temporary non-conforming use. 
A temporary non-conforming use, which will benefit the public health or welfare or promote proper development of a district in conformity with the intent of this chapter, may be permitted for a period of not more than one month, on the approval of the board of appeals, but any such use to be permitted for a longer period shall require a public hearing thereon, after which a board of appeals certificate may be issued for a period not exceeding one year in any case. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2309) 
Sec. 62-151. - Non-conforming signs. 
Any sign, signboard, billboard or advertising device existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that does not conform in use, location, height or size with the regulations of the district in which it is located, shall be considered a non-conforming use and may continue in such use in its present location for a period of five years from the date of the passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but not after. The continuation of such non-conforming use after the expiration of five years shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 2310) 
Secs. 62-152—62-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-181. - Classes of districts. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into 12 districts which shall be designated as follows: 
R-1A single-family residential district - low density 
R-1B single-family residential district - low density 
R-1C single-family detached residential 
R-2 single-family and two-family residential district - medium density 
R-3 multifamily residential district - high density 
OR office residential district 
C-1 central business district 
C-2 commercial/office district 
C-3 highway oriented commercial district 
LI light industrial district 
AG agricultural district 
PUD planned unit development district 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 300; Res. No. 09-02, 2-3-2009) 
Sec. 62-182. - Zoning map. 
The location and boundaries of such districts shall be as shown on the "Zoning Map of the City of Glennville, Georgia" of file in the clerk's office. The official map and all the notations, references and other data thereon shall be as much a part of this section as if fully described herein. The official zoning map shall be hung in city hall and shall be available for inspection by the general public. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 301) 
Sec. 62-183. - District boundaries. 
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the centerlines of streets, lanes, watercourses, rights-of-way of power lines and other public utilities or such lines extended or lines parallel thereto. Where the boundaries of a single district are indicated as including directly opposite sides of a street, lane, lake or watercourse, or right-of-way of a power line of other public utility, for any portion of its length, the district so indicated shall be construed to apply to the entire bed of such street, lane, lake or watercourse, or right-of-way of such power line, railroad or other public utility, lying within such portion of its length. Where uncertainty exists as to the location of any said boundaries as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where a district boundary is indicated approximately following the centerline of a street, lane, lake or watercourse, or right-of-way of a power line or other public utility, such centerline shall be construed to be such boundary. 
(2)  Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot line or other property line, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundary. 
(3)  Where a district boundary divides a lot or runs through undivided property, the location of such boundary, unless otherwise specified by figures on the zoning map, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on said map. 
(4)  Where figures are shown on the zoning map between a street and a district boundary, these shall indicate that the district boundary runs parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated, unless otherwise specified. Where scaled distances do not agree within such figures, the figures shall control. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 302) 
Sec. 62-184. - Federal-owned and state-owned property. 
Whenever federal-owned or state-owned property is included in one or more zoning districts, it shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter only insofar as permitted by the constitution and laws of the United States of America and the state. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 303) 
Secs. 62-185—62-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1A LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-211. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
It is the intent of this division with respect to R-1A residential districts to establish reasonable standards of performance and selection of uses permitted therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits of single-family detached residential uses have through the community. In an R-1A residential district the following regulations of this district shall apply. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 400) 
Sec. 62-212. - Use regulations. 
A building in the R-1A district may be erected, altered, used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling units, excluding manufactured or mobile homes, provided that the housing standards of section 62-214 are met. 
(2)  Nursery, greenhouse, and non-commercial recreational use including tot lots, playgrounds and ball fields. 
(3)  Educational and philanthropic use, excluding correctional or penal institutions. 
(4)  Hospitals. 
(5)  Churches, provided that: 
a.  They are located on a major or collector street. 
b.  The buildings are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
c.  There is a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the side and rear property lines. 
(6)  Public utility facility if essential for the service to the zoning district in which it is proposed to be located, provided that: 
a.  The structures are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
b.  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
c.  There is a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide. 
(7)  A cemetery, provided that the parcel devoted to such purpose shall contain not less than ten acres. 
(8)  Municipal, county, state or federal use, excluding sanitary landfills and storage yards. 
(9)  Nursery schools, day nurseries and child care centers (not including dormitories); provided, however, that for each child cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet and shall be screened from any adjoining lot in any residential district. 
(10)  Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted use. 
(11)  Home occupations as defined herein and described in section 62-147, but including a beauty parlor or barber shop limited to only one chair. 
(12)  Church bulletin boards not exceeding 12 square feet in area. 
(13)  Agriculture, but not including the commercial raising of livestock or poultry. 
(14)  Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with article VI of this chapter. 
(15)  Temporary placement of a manufactured or mobile home, including a single-wide, when authorized as a special exception for a disaster-related hardship by the board of appeals and the city council in accordance with division 2, article II of this chapter, and provided that the following conditions are also met: 
a.  A special exception may be granted to allow temporary placement of a manufactured or mobile home in the event a natural disaster, such as fire, wind or flooding, does such damage to an existing home that it is rendered uninhabitable for a period of time. 
b.  The special exception would only be for the period of time to allow the property owner to restore the dwelling to a livable condition or make other arrangements. 
c.  In no event, may the period of time allowed for the special exception exceed three years, or restoration of the original dwelling, whichever comes first. 
d.  The manufactured or mobile home allowed as a temporary placement under the special exception shall be removed no later than three months after expiration of the special exception as determined above. 
e.  The manufactured or mobile home allowed as a temporary placement as a special exception may only be occupied by the property owner. 
f.  Mobility of the manufactured or mobile home shall be maintained. 
g.  This special exception shall not apply to new construction on an empty lot. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 401; Res. No. 11-15, 3-10-2011) 
Sec. 62-213. - Dimensional requirements. 
Regulations as to the area, yard, and height requirements of the R-1A district are outlined in Table 1 at the end of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 402) 
Sec. 62-214. - Housing standards. 
Dwelling units in the R-1A district shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  The structure shall be of such size so that each dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and a minimum of 40 feet in length. 
(2)  The roof shall have a minimum two to 12 pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate or built-up gravel materials. 
(3)  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap, or other materials of like appearance. 
(4)  The structure must be attached to a permanent foundation in accordance with the building codes of the city. 
(5)  The area beneath the structure shall be enclosed with a facing of brick, stucco, concrete, stone, metal, vinyl, wood, or like materials approved by the building inspector. 
(6)  Each exterior door must have compatible steps, porches or landings adjacent to the threshold, and these steps, porches or landings shall be constructed in accordance with the building codes of the city. 
(7)  The structure shall be connected with an approved water source, sewage disposal system, and electrical service as required, inspected, and approved by the city. 
(8)  The structure shall be oriented on the lot so that its front faces a street, and is similarly oriented as adjacent structures. 
(9)  In addition to the above standards, the structure must be of such like size, materials, and general appearance as to be compatible and harmonious with adjacent structures and the neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 403) 
Secs. 62-215—62-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-1B LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-241. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
It is the intent of this division with respect to R-1B residential districts to establish reasonable standards of performance and selection of uses permitted therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits which single-family detached residential uses have throughout the community. In an R-1B residential district the uses of this division shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 500) 
Sec. 62-242. - Use regulations. 
A building in the R-1B district may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1A residential district, subject to the housing standards of section 62-214. 
(2)  Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 501) 
Sec. 62-243. - Dimensional requirements. 
Regulations as to area, yard, and height requirements for the R-1B district are outlined in Table 1 at the end of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 502) 
DIVISION 3A. - R-1C LOW-MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-244. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
It is the intent of this division with respect to R-1C residential districts to establish reasonable standards of performance and selection of uses permitted therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits which single-family detached residential uses have throughout the community. In an R-1C residential district the uses of this division shall be permitted. 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1[C] residential district, subject to the housing standards of section 62-214. 
(2)  Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with article VI, of this chapter. 
(Res. No. 09-02, § 2-3-2009) 
Sec. 62-245. - Dimensional requirements. 
Regulations as to area, yard, and height requirements for R-1C district are outlined in Table 1 at the end of this article. 
(Res. No. 09-02, § 2-3-2009) 
Secs. 62-246—62-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-261. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
It is the intent of this division with respect to the R-2 residential districts to establish reasonable standards of performance and selection of uses permitted therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits which single-family and two-family residential uses have throughout the community. In an R-2 residential district, the uses of this division shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 600) 
Sec. 62-262. - Use regulations. 
A building in the R-2 district may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1B residential district, provided that the housing standards of section 62-264 are met. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling units, provided that the housing standards of section 62-264 are met. 
(3)  A manufactured home on an individual lot, provided that the housing standards of section 62-264 are met. 
(4)  Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 601) 
Sec. 62-263. - Dimensional requirements. 
Regulations as to area, yard, and height requirements for the R-2 district are outlined in Table 1 at the end of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 602) 
Sec. 62-264. - Housing standards. 
Dwelling units in the R-2 district shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  The structure shall be of such size so that each dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and a minimum of 40 feet in length. 
(2)  The roof shall have a minimum two to 12 pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate or built-up gravel materials. 
(3)  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap, or other materials of like appearance. 
(4)  The structure must be attached to a permanent foundation in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements and those of the building codes of the city. 
(5)  The structure must not have any attached means of transporting, such as axles, wheels, pulling tongues or hitches. 
(6)  The area beneath the structure shall be enclosed with a facing of brick, stucco, concrete, stone, metal, vinyl, wood or like materials approved by the building inspector. 
(7)  Each exterior door must have compatible steps, porches or landings adjacent to the threshold, and these steps, porches or landings shall be constructed in accordance with the building codes of the city. 
(8)  The structure shall be connected with an approved water source, sewage disposal system, and electrical service as required, inspected, and approved by the city. 
(9)  The structure shall be oriented on the lot so that its front faces a street and is similarly oriented as adjacent structures. 
(10)  In addition to the above standards, the structure must be of such like size, materials and general appearance as to be compatible and harmonious with adjacent structures and the neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 603) 
Secs. 62-265—62-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-3 HIGH DENSITY MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-291. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
It is the intent of this division with respect to R-3 residential districts to establish reasonable standards of performance and selection of permitted uses therein, in order to maintain and protect the desirable benefits which single-family, two-family and multifamily residential uses have throughout the community; and to ensure that proposed development will constitute a residential environment and sustained desirability and stability and not produce a volume of traffic in excess of the capacity for which access streets are designed. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 700) 
Sec. 62-292. - Use regulations. 
A building in the R-3 district may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for the following purposes, and no other, provided that the requirements of this section are met: 
(1)  Multifamily or apartment building or buildings which constitute a single operating or proprietary unit. 
(2)  Any use permitted in an R-2 district, subject to the housing standards of section 62-264. 
(3)  Mobile home parks pursuant to article IV of this chapter. 
(4)  Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
(5)  Governmental buildings, health clinics and hospital. 
(6)  Fraternal organizations and clubs not operated for profit, provided that: 
a.  They are located on a major or collector street. 
b.  The buildings are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
c.  There is a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the side and rear lot lines. 
(7)  Funeral parlors. 
(8)  Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 701) 
Sec. 62-293. - Dimensional requirements. 
Regulations as to area, yard, and height requirements of the R-3 district are outlined in Table 1 at the end of this article, except the following additional requirements shall apply to multifamily or apartment uses: 
(1)  Dwelling units per acre. There shall be no more than ten dwelling units per developable acre. 
(2)  Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each lot which shall be not less than 50 feet in depth. 
(3)  Side and rear yards. No building shall be located closer than 30 feet of a side or rear property line adjacent to a residential district, or within 25 feet of any property line. 
(4)  Distance between buildings. The distance, at the closest point, between any two buildings of a group of apartments shall not be less than ten feet. 
(5)  Paving. All areas provided for use by vehicles and all pedestrian walks shall be constructed in accordance with city specifications. All drivers and parking areas shall be curbed. 
(6)  Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from streets and highways to service the apartments without undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow. 
(7)  Utilities. No development shall be permitted unless public water supply and sanitary sewage is supplied. 
(8)  Plan. The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan and shall be designed as a unified architectural unit with appropriate landscaping. 
(9)  Recreation. The developer shall be encouraged to give consideration to the provision of community areas, laundry facilities, playground and tot lots and other services necessary for the comfort and convenience of apartment residents. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 702) 
Secs. 62-294—62-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - OR OFFICE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-311. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
The legislative intent of this OR district is to provide for a mixture of restricted type office and business development with existing residential development, to protect existing residences, and to provide for their orderly development. A primary purpose of this OR district is to provide a buffer and transition between purely business and purely residential uses. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 800) 
Sec. 62-312. - Use regulations. 
A building in the OR district may be erected, altered or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-3 district, excluding mobile home or manufactured housing parks, subject to the housing standards of section 62-264. 
(2)  Professional or business offices. 
(3)  Family day care homes. 
(4)  Agencies, studios, schools. 
(5)  Social or fraternal lodge or club. 
(6)  Financial institutions. 
(7)  Municipal, county, state or federal buildings. 
(8)  Public utility facilities. 
(9)  Restaurants, catering establishments, and bed and breakfast inns utilizing rehabilitated existing dwellings. 
(10)  Customary accessory uses and structures, when located on the same lot as the main structure and clearly incidental to the principal use, excluding open storage. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 801) 
Sec. 62-313. - Height, area, width and yard regulations. 
Minimum regulations for building heights, lot area, yards, building line and building coverage in the OR district shall be in conformity with the requirements of the adjoining residential zone, provided that in the case of two or more surrounding zones the lot area, yard size and setback distances of the least restrictive residential zone shall apply. Off-street parking shall be provided as required in article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 802) 
Secs. 62-314—62-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-331. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
The purpose of the C-1 central business district is to provide for the orderly development of a major business and commerce area of the city in accordance with the objectives, policies and proposals of the future land use plan of the city. The development of this C-1 district shall be directed as to the plans and redevelopment proposals heretofore shown in the future land use plan and studies which may subsequently follow. The logical and timely development of land for business purpose is herein a stated purpose of this C-1 district. The C-1 district proposes to permit a uniformity of design to ensure the orderly arrangement of buildings, land uses and parking areas, and all construction hereafter proposed for this area shall be related to this objective. The architectural and design arrangement of buildings are encouraged to conform to the general character and plans of the central business district. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 900) 
Sec. 62-332. - Use regulations. 
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied in the C-1 district for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Retail establishments for the sale of dry goods, variety and general merchandise, clothing, food, drugs, furnishings, or other household supplies, sale and repair of jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods or musical professional or scientific instruments. 
(2)  Business or professional office, studio, bank, savings and loan association, financial institution, municipal use excluding a dump. 
(3)  Office buildings. 
(4)  Restaurant, tea room, retail bakery, confectionery or ice cream shop, or other places serving food or beverages. 
(5)  Florist shop. 
(6)  Personal service shop, including tailor, barber, beauty salon, shoe repair, dressmaking or similar shop. 
(7)  Indoor theater or other place of indoor amusement or recreation. 
(8)  Newspaper publishing, job printing. 
(9)  Hotel or motel. 
(10)  Parking lot, not to include automobile junkyard. 
(11)  The following uses when authorized as a special exception: 
a.  Any use of the same general character as any of the uses hereinbefore specifically permitted without requirements of a special exception. 
b.  Laundry or dry cleaning establishments. 
(12)  Signs subject to the provisions of article VI of this chapter. 
(13)  Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of the foregoing permitted uses. 
(14)  Public utility structures. 
(15)  Churches. 
(16)  Wholesale and storage businesses excluding building materials yard. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 901) 
Sec. 62-333. - Dimensional requirements. 
Regulations as to height and yard requirements for the C-1 district are outlined in Table 1 at the end of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 902) 
Secs. 62-334—62-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - C-2 COMMERCIAL/OFFICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-351. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
The purpose of the C-2 district is to establish and preserve areas for those commercial facilities which were especially useful in close proximity to residential areas while minimizing the undesirable impact of such uses on the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1000) 
Sec. 62-352. - Use regulations. 
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot may be used or occupied in the C-2 district, for any of the following purposes and no other: 
(1)  Any use specifically permitted in a C-1 district. 
(2)  Funeral parlors. 
(3)  Veterinarian hospitals and kennels. 
(4)  Bus terminals. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1001) 
Sec. 62-353. - Dimensional requirements. 
Regulations as to area, yard, and height requirements for the C-2 district are outlined in Table 1 at the end of this article, except, on a side yard which abuts a residential district, the side yard abutting such district shall have a width of no less than that required in such adjoining district. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1002) 
Sec. 62-354. - Development requirements. 
(a)  Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from public roads serving the C-2 district without undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow. 
(b)  Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will protect the roadway and neighboring properties in the C-2 district from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. 
(c)  Parking: Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in the C-2 district in accordance with article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1003) 
Secs. 62-355—62-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - C-3 HIGHWAY ORIENTED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-371. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
The C-3 highway oriented commercial district is a district in which the principal use of land is for establishments offering accommodations, supplies or services to motorists, and for certain specialized uses such as retail outlets, extensive commercial amusements and service establishments which, although serving the entire community and its trading area, do not and should not be encouraged to locate in the retail commercial or non-retail commercial districts. The C-3 highway oriented commercial districts ordinarily will be located along roads designed in the major thoroughfare plan as major highways. For the C-3 district, the specific intent of this section is: 
(1)  To encourage the logical and timely development of land for purposes in accordance with the objectives, policies and proposals of the future land use plan, the location of the C-3 district shall be in accordance with the city plan. 
(2)  To encourage the construction of, and the continued use of land for commercial, service and amusement uses serving both local and long distance travelers. 
(3)  To provide for orderly development and concentration of such uses within the C-3 district as designated in the future land use plan. 
(4)  To provide appropriate space, and in particular, sufficient depth from the street, to satisfy the needs of modern commercial development where access is entirely dependent on the automobile. 
(5)  To encourage the development of the district with such uses and in such a manner as to minimize traffic hazards and interference from highway oriented businesses. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1100) 
Sec. 62-372. - Use regulations. 
In a C-3 highway oriented commercial district, a building or combination of buildings may be erected or used, and a lot area may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes, and no other: 
(1)  Services to traveling public: service stations, diners, restaurants, taverns, ice cream stands, motels, inns, souvenir shops. 
(2)  Commercial recreation: bowling alleys, skating rinks, theaters, amusement parks, golf driving ranges, drive-in theaters. 
(3)  Automotive and allied sales and services; service stations and repair shops, used car and truck sales, automotive parts and accessories, new car and truck sales, boat and marine sales, trailer and mobile home sales, heavy equipment and/or farm implement sales, bicycle shops. 
(4)  Miscellaneous sales: heating and plumbing shops, building material sales, monument sales, nurseries, greenhouses, garden stores, fruit and/or vegetable and/or produce structures, furniture and appliance stores, farm supply and feed stores. 
(5)  Accessory use customarily incidental to any of the above uses. 
(6)  Family day care home. 
(7)  Any use of the same general character as any of the above permitted uses, when authorized as a special exception by the board of appeals, provided that such use shall be permitted, subject to such reasonable restrictions as the board of appeals may determine, and further provided that no trade or business shall be permitted which is either noxious or hazardous. 
(8)  Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with article VI of this chapter. 
(9)  Newspaper and printing agencies. 
(10)  Radio stations and transmission towers. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1101) 
Sec. 62-373. - Area regulations. 
(a)  Minimum district area and depth from road. Not less than one acre and a depth of 50 feet as measured from the street line, shall be provided for every area to be classified as a C-3 district. One use shall be allowed for every 100 feet of road frontage as measured along the major highway only. 
(b)  Building area. No more than 30 percent of the lot area in the C-3 district shall be occupied by buildings. 
(c)  Building setback from street line. There shall be a minimum setback of 100 feet from the street right-of-way in the C-3 district. This distance may be reduced to 40 feet if no front of structure parking is contemplated; however, in any case a unified setback for the entire C-3 district is encouraged. 
(d)  Setback from district and property lines. There shall be a setback of 50 feet from any C-3 district line and 25 feet from any property line. 
(e)  Distance between buildings. The horizontal distance measured in feet, at the closest point between any two buildings in the C-3 district, shall not be less than the height of the taller building, measured in feet. 
(f)  Parking ratio. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for each lot or property in the C-3 district. No on-street parking will be permitted on any street abutting the C-3 district. Parking areas shall be so placed so as not to interfere with any service area and shall not be less than 20 feet from the street line or district boundary line. All pertinent sections of the off-street parking provisions of article V of this chapter shall be enforceable. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1102) 
Sec. 62-374. - Development requirements. 
The general plan for new C-3 highway oriented commercial districts shall include evidence and facts showing that it has considered and made provision for, and the development shall be executed in accordance with the following essential conditions: 
(1)  Generally. It shall consist of a harmonious selection of uses (see section 62-372) and grouping of buildings, service and parking areas, circulation and open spaces, planned and designed as an integrated unit (or to facilitate the ultimate creation of an integrated unit) in such a manner as to constitute a safe, efficient and convenient highway oriented commercial district. 
(2)  Unified architectural unit. The proposed development or lot shall be constructed in accordance with an overall plan and shall be designed as a unified architectural unit with appropriate landscaping. 
(3)  Loading and unloading areas. Adequate areas shall be provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles, service by refuse collection, fuel, fire and other vehicles, automobile accessways and pedestrian walks. All areas provided for use by vehicles and all pedestrian walks shall be constructed in accordance with state highway department specifications. Service areas shall be screened from view from any abutting roadway and from within the parking area. 
(4)  Ingress and egress. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from public highways serving the district without undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow. 
(5)  Access barrier. Each lot or center with its buildings, other structures, and parking and loading areas, shall be physically separated from each adjoining highway or street by a curb or other suitable barrier including a landscape buffer strip against unchanneled motor vehicle ingress or egress. Such a barrier shall be located at the edge of the street line unless suitable curbs and gutters are provided within the highway or street right-of-way. Except for the accessways permitted below, such barrier shall be continuous for the entire length of any lot line adjoining a street or highway. 
(6)  Accessways. All permanent points of vehicular access to and from the public streets shall be located not less than 200 feet from the intersection of any public street lines; except that access may be permitted to a minor or secondary street within not less than 100 feet of its intersection with the major highway. All accessways shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Width. The width of any accessway leading to or from a street or highway shall not exceed 36 feet nor be less than 15 feet in width at the right-of-way. The alignment of accessways and curb dimensions shall be determined through architectural and site approval. 
b.  Spacing. In C-3 districts no parts of any accessway shall be nearer than 20 feet to any other accessway on the same lot, nor shall any part of an accessway be nearer than ten feet to any side or rear property line at its intersection with a street line. Insofar as practicable, the use of common accessways by two or more permitted uses shall be encouraged in order to reduce the number on closeness of access points along highways. 
c.  Marginal access drives (or service streets). A 20-foot wide marginal access drive may be required to reduce the number of accessways and improve vehicular circulations within the C-3 district. This drive would be located adjacent to the landscaped buffer area and extended parallel to the street line of the major highway. Access to this facility from the parking areas of the commercial establishments shall be located to facilitate traffic movement between the major highway (or intersecting road), the marginal access drive, and the parking area. Prior to granting of approval of a development plan, the city shall ensure that adequate legal provisions are considered concerning the use, ownership and responsibility of the marginal access drives. 
(7)  Parking areas. Parking areas shall be located and designed to facilitate the interchange of vehicular movement between the major highway, the marginal access drive and the parking area as well as from one parking area to another provided the second lot is located on adjacent C-3 district zoned land, C-3 uses which do not require patron parking facilities in the normal sense (such as service stations, and drive-in theaters) are encouraged to locate at the extremities of the district to ensure the continuity of the parking facilities. 
(8)  On-street parking. No on-street parking is allowed on any public highway, road or street upon which a C-3 district abuts. 
(9)  Lighting. Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will protect the highway and neighboring properties from unreasonable direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. 
(10)  Screening. The C-3 district shall be permanently screened from adjoining and contiguous residential districts by a wall, fence, evergreen hedge and/or other suitable enclosure of minimum height five feet and maximum height seven feet, placed at least two feet inside the C-3 district property line. The area between such enclosure and the property line shall be landscaped to form a permanent screening area. The board of appeals may waive the requirement for a screening enclosure and/or screening area if equivalent screening is provided by existing parks, parkways, recreational areas, or by topography or other natural conditions. 
(11)  Water and sewer. No facility permitted in a C-3 district shall be erected or used that is not adequately served with both sanitary sewers and public water unless authorized as a special exception and upon submission of satisfactory evidence to the fact that sanitary sewers and public water supply are not feasible in the particular location in question. Such evidence may include, but not be limited to, a specific recommendation from the city engineer, local health officer, official representative of the state health department and/or sewer authority. 
(12)  No split district. For the purpose of calculating the minimum area, lot dimensions and yard requirements established by this section, a C-3 district cannot lie on two sides of a public street or alley. Any area designated as being a C-3 district and lying on both sides of a public street shall be deemed to be two C-3 districts, and all minimum requirements shall be met by buildings on each side of said public street as separate districts. 
(13)  Drainage. The development plan shall include provisions for handling surface water drainage compatible with the topography of the lot and surrounding development. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1103) 
Secs. 62-375—62-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 62-391. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
The legislative intent of the LI light industrial district is to establish and preserve areas for industrial and related uses of such a nature that they do not create serious problems of compatibility with other kinds of uses. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1200) 
Sec. 62-392. - Use regulations. 
The specific uses, permitted in this LI district, shall be the erection, construction, alternation or use of buildings for the following uses and no other: 
(1)  Any individual use not specifically excluded, which meets the provisions of this division. 
(2)  Agriculture. 
(3)  Agricultural equipment sale and repair, 
(4)  Agricultural sales, 
(5)  Baking establishments. 
(6)  Bottling and distributing plants. 
(7)  Wholesale and storage business, including material. 
(8)  Commercial use customarily associated with industrial district. 
(9)  Signs erected and maintained according to article VI of this chapter. 
(10)  Dwelling quarters for watchmen and caretakers employed on the premises shall be permitted in connection with any industrial establishments. 
(11)  The following uses shall not be permitted unless proof is shown that the use meets the performance standards identified in this division: 
Abattoir 
Acetylene gas manufacture and/or storage 
Acid manufacture (hydrochloric, nitric, picric, sulphuric, sulphaneous, carbolic) 
Ammonia, bleaching power or chlorine manufacture 
Ammunition manufacture and/or storage 
Arsenal 
Asphalt manufacture or refining 
Blast furnace 
Bone distillation 
Celluloid manufacture 
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture 
Coal distillation 
Coke ovens 
Creosote treatment or manufacture 
Dead animal and offal reduction 
Distillation of bones, coal, petroleum, refuse, grain or wood (except in the manufacture of gas) 
Distillation of tar 
Explosives, fireworks and gunpowder manufacture or storage 
Fat rendering 
Fertilizer manufacture 
Forge plant 
Hog farm 
Incineration, reduction, storage or dumping of slaughter-house refuse, rancid fats, garbage, dead animal or offal 
Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture 
Ore reduction 
Petroleum or kerosene refining, distillation or derivation of byproducts and/or storage 
Potash works 
Power forge (riveting, hammering, punching, chipping, drawing, rolling or tumbling of iron, steel, brass or copper except as a necessary incident of manufacture or which these processes form a minor part, and which are carried on without objectionable noise outside the plant) 
Rolling mill 
Steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill 
Stock yards 
Tar manufacture 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1201) 
Sec. 62-393. - Air quality control. 
(a)  No person owning, leasing or controlling the operation of any air contaminant sources in the LI district shall willfully, negligently or through failure to provide necessary precautions, cause, permit or allow emission from said air contamination source or sources of such quantities of air contamination as will cause, or tend to cause, by themselves or in conjunction with other air contaminants, a condition of air pollution. 
(b)  Release of air contaminant(s) including particulate matter, dust, fumes, gas, mist, smoke, vapor or any combination thereof in the LI district shall be governed by chapter 391-3-1, "Rules and Regulations for Air Quality Control," environmental protection division, state department of natural resources; however, in cases where the aforementioned regulations are in conflict with ordinances the regulations allowing the least emission of air contaminants to the atmosphere shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1202) 
Cross reference— Air quality, § 22-31 et seq. 
Sec. 62-394. - Control of dust and dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors and gases. 
(a)  No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to the health or vegetation or other forms of property in the LI district, or which can cause any excessive soiling at any point. 
(b)  No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney shall exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas at any point in the LI district. 
(c)  For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit and 50 percent excess air in the LI district. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1203) 
Sec. 62-395. - Control of noise. 
At no point in the LI district on the boundary of a residential or commercial district shall the sound pressure level of any operation exceed the described levels in the octave bands shown as follows for the districts indicated: 
SOUND LEVELS 

 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1204) 
Sec. 62-396. - Control of odors. 
There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in the LI district in such quantities as to be offensive at lot boundary lines. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system shall fail. There is established as a guide to determining such quantities of offensive odors Table 111 (Odor Thresholds) in chapter 5 "Air Pollution Abatement Manual," copyright 1951 by Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1205) 
Sec. 62-397. - Control of glare or heat. 
Any operation producing intense glare or heat in the LI district shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence in such manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point beyond the lot lines. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1206) 
Sec. 62-398. - Control of vibration. 
No vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling shall be perceptible without instruments at any point beyond the lot line of an LI district. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1207) 
Sec. 62-399. - Control of radioactivity or electrical disturbances. 
There shall be no activities which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity in the LI district. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation of any equipment located beyond the property of the creator of such disturbances. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1208) 
Sec. 62-400. - Outdoor storage and waste disposal. 
(a)  No flammable or explosive liquids, solid, or gases shall be stored in bulk in the LI district above the ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with energy devices, heating devices or appliances located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision. 
(b)  All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products and all fuel, and all raw materials and products stored outdoors in the LI district shall be enclosed by a fence adequate to conceal the facilities from any adjacent properties. 
(c)  No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in the LI district in such form or manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces. 
(d)  All material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects in the LI district shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1209) 
Sec. 62-401. - Electric, diesel, gas or other power. 
Every use requiring power in the LI district shall be so operated that the service lines, substation, etc., shall conform to the most acceptable safety requirements, shall be so constructed, installed, etc. to be an integral part of the architectural features of the plant, or if visible from abutting residential properties shall be concealed by coniferous planting. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1210) 
Sec. 62-402. - Industrial waste or sewage. 
No use in the LI district shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any treated or untreated sewage or industrial waste and disposal except as shall be provided by sanitary engineers or other qualified persons employed by the city at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1211) 
Sec. 62-403. - Provision and use of water. 
All water requirements for the LI district shall be stated in the application. The water supply and quality shall comply with the requirements established within chapter 270-5-15, "Rules and Regulations for Water Supply Quality" and chapter 391-3-6, "Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Contract," as published by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1212) 
Sec. 62-404. - Dimensional requirements. 
Regulations for the LI district as to area, yard and height requirements are outlined in Table 1 at the end of this article, except: 
(1)  Minimum front yard setback may be reduced to 20 feet if no front of structure-parking is contemplated. 
(2)  In no case shall any building or structure be erected closer than 100 feet to any residential district. 
(3)  The maximum height may be increased to 50 feet when approved by the board of appeals provided that for every foot of height in excess of 40 feet there shall be added to each yard requirement one foot. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1213) 
Secs. 62-405—62-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - AG AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-431. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
The purpose and intent of the AG agricultural district is to encourage the preservation of a broad range of agricultural pursuits and their accessory operations in the city while providing a climate to protect open space, watersheds, other natural areas and to permit a variety of activities which require non-urban locations but which do not operate to the detriment of adjoining lands devoted to rural, agricultural, or residential purposes. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1300) 
Sec. 62-432. - Use regulations. 
In an AG agricultural district, no building, structure or land and water use shall be permitted except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)  General farming activities including, but not limited to, agriculture, dairying, forestry, greenhouses, groves, horticulture, livestock raising, nurseries, pisciculture, poultry and egg production, mushroom raising and crop raising. 
(2)  Such accessory uses that are customary and incidental to principal agriculture use including, but not limited to: 
a.  Stands for the sale of products which are raised on the premises provided: 
1.  The stand not exceed 300 square feet of gross floor area; and 
2.  The stand and any parking area be located off any right-of-way. 
b.  Uses such as nut packing and grading plants, corrals, equipment storage sheds, forage or other drying facilities, syrup mills, and the like. 
But excluding the manufacture and retail sale of products. 
(3)  Single-family detached dwelling on a minimum lot area of five acres. 
(4)  Any accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any permitted residential use. 
(5)  Tenant dwellings consisting of one self-contained dwelling unit for each 25 acres in addition to the area required for the principal residence. 
(6)  Educational and philanthropic uses including correctional or penal institutions. 
(7)  Hospitals and convalescent homes. 
(8)  Public and private utility facilities. 
(9)  Cemeteries, provided that the parcel devoted to this shall not contain less than ten acres. 
(10)  Municipal, county, state or federal use, including sanitary landfills and storage yards. 
(11)  Churches and related places of worship. 
(12)  Nursery schools, day nurseries, and child care centers (not including dormitories), provided that for each child cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet and shall be screened from an adjoining lot. 
(13)  Animal hospitals and/or kennels. 
(14)  Public and/or private recreational facilities. 
(15)  Commercial sales and services enterprises providing products and services of an agricultural nature only such as feed and grain or seed and fertilizer stores and the like. 
(16)  Manufactured or mobile home residence on a minimum lot area of five acres, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Additions or adjuncts to the mobile home shall be considered as construction or alteration subject to the building codes of the city and the permitting and other requirements of this chapter. 
b.  Tie-down requirements as outlined under section 62-496 must be observed. 
(17)  Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1301) 
Sec. 62-433. - Dimensional requirements. 
(a)  Enumeration. The dimensional requirements of the AG district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area and dimensions: 
Area: five acres 
Width: 300 feet 
Depth: 300 feet 
Frontage: 300 feet 
(2)  Minimum yard setback requirements: 
Front: 100 feet 
Side: 50 feet 
Rear: 100 feet 
(3)  Maximum building height, total floor area and lot coverage: 
Maximum building height: 35 feet 
Maximum total floor area: 15 percent of total lot area 
Maximum total lot coverage: 20 percent of total lot area 
(b)  Exception. All agricultural processing and accessory uses in the AG district requiring a height greater than 35 feet shall be permitted, provided that the minimum yard setbacks above are met in addition to a three-foot setback for each foot above 35 feet. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1302) 
Secs. 62-434—62-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 62-451. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
The legislative intent of the PUD district is to permit great flexibility in the use and design of structures and land in situations where modification of specific provisions of this chapter will not be contrary to its intent and purpose or significantly inconsistent with the planning on which it is based and will not be harmful to the neighborhood in which they occur. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1400) 
Sec. 62-452. - Use regulations. 
The planning commission may authorize uses not permitted in the district where the lot is located, provided that such uses are desirable or convenient for the users of the lot as developed or the immediate neighborhood, and provided that such uses are planned to ensure that they will not materially alter the existing character of the neighborhood. However, uses not permitted in the district where the lot is located shall not be permitted to occupy more than ten percent of the lot area nor more than ten percent of the building floor area. Where the planning commission determines that the application is consistent with section 62-451 and with the other requirements hereof, it shall enter an order authorizing development and use in accordance with the site plan and description contained in the application, modified as the planning commission may require to carry out the intent and purpose of this division and containing any conditions or restrictions which the planning commission may consider necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The order shall recite the reasons and findings of fact upon which it is based. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1401) 
Sec. 62-453. - Lot regulations. 
The provisions of this division may be applied, upon application of the owner, to any lot exceeding ten acres in size. The owner shall file with the planning commission a proposed site plan and detailed description of the structures to be erected, the other facilities of the PUD project and the land uses involved. In addition, he shall furnish such other information as the planning commission may reasonably require. In acting upon the application, the planning commission may alter setback requirements, height limits, building size limits, off-street parking regulations, landscaping rules and density and intensity limits but only with approval from the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1402) 
Sec. 62-454. - Procedural requirements. 
The plan of the proposed PUD planned unit development with any required supplementary information shall be referred to the planning commission. The planning commission shall report its recommendation for approval or disapproval with reasons and any additional requirements to the zoning board of appeals for action. The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing in the same manner and give notice thereof as required upon application for a variance. If no report is submitted by the planning commission within 30 days of referral, the zoning board of appeals may take action without such a report. The PUD districts will be designated and numbered sequentially beginning with PUD-1. 
TABLE 1  DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT 

 
* See appropriate section for special exceptions. 
1 Accessory buildings in R-1A, R-1B, R-2, and R-3 districts shall not exceed 15 feet. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1403; Ord. No. 07-09, 6-5-2007; Res. No. 09-02, 2-3-2009) 
Secs. 62-455—62-490. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, ch. 46. 

Sec. 62-491. - Declaration of legislative intent. 
The legislative intent of this article is to provide areas for development of mobile or manufactured home parks designated and located to provide safe and sanitary living conditions for park occupants. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1500) 
Sec. 62-492. - Use regulations. 
Two or more mobile or manufactured homes shall be permitted in mobile or manufactured home parks. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1501) 
Sec. 62-493. - Area requirements. 
Each mobile home shall be located on a lot having an area of at least 4,000 square feet. The mobile home park shall not be less than three acres in size, and each mobile home lot shall have a minimum width and frontage of 40 feet on a street within a mobile home park. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1502) 
Sec. 62-494. - Yard requirements. 
No mobile home lots shall have direct access to a publicly dedicated street. All mobile home lots shall have access to an interior roadway which is no less than 30 feet in width. Such roadway shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. There shall be at least 20 feet between mobile homes. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1503) 
Sec. 62-495. - General requirements. 
(a)  Drainage. The mobile home park shall be located on a well drained and properly graded site. 
(b)  Utilities. All utility wires, pipes and tanks shall be underground, except that oil tanks used as part of a central distribution system may be above the ground if fully screened from view by a wood or masonry wall or fence. Each mobile home shall be provided with municipal water and sewerage. 
(c)  Refuse collection facilities. Each mobile home park shall provide refuse containers, compatible with mechanical lifting devices on city collection trucks, having a capacity of one cubic yard for each four mobile homes, so located that no mobile home is farther than 150 feet from such a container. All refuse containers shall be located on concrete stands, abutting and level with a driveway, which shall be surrounded except on the driveway side by a wood or masonry fence or wall at least six feet high. 
(d)  Street widths. The minimum street widths in mobile home parks shall be as follows: 

 
(e)  Open space. Each mobile home park shall contain one or more recreation areas totaling at least 100 square feet per mobile home, provided that no recreation area shall contain less than 2,500 square feet. No mobile home shall be more than 500 feet distant from a recreation area. Streets, driveways, parking areas and buildings are not to be included in calculating the size of recreation areas. 
(f)  Buffer strip. A greenbelt, at least 20 feet in width, shall be located along all boundaries of each mobile home park, except where it is crossed by driveways. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1504) 
Sec. 62-496. - Anchoring and support systems. 
(a)  Each mobile home shall have provisions for support and anchoring systems, which when properly designed and installed, will resist overturning and lateral movement of the mobile home. 
(b)  The provisions made for anchoring systems shall be based on the following design criteria for single-wide mobile homes: 
(1)  The minimum number of ties shall be in accordance with Table 2 at the end of this article. 
(2)  Ties shall be as evenly spaced as practicable along the length of the mobile home with not more than eight feet open-end spacing on each end. 
(3)  When continuous straps are provided as vertical ties, such ties shall be positioned at rafters and studs. Where a vertical tie and diagonal tie are located at the same place, both ties may be connected to a single ground anchor, provided that the anchor used is capable of carrying both loadings. 
(4)  Add-on sections of expandable mobile homes shall have provisions for vertical ties at the exposed ends. 
(c)  Double-wide mobile homes require only the diagonal ties specified in Table 2 at the end of this article. These shall be placed along the outer side walls. 
(d)  Protection shall be provided at sharp corners where the anchoring system requires the use of external cables or straps. Protection shall also be provided to minimize damage to roofing or siding by the cable or straps. 
(e)  Anchoring equipment shall be capable of resisting an allowable working load equal to or exceeding 3,150 pounds and shall be capable of withstanding a 50 percent overload (4,725 pounds total) without failure of either the anchoring equipment or the attachment point on the mobile home. 
(f)  Anchoring exposed to weathering shall have a resistance to weather deterioration at least equivalent to that provided by a coating of zinc on steel of not less than 0.30 ounces per square foot of surface coated. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall be followed except when the support and anchoring systems are designed by a registered professional engineer or architect, in which the circumstances described in subsections (b)(1) and (c) of this section are not applicable. 
Table 2  NUMBER OF TIES REQUIRED PER SIDE OF  SINGLE-WIDE AND DOUBLE-WIDE 1 MOBILE HOMES 

 
1 Double-wide mobile homes require only the diagonal tie specified in column 3, and these shall be placed along the outer sidewalls. 
2 Length of the mobile home length excluding the drawbar. 
3 Diagonal ties in this method shall deviate at least 40 degrees from a vertical direction. 
Source: Federal Register "Federal Mobile Homes-Construction and Safety Standards," Vol. 40, No. 123. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1505) 
ARTICLE IV-A. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 

Sec. 62-497. - State law references. 
The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A § 8-2-130 et seq.; registration and licensing of dealers, manufactures and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-37; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440; licenses for installers of manufactured homes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-164; compliance with manufactured homes installation instructions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-165; penalty for violation, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-166. 
(Res. No. 09-24, 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 62-498. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Mayor and council means City of Glennville Mayor and Council Members. 
Building official means one or more persons, officers or officials or his/her authorized representative, whom the city manager has appointed to administer and enforce, individually or collectively, the building code, subdivision, manufactured home, and zoning ordinances. 
City means City of Glennville. 
Code enforcement department means the department which includes the building and zoning departments. 
Manufactured housing means a factory built, single family structure, manufactured under the authority of 42 U.S.C. 5401, the National Manufactured Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, manufactured after June 15, 1976, is transportable in one or more sections is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed to be use as a place of human habitation, with or without, a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing transportation of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site, and which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
Modular home means a structure which is factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site in a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a deal of compliance with regulations of the Southern Building Code Congress International, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act or National Manufactured Housing Construction Act or the National Manufactured Housing Construction Act as amended. For purposes of this ordinance, a modular home shall be construed to be a single-family dwelling. 
Permit means a written permit of certification issued by the Code Enforcement Office permitting a manufactured home to be located on a parcel of land. 
Person means any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association, or corporation. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously utilized. 
(Res. No. 09-24, § 3-3-2009; Res. No. 11-11, 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 62-499. - Liability. 
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the municipal or state authority any liability or responsibility for damages to any person or property caused by any defect in any piping or appliance, or by installation thereof. Nor shall any city employee thereof be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder. 
(Res. No. 09-24, § 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 62-500. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  The building official shall in writing order all further work stopped when by reason of defective or illegal work, a provision or requirement of this chapter is being violated. The building official may require suspension of all work until the condition in violation has been corrected. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision, requirement, term or condition of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Any violation of any provisions, requirement, term or condition of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance; and any person aggrieved thereby may abate the same, or the same may be abated as a public nuisance. 
(Res. No. 09-24, § 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 62-501. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Exemption of units held for resale. If the owner of a manufactured home is using or intends to use such manufactured home for the purpose of resale only, then such manufactured home shall be exempt from obtaining a permit provided the manufactured home is placed on property permitted for manufactured home sales and service. 
(b)  Prerequisites to locating or occupying manufactured home. 
(1)  No person shall initially locate or relocate any manufactured home within the city limits of the city without having made such application and obtained such permit. 
(2)  Once the permit has been acquired, only a hauler registered with the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety can locate or relocate a manufactured home, modular home or mobile home within the city limits of city. 
(3)  No person shall occupy any manufactured home as a residence unless a permit has been issued as required by this section. 
(4)  Installers of manufactured homes are responsible for complying with all local requirements and assuring that a permit has been obtained prior to the installation of any manufactured home. 
(5)  Manufactured homes are not permitted to be used as storage buildings. Manufactured homes are not to be stored or abandoned on the property for more than 60 days, except in a location that is in the manufactured home sales businesses. 
(c)  Pre-owned manufactured homes. 
(1)  No manufactured home, modular home, mobile home or covered travel trailer shall be admitted to, or placed within the City of Glennville unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and is constructed in conformance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standard which came into effect on June 15, 1976 and bears an insignia issued by HUD certifying such conformance. Manufactured homes, modular homes or mobile homes that were constructed before July 1976 or do not meet or exceed the HUD construction and safety standards in effect at the time of construction may not be located within the City of Glennville as of the effective date of October 5, 2010. Those in place prior to this date may remain in their existing location until condemned, or declared to be out of compliance with any ordinance. 
(2)  Applications for pre-owned manufactured homes not located in the city limits of the city shall be given a copy of the required safety and aesthetic standards subsection 62.501(d) and provide to the code enforcement office photographs that show these standards have been met prior to issuing a permit. Once the manufactured home has been brought into the city, an inspection shall be made to ensure the manufactured home meets these standards at the installation inspection. If the manufactured home does not meet these standards according to the building inspector, power will not be approved until the standards have been met. 
(d)  Safety and aesthetic standards for pre-owned manufactured homes. 
(1)  Exterior walls. The exterior shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(2)  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects which might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portions of the structure. The roof shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
(3)  Windows, doors, and frames. Every window, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight. Every bedroom shall have at least on window than can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. All glazing materials shall be maintained free form cracks and holes. 
(4)  Plumbing facilities and fixtures. The owner of the occupied structure or a designated agent shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with the HUD Code. 
(5)  Sanitary facilities. Every residential unit shall contain a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in good working condition. 
(6)  Steps and landings. Every residential unit shall be equipped with a permanent landing (minimum four inches × four inches) and steps with hand rails at main entrance. 
(7)  Underpinning. Every residential unit must have underpinning installed within 30 days after electrical power has been approved. 
(8)  Anchoring and support systems. Anchoring and support systems shall be in accordance with section 62-496. 
(e)  Permit fee. A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees for the issuance of each permit will be paid by the owner of a manufactured home to the city when issued. 
(f)  Issuance of permit. 
(1)  All permits issued under the terms of this division shall indicate the date issued. Any permits issued hereunder shall be valid only for the specified manufactured home and for the location of such manufactured home as indicated on the permit. 
(2)  Nothing contained in this section shall be so construed as to relieve any person from the responsibility of obtaining a relocation permit each time such person moves or relocates a manufactured home. 
(3)  Permits shall be valid for 90 days. 
(Res. No. 09-24, § 3-3-2009; Res. No. 11-11, 10-5-2010) 
Sec. 62-502. - Inspections. 
(a)  The code enforcement office is charged with inspecting manufactured homes to ensure compliance with local and state guidelines. Inspections shall include by not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Safety and aesthetic inspection shall be performed on pre-owned manufactured homes. 
(2)  Site inspection shall be performed on each site prior to placement of the manufactured home. 
(3)  Installation inspection shall be performed before the power company has connected service to the home. 
(4)  Skirting inspection shall be performed 30 days after the installation inspection to assure that skirting, landings and handrails are in place. 
(b)  To the extent possible, inspections will be scheduled within 48 hours of notification that the manufactured home has been installed is ready for inspection excluding Saturday, Sunday and city-observed holidays. 
(c)  Upon completion of the installation inspection, and if the manufactured home is in compliance with this chapter, the code enforcement office shall notify the power company to connect the electrical service to the home. 
(d)  No manufactured home shall be occupied prior to the installation inspection being done and approved. 
(Res. No. 09-24, § 3-3-2009) 
Sec. 62-503. - Required decals. 
All manufactured homes, modular homes, or mobile homes located in the city, exclusive of those on a sales or manufacturer's lot, shall be affixed with a current decal issued by the Tattnall County Tax Commissioner. Said decal shall be visible from the nearest road. Decals provided for each calendar year shall expire on December 31 of that year. After January 1 of each year and upon payment of all taxes due on the manufactured home, a decal for the new year will be provided for attachment to the home. The following is an excerpt from Tattnall County Manufactured, Mobile Home and Modular Home Ordinance number 05-04-04 dated April 4, 2005. This ordinance is maintained and enforced by Tattnall County, Georgia. 
"Mobile home tax bills not paid by the due date of May 1st shall have a 10% penalty (Minimum $5.00) added beginning the day after the due date. Interest at a rate of 1% per month shall begin the day after the due date. Failure to purchase a decal by the due date is a misdemeanor and could result in a fine from $25.00 to $200.00. Failure to display a decal is a misdemeanor and could result in a fine of $25.00. Moving or transporting a mobile home without a current decal is a misdemeanor with a minimum fine of $200.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00." 
(Res. No. 09-24, § 3-3-2009) 
Secs. 62-504—62-530. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 54. 

Sec. 62-531. - Required off-street parking facilities. 
(a)  Except with respect to lots in district C-1, there shall be provided off-street parking for motor vehicles, and the minimum number of parking spaces to be provided shall be shown in the following list: 

 
(b)  For uses not specifically listed in subsection (a) of this section, the requirements listed as follows are applicable: 

 
(c)  Where calculation in accordance with the foregoing list results in requiring a fractional space, any fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half or more shall be a required space. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1700) 
Sec. 62-532. - Miscellaneous off-street parking rules. 
The following rules shall be observed: 
(1)  In districts R-1A, R-1B, R-2, and R-3 required off-street parking shall be provided on the lot on which is located the use to which the parking pertains. In other districts, such parking may be provided either on the same lot or on another lot in a residential district but only where the lot on which the parking spaces are located and the lot on which the use requiring them is located are not separated by more than 300 feet at their closest points, measured along a street. 
(2)  Where off-street parking is located on a lot other than the lot occupied by the use which required it, site plan approval for both lots is required. 
(3)  The use of any required parking space for the storage of any motor vehicle for sale, or for any other purpose other than the parking of motor vehicles, is prohibited. 
(4)  The following minimum design standards shall be observed in laying out off-street parking facilities: 

 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1701) 
Sec. 62-533. - Design requirements for commercial and industrial parking lots. 
All parking lots in commercial and industrial districts shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all of the following conditions: 
(1)  They shall not be used for the sale, repair or dismantling of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. 
(2)  They shall be properly graded for drainage; surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete, asphalt, oil or any dust-free surfacing and maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash or debris. 
(3)  They shall be provided with entrances and exits located to minimize traffic congestion and the effect of headlight glare. 
(4)  They shall be provided with wheel or bumper guards located and arranged that no part of any parked vehicles will extend beyond the boundaries of the parking lot. 
(5)  Lighting facilities shall be arranged that they neither unreasonably nor unnecessarily disturb occupants of adjacent residential properties nor interfere with traffic by either location or glare. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1702) 
Sec. 62-534. - Reduction of facilities. 
Off-street parking facilities existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not subsequently be reduced to an amount less than required hereunder for a similar new building or new use. Off-street parking facilities provided to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall not subsequently be reduced below the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1703) 
Sec. 62-535. - Required off-street loading spaces. 
Loading spaces required under this article shall be at least 50 feet long and 12 feet wide. Every lot used for commercial or industrial purposes and having a building or buildings with a total floor area of at least 10,000 square feet and every lot used for office or research purposes on which there is a building or buildings having a total floor area of at least 20,000 square feet, shall be provided with an off-street loading space. An additional off-street loading space shall be required for lots used for commercial or industrial purposes where the floor area of all buildings exceeds 100,000 square feet. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1704) 
Secs. 62-536—62-570. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— State department of transportation control of signs on public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq.; outdoor advertising generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-6-70 et seq. 

Sec. 62-571. - Conformance with article provisions required. 
No sign may be erected or maintained other than signs of the character, size, location and construction expressly authorized by this article relating to the erection, alteration or maintenance of signs and similar devices. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1600) 
Sec. 62-572. - Permitted signs. 
The following signs may be erected, and maintained subsequent to section 62-573: 
(1)  One sign for each family residing on the premises, indicating the name of the owner or occupant or pertaining to a permitted accessory use, provided that such sign is not larger than 200 square inches. 
(2)  Signs of schools, colleges, churches, hospitals, sanitariums or other institutions of a similar nature relating exclusively to the institutions erecting the same, may be erected and maintained; provided, however, that the side of any such sign is not in excess of 20 square feet and not more than two such signs are placed on a property held in single and separate ownership, unless such property fronts upon more than one street, in which event not more than two such signs may be erected on each frontage. No two signs shall be less than 25 feet apart. 
(3)  All temporary signs, provided that: 
a.  The size of any such sign is not in excess of 32 square feet; and 
b.  Not more than two such signs are placed upon any property held in single and separate ownership, unless such property fronts upon more than one street, in which event not more than two such signs may be erected on each frontage. No two signs shall be less than 25 feet apart. 
Such signs must be removed promptly upon completion of the work. 
(4)  Signs indicating the name of a particular organization or estate may be erected and maintained provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet, and any such sign shall be located on the same lot as the organization or estate but precluding signs designated within chapter 46, subdivisions. 
(5)  All businesses or commercial signs must be located on the same lot to which it refers, provided that the total sign area on any one street frontage of any property in single and separate ownership. 
(6)  Signs prohibiting or otherwise controlling trespassing upon particular premises, or indicating the private nature of a road, driveway or premises may be erected and maintained, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed two square feet. 
(7)  Signs which exist at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived becomes effective and are maintained in connection with a business then existing and lawfully conducted, may be maintained, repaired or replaced with signs similar in size and character, but may not be enlarged or otherwise substantially altered. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1601; Res. No. 17-03, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 62-573. - Provisions applicable to commercial, institutional or industrial development signs. 
The provisions of this article apply to all properties zoned and intended for commercial, institutional, and industrial use. 
(1)  Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs may consist of either stanchion signs or monument signs. 
a.  Stanchion signs. 
1.  Number. Stanchion signs shall be limited to one sign per parcel per street frontage. Where a parcel has frontage on more than one street, one stanchion sign shall be allowed on each frontage. 
2.  Height. Stanchion signs shall be erected to a height of no more than 18 feet in C-1 district, 25 feet in C-2 district, and 35 feet in C-3 and industrial districts. 
3.  Sign area. 
i.  Stanchion signs shall not exceed 64 square feet in sign area for signs fronting Highway US 301. 
ii.  Stanchion signs for all other areas shall not exceed 35 square feet in sign area. 
b.  Monument signs. Monument signs may be erected in lieu of stanchion signs at the option of the sign owner. Monument signs shall not exceed eight feet in height and 60 square feet in sign area. 
(2)  Building signs. 
a.  Building signs may include a combination of wall, canopy, projecting, and awning signs. Building signs shall be limited to two signs per street frontage per building. Window signs must be mounted inside of windows or made of a material suitable for outdoor use. 
b.  The aggregate sign area of all building signs shall be no more than ten percent of the total store frontage and not to exceed 160 square feet. 
c.  Wall signs shall not project more than six inches from the surface upon which they are mounted. 
d.  Awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall and shall not project beyond the building face by more than six feet. 
e.  Projecting signs shall be supported by overhead supports and shall leave a minimum of eight feet of clearance over any sidewalk or walkway. 
(3)  Drive-through windows. In addition to any other freestanding signs authorized, if such property contains a business premises where materials are delivered at a drive-through delivery point other than on the front side of the building, then one additional freestanding sign per delivery point shall be allowed to be located on the property. 
(4)  Downtown business district signs. All signs in the downtown business district must conform as per chapter 42, section 42-222, signage. The downtown business district is designated as Barnard Street between Veterans Boulevard and Tillman Streets. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1602; Res. No. 17-03, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 62-574. - General sign restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or maintain any sign, signal, or device which meets the following: 
(1)  Obsolete or left abandoned. 
(2)  Not structurally safe, clean, and in good repair. 
(3)  Signs attached to, drawn, or painted upon trees, rocks, or other natural features. 
(4)  Signs emitting or utilizing any manner of any sound. 
(5)  If illuminated, signs containing, including or illuminated by any flashing, intermittent, or moving lights except those contained in allowable changeable copy signs. 
(6)  If illuminated, the illumination is not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way and which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with the operation of any motor vehicle. 
(7)  If illuminated, the illumination is such that it interferes with the effectiveness of, or obscures, an official traffic sign, device, or signal. 
(8)  Signs located so as to obscure, or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic sign, signal or device. 
(9)  Signs located so as to obscure, or otherwise interfere with a motor vehicle operator's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic. 
(10)  Roof signs. 
(11)  Signs advertising an activity that is illegal under state or federal laws or regulations. 
(12)  Signs placed on any utility pole. 
(13)  Billboards located less than 2,500 feet from another billboard. 
(Ord. of 2-7-1997, § 1603; Res. No. 14-05, 9-3-2013; Res. No. 17-03, 9-13-2016) 
Sec. 62-575. - Changeable copy signs and electronic message center signs. 
(a)  Changeable copy signs and electronic message center signs are permitted as an integral part of any permanent signs which meet all other requirements of this article and further subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The changeable copy of electronic message center portion of the sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the overall display surface area of the sign. 
(2)  The total display area of any sign containing changeable copy panels shall not exceed the size limitation imposed elsewhere in this article. 
(3)  Changeable copy signs and electronic message center signs will only be allowed as part of the original construction and erection of a sign which complies with specifications required by this article or as part of a significant structural alteration to an existing sign. 
(4)  Electronic message center signs may only display static images lasting for at least eight seconds before transitioning to another static image. Transitions [from] one static image to the [next] may utilize frame effects so long animation and flashing is prohibited. 
(5)  All electronic message center signs shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology that automatically adjusts the sign's brightness in direct correlation with natural ambient light conditions. 
(6)  No electronic message center sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (Lux) meter at a preset distance depending on sign area, measured as follows: 

 
(Res. No. 14-05, 9-3-2013) 
Secs. 62-576—62-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NURSING HOMES, PERSONAL CARE HOMES AND DAY CARE HOMES/CENTERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. 11-15, adopted 3-10-2011, renamed Ch. 62, Art. VII from "Group Homes and Centers" to "Nursing Homes, Personal Care Homes and Day Care Homes/Centers. 

Sec. 62-601. - Categories; definitions. 
(a)  Day care center. Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution, or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, 19 or more children under 18 years of age, and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the State of Georgia department regulating the use of day care centers. 
(b)  Day care home, family. A private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care, fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, a maximum of six children to include any children considered normal residents of said dwelling, under 18 years of age. 
(c)  Day care home, group. Any place operated by any person(s), partnership, association or corporation wherein are received for pay for group care not less than seven nor more than 18 children under 18 years of age for less than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the State of Georgia department regulating the use of group day care homes. 
(d)  Nursing home means a structure designed or used for residential occupancy and providing limited medical or nursing care on the premises for occupants but not including a hospital or mental health center. 
(e)  Personal care home. A facility intended to provide living quarters and limited services for individuals who require social, medical, and/or mental health services in a community-based residential setting. Homes must be operated under a program authorized or directed by the State of Georgia department regulating personal care homes. 
(1)  Personal care home, family. A group home serving six or fewer residents (including any live-in or overnight staff), and located in a building that closely resembles a single-family dwelling. 
(2)  Personal care home, group. A group home serving fewer than 15 residents (including any live-in or overnight staff), and located in a building that may resemble a multifamily dwelling structure. 
(Res. No. 11-15, 3-10-2011) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 62-5. 
Sec. 62-602. - Zones allowed. 
(a)  Day care center; day care home, group; nursing homes; personal care home, family; personal care home, group. All of the above are allowed only in commercial zones 1, 2 and 3. 
(b)  Day care home, family may be allowed in all zones, provided the applicant has complied with section 62-603(a), (b) and (c). 
(Res. No. 11-15, 3-10-2011) 
Sec. 62-603. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Any applicant for a day care center, day care home, group; nursing home or personal care home shall submit an application to the planning commission for approval of that commission and the city council, setting forth a location and intended use of the site, names of all property owners and existing land uses within 300 feet, and any other material or information pertinent to the applicant's request which the planning commission may require. 
(b)  All applicants, including family day care home applicants, shall file a copy of their certificate of registration or state license with the city clerk prior to obtaining a business license, or otherwise beginning operation of their home or center. 
(c)  All day care center; day care home, family; day care home, group; nursing homes; personal care home, family and group homes must meet and comply with all state rules and regulations, according to the State Department of Human Resources, Chapters 290-2-1, 290-2-2, and 290-2-3 and all state and local fire codes. 
(d)  Before approving any application or request, the planning commission and city council shall be satisfied that the following standards have been met: 
(1)  The intended use shall create no unsafe conditions for picking up or dropping off children or adults. 
(2)  The outdoor area or play area shall be enclosed with a wall or fence at least four feet high. 
(3)  All day care homes, family shall have a minimum of 35 square feet per child of usable space within the building/home. 
(4)  The use does not adversely affect neighborhood public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, appearance, convenience, prosperity, value or general welfare. 
(Res. No. 11-15, 3-10-2011) 
Sec. 62-604. - Registration fees. 
Day care centers/homes/group and personal care homes shall cover registration expenses incurred as set by the mayor and council. 
(Res. No. 11-15, 3-10-2011) 
Secs. 62-605—62-650. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESIDENTIAL FENCING 

Sec. 62-651. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Dig permit means service required by the State of Georgia to identify and locate all underground utility and communications lines. 
Fence layout means a drawing that indicate the planed layout and dimensions of fencing in reference to property lines. 
Fence permit means a permit required and issued by the city for authorization of fencing. 
Ingress means the act of entering properties, buildings, etc. 
Property lines means the surveyed connecting corner points of a particular parcel of property. 
Utility easements means those easement areas granted by the property owners for placement of underground utilities. 
(Res. No. 17-30, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-652. - Dig permits. 
Dig permits are required prior to any construction that requires digging or excavation. This service is provided free of charge by the State of Georgia. 
(Res. No. 17-30, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-653. - Fence permits. 
Fencing permits are required prior to constructing of fencing. Fencing applications are available on-line or at city hall. 
(Res. No. 17-30, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-654. - Fencing materials. 
Fencing materials authorized are wood, chainlink, wrought iron or vinyl. Any other materials not specified must be approved by the code enforcement officer. Farm-type cattle fencing or barbwire fencing materials are not authorized in residential areas (these materials may be used for fencing for vegetable gardens located in rear of residential properties). 
(Res. No. 17-30, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-655. - Utility easements. 
Fencing construction in areas where utility easements are granted is not authorized that prohibits ingress as required for repairs of underground utilities. 
(Res. No. 17-30, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-656. - Corner lots. 
On a corner lot in any residential district, no fence, wall or obstruction to vision more than three feet in height shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersection street right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting points on side streets lines, each of which is 25 feet distant from the point of intersection. 
(Res. No. 17-30, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-657. - Ingress. 
All properties enclosed by fencing must provide means of ingress (gate, minimum 36 inches wide for chainlink fencing; 48 inches wide for wood fencing). 
(Res. No. 17-30, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-658. - Penalty for violation of article. 
If any person is convicted of violating this article, they shall be subject to penalties as outlined in section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 17-30, 6-6-2017) 
Secs. 62-659—62-700. - Reserved. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code which are included herein. This table contains some ordinances which precede the 1982 Code, but which were never included in the 1982 Code for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 