THE CODE OF THE CITY OF BROOKLET, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BROOKLET, GEORGIA 
____________ 
William R. Hendrix 
Mayor 
____________ 
Benjamin (Randy) Newman (Post 1) 
Russell D. Davis (Post 2) 
Richard J. (Jim) Stanoff (Post 3) 
Edwin R. Smith (Post 4) 
James D. Orr (Post 5) 
City Council 
____________ 
Hugh T. Hunter 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Lori Prosser 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Michael Buchan 
Chief of Police 
____________ 
Belle Gay 
Administrative Assistant to Mayor and Council 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BROOKLET, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joe A. Grooms 
Mayor 
____________ 
Benjamin (Randy) Newman (Post 1) 
Russell D. Davis (Post 2) 
Sylvia P. Prosser (Post 3) 
Annette B. Wilson (Post 4) 
William R. Hendrix (Post 5) 
City Council 
____________ 
Hugh T. Hunter 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Belle Gay 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Brooklet, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code and ordinances subsequently by the mayor and council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1986 Code and any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Ellen K. Torof, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Belle Gay, City Clerk, and Mr. Hugh T. Hunter, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Brooklet, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Brooklet, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Brooklet, Georgia. 2008. 
ORDINANCE NO. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF BROOKLET, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BROOKLET, GEORGIA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Brooklet, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 105, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 7, 2008, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. Provided however, the Ordinance regarding Personnel Policies found at the former section 11-11 through 11-18, attached hereto and made a part hereof are expressly saved from repeal. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of the Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty days, or compulsory labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public places for a period not exceeding 30 days, or any combination thereof. Except as otherwise provided, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense and with respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 7, 2008, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective. 
Passed and adopted by the city council this 19th day of December, 2008. 

ATTEST: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED 
AN ACT 
To provide a new charter for the City of Brooklet; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, vacancies, compensation, expenses, qualifications, prohibitions, conflicts of interest, and suspension and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for oaths, organization, meetings, quorum, voting, rules, and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for a mayor and mayor pro tempore and certain duties, powers, and other matters relative thereto; to provide for administrative affairs and responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, and other personnel and matters relating thereto; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof and other matters relative to those judges; to provide for the court's jurisdiction, powers, practices, and procedures; to provide for the right of certiorari; to provide for elections; to provide for taxation, licenses, and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for auditing, accounting, budgeting, and appropriations; to provide for city contracts and purchasing; to provide for the conveyance of property and interests therein; to provide for a sewerage and drainage system and all matters relative thereto; to provide for streets, sidewalks, public places, and railroads and all matters relative thereto; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for prior ordinances and rules, pending matters, and existing personnel; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for severability; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city Charter, being 2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 595), page 3989. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1-1. - Name and incorporation. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style Brooklet, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. The City of Brooklet, in the County of Bulloch, is hereby incorporated. 
Sec. 1-2. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of clerk of the city, or alternatively, in the office of the zoning administrator, and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map of the corporate limits/zoning classifications of the City of Brooklet, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries or changes in zoning classifications. All such modifications shall be noted on such map by the zoning administrator. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1-3. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
Sec. 1-4. - Examples of powers. 
The powers of the city shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at-large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  Building regulations. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [(O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.)] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary; to place for bid or otherwise privatize garbage, refuse, or trash collection as is deemed by the city as appropriate; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and parks in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property in fee simple or lesser interest within or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city, and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage or garbage disposal, gas works, electrical plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for (A) refusal and failure to pay the same or (B) violation of any ordinance; 
(21)  Nuisance. To declare what shall constitute a nuisance within the limits of the City of Brooklet and to pass such ordinances as are necessary to prevent the same, and by ordinance to empower the municipal court of the city to abate same and authorize the removal of such nuisance within the city limits of the City of Brooklet and to punish the person, persons, firms, or corporations causing or allowing such nuisance to exist, and to provide for the assessment of the expense of the removal of such nuisance against such person, persons, firms, or corporations causing or continuing the same and to provide for the collection of such expense by execution, the execution to have the same force and effect as city tax executions; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide comprehensive penalties for the violation of ordinances. Whenever any act within the city is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; to provide for the position of a zoning administrator; and to provide subdivision regulations and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for police and fire-fighting services; 
(25)  Public hazards: removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [(O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.)], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To privatize, grant franchises, or make contracts for public utilities and public services; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as they are not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending for a sewage disposal plant and sewage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials; and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and flammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, adult entertainment facilities, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; and 
(39)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases of granted powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(40)  Advertising and promotion of city. To advertise and promote the advantages of the city, and to encourage and promote tourism and positive exposure for the city, in such manner that shall be determined by the mayor and council of the city, including, but not limited to, the promotion and sponsorship of festivals and parades within the city, and to appropriate funds for such purposes. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2011(1), § 1) 
Sec. 1-5. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2-1. - City council creation; number; election. 
The municipal government of the City of Brooklet shall consist of the mayor and five members of council who are constituted a body corporate under the name and style of the "Mayor and City Council of Brooklet," and by such name they shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 2-2. - Terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  The mayor and members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as councilmember unless he or she has been a resident of the city for 12 months immediately preceding the election. Each member of the city council shall continue to reside within the city during his or her entire term of office and shall be registered and qualified to vote in the municipal elections of the city. 
(b)  Persons qualifying for the city council must have attained the age of 18 years. 
(c)  Persons qualifying for the position of mayor shall have attained the age of 18 years and must have been a resident of the City of Brooklet for at least 12 months. 
Sec. 2-3. - Designation of council posts. 
In order to provide for the staggered election of councilmembers, the council of the City of Brooklet is divided into five councilmember posts: 
The position presently occupied by Councilman Benjamin (Randy) Newman is designated Councilmember Post No. 1; the position presently occupied by Councilman Russell D. Davis is designated Councilmember Post No. 2; the position presently occupied by Councilman Richard J. (Jim) Stanoff is designated Councilmember Post No. 3; the position presently occupied by Councilman Edwin R. Smith is designated Councilmember Post No. 4; and the position presently occupied by Councilman James D. Orr is designated Councilmember Post No. 5. 
Elections shall be held in the year 2003 and thereafter every four years for the mayor and the councilmembers for Post Numbers 1 and 2, such individuals to be elected for four-year terms of office. Elections shall be held in the year 2005 and thereafter every four years for councilmembers for Post Numbers 3, 4, and 5, such individuals to be elected for four-year terms of office. 
Sec. 2-4. - Oath of office. 
The oath of office to be administered to newly elected members of council and the mayor shall be as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that: 
I will faithfully execute the office of ____________ of the City of Brooklet, and to the best of my ability support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Georgia, and the charter, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Brooklet; 
I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof; 
I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which by the laws of the State of Georgia I am prohibited from holding; 
I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia; 
I have been a resident of the City of Brooklet for the time required by the Constitution and the laws of this state; 
I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Brooklet and to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward or expectation thereof." 
Sec. 2-5. - Vacancy declared in office of mayor and council if officer changes residency to one outside city. 
The mayor and each member of the council of the city shall reside within the corporate limits of the city during their terms of office. If any officer changes residency to one outside of the city, such office shall be declared vacant. 
Sec. 2-6. - Filling vacancy in office of mayor or member of council. 
(a)  In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember caused by death, resignation, failure to elect, or removal of residency, or for any other reason, the city will hold an election to elect a mayor or councilmember for the unexpired term, in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [(O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1 et seq.)], the "Georgia Election Code." 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers elected as provided in this section shall take the oath of office prescribed in section 2-4 of this Charter before entering upon the duties of office. 
Sec. 2-7. - Mayor pro tempore; selection, function, duties. 
The city council shall, at its first meeting after election and qualification, elect one of its members as mayor pro tempore, who shall, in the absence or disqualification of the mayor, be the presiding officer of the city council, shall be allowed to vote on all questions, and shall, in the absence or disqualification of the mayor, exercise all the functions of the office of mayor and all the duties, powers, rights, and privileges conferred by this Charter upon the mayor. 
Sec. 2-8. - Meetings, minutes, proceedings of council. 
(a)  The city council shall be presided over at its meetings by the mayor or, in his or her absence, by the mayor pro tempore. Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the council. In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact the business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. The council shall cause to be kept in a well-bound book an accurate record of all its proceedings, bylaws, acts, orders, ordinances, and resolutions, which book shall be fully indexed and open to the public. The council shall hold monthly, semimonthly, or weekly sessions as it may determine, and the mayor, mayor pro tempore, or three members of council may cause to be held such other and additional meetings as emergencies may require, in the discretion of the mayor, mayor pro tempore, or councilmembers. 
(b)  The city council shall have power and authority to enact such ordinances from time to time as it may deem necessary to enforce the provisions of this Charter. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by a voice vote and shall be recorded in the official minutes, but any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of a majority of the members present shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
(c)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. Unless otherwise modified by ordinance, the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the mayor and city council shall be at 7:00 p.m. on the third Thursday of each month. Regular monthly meetings may be rescheduled in the event of conflicts or other circumstances. 
(d)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or a majority of members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required of the mayor and all councilmembers who are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember or mayor in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's or mayor's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(e)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made [as] fully as is reasonably possible 24 hours prior to such meetings. 
(f)  Executive sessions of the council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by code sections 50-14-2 and 50-14-3 of the O.C.G.A. [(O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 5-14-3)]. Where a meeting of the council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the city council taken in a public meeting. The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session, and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the clerk of the city council upon a majority vote of the council. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the council may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(g)  All councilmembers except the mayor shall have one vote each. As noted in section 2-10 of this Charter, the mayor shall have one vote if and only if there is a tie in the votes of the other councilmembers. 
(h)  The city council may have posted any measure, ordinance, or resolution at such place in the city as it may direct for the information of the public, or it may have the same published in any newspaper of the city, but failure to so post or publish any ordinance, measure, or resolution shall in no way operate to render the same void. 
Sec. 2-9. - Committees. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall create by ordinance such committees as they deem necessary to oversee the operation and provision of the city services and the administration of city government. The following committees shall be standing committees: police, fire, streets, water and sewer, finance, and solid waste disposal. Each committee shall consist of at least one councilmember. 
(b)  Each committee provided for in this section shall meet periodically with the department heads and other appropriate employees or appointees from the committee's assigned area of services. The committee shall recommend to the mayor and the city council such policies and measures deemed necessary and expedient for the health, safety, and welfare of the city or for the implementation or improvement of the provisions of city services. Each committee shall oversee and recommend the preparation of annual budgetary requests to the mayor and city council for the committee's assigned area of services. Each committee shall also review bids; review and recommend major construction and infrastructure repairs and improvements; hear policy appeals related to its department or assigned area of services; and perform such other duties as requested by the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 2-10. - Mayor. 
(a)  The mayor is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meetings. In order to fulfill this duty, the mayor must enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the city council. The mayor shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The mayor may not introduce motions or second a motion except that the mayor may introduce or second a motion to go into executive session. 
(b)  The mayor shall not vote, except in the case of a tie vote among the councilmembers, in which case the mayor may then vote to break the tie. The mayor shall propose appointments to various boards, authorities, councils, and committees, which appointments must be subsequently ratified by majority of the city council, all subject to statutes of general application. 
Sec. 2-11. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-12. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested; nepotism. 
(a)  Except as authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which he or she has been elected. 
(b)  Neither the mayor nor any member of the city council shall vote upon, sign, or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which he or she is personally interested. 
(c)  No immediate family member of the mayor or any councilmember shall be employed by the city during the term for which the mayor or councilmember has been elected. 
(d)  Neither the mayor of the city nor any member of the city council nor any other officer of the city shall be personally interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract made by the city or receive any profit or compensation for any purchase or sale of material or other article sold to the city or paid for out of the public revenues of the city. 
Sec. 2-13. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by this Charter or ordinance. 
Sec. 2-14. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Main motion. In order for the council to take any official action on any subject, a councilmember must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the mayor until another councilmember agrees to second the motion. This section does not require the councilmember seconding the motion to support the motion. A councilmember may withdraw a main motion that he or she has made at any time before the council has voted on the motion. 
(b)  Debate. After the main motion is recognized by the mayor, the council shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the mayor in a manner that is fair to all members of the council. During the course of the debate, councilmembers may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the council take a particular action on a motion, i.e., to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Motions to recess and adjourn require a second. 
(c)  Voting procedure. Voting on motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  If debate has been completed and no other councilmember wishes to speak, the mayor can call for the vote. If there are no objections, then the mayor can proceed with the vote; and 
(2)  If the mayor calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the council may move to vote immediately. If this motion is seconded and approved by a two-thirds vote, debate will stop. The mayor will then read the proposed motion to the council and ask for the votes of the councilmembers. 
Sec. 2-15. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  All ordinances passed which amend, repeal, or in any way affect the Code must be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion therein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed are omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima-facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that the Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of the Code may be made by amending such provision by specific reference to the section number of the Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Brooklet, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
"The Code of Ordinances, City of Brooklet, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows: …." 
The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article, or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(e)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, that an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in section 2-17 of this Charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2-16. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-17. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2-18. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of section 2-15 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2-19 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
Sec. 2-19. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as the "The Code of the City of Brooklet, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and may be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
Sec. 2-20. - General power and authority. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
Sec. 2-21. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 3-1. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesman for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(5)  Vote on matters before the city council in the event of a tie vote and not be counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember; 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual budget; 
(7)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish; 
(8)  Supervise the administration of the daily operations of the city and to see that all ordinances, resolutions, regulations, and policies of the council are faithfully executed and enforced; and 
(9)  Be the chief purchasing agent for the city and shall establish policies and procedures for procurement of all supplies and materials required by the city. The duty shall be fulfilled by either the mayor or his or her authorized designee. All purchase orders and contracts obligating the city for sums of less than $1,000.00 may be executed by the mayor. All contracts or purchase orders obligating the city for the expenditure of sums in excess of $1,000.00 shall, with the city council's approval, be executed by the mayor. 
(Ord. of 11-19-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 3-2. - Additional responsibilities. 
The city council shall have full authority to assign additional responsibilities to the mayor or to restrict or modify the responsibilities previously assigned. The modification in responsibilities as contemplated herein may be established by the city council by ordinance, written directives to the mayor, modification of job descriptions, or by such other method as may be determined by the city council consistent with good management practices. 
Sec. 3-3. - Officers and employees. 
The mayor and city council have the power to appoint and, when necessary, to suspend the clerk, treasurer, attorney, judge, engineer, auditor, and such other officers and employees as are deemed necessary for the efficient administration and operation of the city government and the provisions of services. The mayor and city council shall have the power to create departments, offices, and agencies necessary for the administration of government and provision of services and shall have the power to hire, appoint, suspend, or remove subordinates in such departments, agencies, or offices; provided, however, that such appointments, suspensions, or removals shall be subject to the personnel policies adopted by the mayor and the city council. The appointment, suspension, or removal of any department head, the city clerk, the city engineer, city attorney, and city auditor shall be made directly by the mayor and city council, which shall establish a procedure for recruitment and review of candidates for open positions. 
Sec. 3-4. - Oaths, bonds. 
All officers, employees, and appointees shall take an oath to perform faithfully the duties of their respective offices and give such bond and security as may be required and set by the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 3-5. - City clerk. 
The city clerk shall be ex officio treasurer of the city, and the duties of the office shall be prescribed by the mayor and city council. The clerk shall be required to give such bond and security as the city council may fix, conditioned upon faithful performance of the duties of treasurer of the city; provided, however, that the mayor and city council shall retain authority to separate by ordinance the office of clerk and treasurer, prescribe [the] duties of each office, fix salaries, and require bonds and security. 
Sec. 3-6. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the mayor and city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor and city council, be responsible for administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department or agency. 
(d)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive compensation as determined by council. 
Sec. 3-7. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor and city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The mayor and city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for the original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three members of the city council during a regular or called meeting of the city council. 
Sec. 3-8. - City attorney. 
The mayor and council may appoint a city attorney and shall provide for the payment of such attorney for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the citys affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by him or her by virtue of his or her position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3-9. - City clerk. 
At the first regular meeting in January of each year, the mayor and council shall elect a clerk, a city marshal, and such other officers as they shall deem necessary. The mayor and council shall set the fees and salaries, set the amount of bond to be given by each, and prescribe the duties of each. Such officers shall hold their offices for one year and until their successors are elected and qualified; provided, however, that any of said officers may be removed at any time by a majority vote of the mayor and council for neglect of duty, incapacity, or misconduct in office. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council records required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3-10. - City treasurer. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes by the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. The city treasurer may be the same person as the city clerk. 
Sec. 3-11. - City accountant. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. The mayor and council shall provide for payment of such accountant for services rendered to the city. The city accountant shall perform the duties as prescribed by mayor and council. 
Sec. 3-12. - Personnel policies: At-will employer. 
(a)  General policies. The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position, classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be elected; 
(4)  Such other personnel rules and regulations as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
(b)  At-will employer; advisory rules . 
(1)  At-will employer. The City of Brooklet is an at-will employer pursuant to Georgia law. Employees may be terminated at any time with or without cause or advance notice by a majority vote of a quorum of the city council. Any rules, regulations or ordinances adopted or practiced with respect to due process and discipline are advisory in nature, and shall not create contractual obligations on the part of employees or the city, and shall not alter the at-will employment relationship. 
(2)  Advisory provisions regarding due process and discipline. The city council is authorized to enact advisory provisions regarding procedures for discipline and due process with respect to city personnel, provided that such policies and procedures shall not alter the at-will employment relationship as provided for in this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-1, § 1, 1-18-2018) 
Sec. 3-13. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A. [(O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.)], the "Georgia Election Code." 
Sec. 3-14. - Regular elections; time of holding. 
On the first Tuesday of November of the odd-numbered years beginning 2003 and on that day thereafter, there shall be a municipal general election. The terms of office shall be in accord with this Charter and shall begin at the time of taking the oath of office which shall be at the January council meeting the year following the election. 
Sec. 3-15. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 3-16. - Election by plurality. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 3-17. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember by reason of death, resignation, or other cause shall become vacant, the mayor shall order an election to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term of such official. A minimum of ten days' notice, in writing, shall be given of such election by posting notices in at least three public places in the city. In the event that the office of mayor is vacated, the call for election shall be issued by the mayor pro tempore and, if there is no mayor pro tempore, the call shall be issued by the council. A person elected to fill such vacancy shall fill such vacancy for the unexpired term only. 
Sec. 3-18. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of three councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Bulloch County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Bulloch County, Georgia, following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Brooklet. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4-1. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Brooklet. 
Sec. 4-2. - Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Brooklet. 
(a)  The Municipal Court of the City of Brooklet shall be presided over by a judge appointed by the mayor and council. The judge may also be removed for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. Compensation of the judge shall be determined by the mayor and council. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the state bar of Georgia. 
(c)  Before assuming office, the judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his or her office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. 
Sec. 4-3. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as determined by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 4-4. - Jurisdiction, powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not be in excess of $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00, or imprisonment for 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi, at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served and executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(g)  The judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(h)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(i)  The municipal court judge of the city is authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of all persons charged, upon affidavits made before the judge, with having committed within the limits of the City of Brooklet offenses against any ordinance of the city or penal law of the state, and to take examination of such persons, and the same to discharge or commit to the county jail or let to bail, according to law, to answer such charge before the court having jurisdiction, all of which warrants shall be addressed to "the Chief of Police of Brooklet, Georgia, or any lawful policeman thereof, and to all and singular the sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, and constables of this state," and any one of the officers shall have the same authority to execute the warrants as the sheriffs of this state have to execute criminal warrants. 
Sec. 4-5. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Bulloch County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4-6. - Rules of court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL CLAIMS 

Sec. 5-1. - Execution to enforce collection. 
The city council shall have the authority to enforce by execution the collection of any debt or claim due or to become due to the city for taxes, license fees, rents, impounding fees, fines, and forfeitures, for laying sewers and mains, and for abating nuisances, and for any and all levies, assessments, debts, or demands, due or to become due to the city; the executions to be issued by the clerk of the city council, signed by him or her and the mayor of the city, directed to the Chief of Police of the City of Brooklet, and to all and singular the sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, and constables of this state, by any one of whom the same may be executed, and who are authorized to levy the same upon the property against which it is issued, or on the property of the owner against whom such execution shall issue, and the same to be sold as provided by code section 48-5-350, et seq., of the O.C.G.A. [(O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.)] in cases of sales for taxes. 
Sec. 5-2. - Payment of costs of execution, sale thereunder. 
The cost of the issuing and levying of any execution authorized by this Charter, and of the sale of any property under the same, shall be paid by the person against whom the execution shall issue, or paid out of the proceeds of the property levied on and sold; and the city council is authorized to prepare and establish a fee bill of the cost. 
Sec. 5-3. - Time, place, manner of execution; sale, delivery of title, possession. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to levy all executions in favor of the city, and, after advertising for 30 days as sheriffs' sales are advertised, he or she shall sell the property levied upon before the courthouse door in Bulloch County, on a regular sheriffs' sale day, within the legal hours of sheriffs' sales, at public outcry, to the highest bidder, and execute titles to purchaser, and shall have the same power to place the purchaser in possession as sheriffs of the state have; provided, however, that, should any of the property levied upon, as before provided, remain in the hands of the levying officer and be of a perishable nature or liable to deteriorate in value from keeping, or should there be an expense attending the keeping of the same (the same not being real estate), it may be sold as in such cases provided in code sections 9-13-163 and 9-13-164 of the O.C.G.A. [(O.C.G.A. § 9-13-163 and O.C.G.A. § 9-13-164)], except that the order to sell shall be obtained from the mayor. In the event the executions are levied by any person authorized to levy and execute the same and not by the chief of police, the time, place, and manner of sale shall be the same as if levied by the chief of police. 
Sec. 5-4. - Force, effect of execution. 
The executions issued shall have the same force and binding effect as other executions for taxes; in case they are for ad valorem taxes due the city, and in case they are for other taxes, licenses, fines, forfeitures, or demands due the city, shall have the same force and binding effect as executions issued from the superior courts and justice courts of this state, and may be levied by any officer to whom they are directed, upon any property in the state to execution. 
Sec. 5-5. - Defenses to executions. 
The same right and privilege shall belong to the person against which executions are issued to file an illegality to the execution, and to any person not a party to the execution to file a claim to the property levied on and give bond, as if the executions issued from a superior court of this state. The paper connected with claim or illegality cases shall be returned to that court, according to the amount involved, in Bulloch County, as provided by the Laws of Georgia, which has jurisdiction to try such claims and illegalities. In the event the real estate levied on lies in another county, then the paper connected with claim or illegality cases shall be returned to the court in the county where the land lies, according to the amount involved, which has jurisdiction to try similar claims and illegalities. 
Sec. 5-6. - Officer conducting execution sale to execute title, deliver possession. 
In all cases, the officer conducting a sale under the execution shall execute title to the property sold and put the purchaser in possession of the same. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6-1. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest in general obligations, and for any other public purposes as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6-2. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and a time period within which these taxes must be paid. 
Sec. 6-3. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 5-1 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6-4. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 5-1 of this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Sec. 6-5. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration of terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6-6. - Service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 5-1 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6-7. - Special assessments. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutter, sewer, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 5-1 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6-8. - Construction; other taxes. 
The city council shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6-9. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 5-1 through 5-6 of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fa.s; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6-10. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issues by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6-11. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6-12. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans no later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6-13. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6-14. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council may provide an ordinance on detailed procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6-15. - Budget. 
Prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor and council shall adopt a budget. The budget as finally adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by the beginning of the fiscal year, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Following adoption of the budget, the city council shall levy such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and the tax rates set shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6-16. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by resolution may amend the city's budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, to make any increase in appropriation, whether accomplished through a change in anticipated revenues in any fund or through a transfer of appropriations among departments. 
(Ord. No. 2018-2, § 1, 1-18-2018) 
Sec. 6-17. - Independent audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirement of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6-18. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; and 
(2)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings. 
Sec. 6-19. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon adoption of a resolution by the city council, by finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes, and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such swap is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE 

Sec. 7-1. - Authority for establishing, maintaining, and extending a sewerage and drainage system. 
The mayor and council for the city shall have authority to provide for the establishment and maintenance extension from time to time of a system of sewerage and drainage for the city and shall have power and authority to contract with any person or persons for the purchase of lands or premises to be used in connection therewith, whether inside or outside the city, and shall have the authority and power to condemn private property, either inside or outside the city, in the manner provided for by law for such purposes. The mayor and council shall have authority to purchase all machinery and plants, to make all contracts with the inhabitants of the city and with others for the furnishing of sewerage and drainage, and to do any and all things necessary for the establishment, operation, maintenance, and extension of the system of sewerage and drainage. 
Sec. 7-2. - Same—Bond election authorized. 
The mayor and council of the city shall have the authority and they are empowered to incur debt, including issuing general obligation or revenue bonds, for the purpose of establishing, improving, and extending a system of sewerage and drainage for the city, and for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of section 7-1 of this Charter, in the manner consistent with the constitution of the State of Georgia and the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 7-3. - Power, authority over pipes, sewers, private drains. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall have full power and authority over and absolute control of all pipes, sewers, and private drains for filthy waters or other substances or fluids in the city; and full power and authority to limit or prescribe their location and structure, use, and preservation and to make such regulations concerning them in all particulars as may seem best for the preservation of the health of the inhabitants of the city. They shall have full power and authority over and absolute control of all receptacles or drains for filthy water or other fluids or substances to be used within the corporate limits of the city. They shall have power and authority to condemn and destroy any individual sewage disposal facilities or systems or other receptacle or drain now in use or hereafter to be erected and put in use which do not conform to and are not of the kind prescribed for use by the mayor and council of the city or Bulloch County Health Department, or both, or which may be detrimental to the public health. 
(b)  The mayor and city council shall also have full power and authority to compel all property owners to connect individual sewage disposal facilities or systems or other receptacles or drains on the premises of such property owners with the sanitary sewer of the city, under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by them; and if such property owner shall fail to connect any individual sewage disposal facilities or system or other receptacles or drain within the time and in the manner prescribed, which time shall not be less than 30 days, the city authorities may cause such connection to be made and provide all necessary fixtures therefor and assess the cost of the same against the real estate of the property owner and against the real estate so improved, which is declared to be a first lien on the real estate, superior to all other liens except liens for taxes; and the chief of police or marshal shall levy the same on the real estate, and advertise and sell the same in the manner as sheriffs' sales under judgment and execution. The city may become the purchaser thereof if it chooses to offer the highest bid therefor at the sale. The officer making the sale is authorized to execute to the purchaser a deed to the property so sold, which shall pass the title thereto as fully and completely as sheriff's deeds under sales made by judgment and execution, and he or she shall proceed at once to dispossess the owner and put the purchaser in possession. The city authorities shall also have the right, power, and authority to arrest and prosecute the owner of such property and, if upon trial before the municipal court he or she is found guilty, to punish the owner for maintaining a nuisance. 
(c)  The city authorities or any agent of the city shall have the right, power, and authority to enter and go upon or into any private house or other building for the purpose of inspecting the individual sewage facilities or systems and other drains and pipes, to remove the same whenever condemned, and to insert the connections and fixtures necessary to connect the same with the sanitation sewers of the city, without being deemed a trespasser or becoming responsible in any way to the owner or any tenant in possession of the same. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC PLACES, AND RAILROADS 

Sec. 8-1. - General authority over streets, lanes, sideways, and public places. 
The mayor and city council shall have full and complete power and authority over all the streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, crossings, parks, and public lands of the city. They shall have full and complete power and authority to manage, control, direct, work, grade, drain, and pave the same, or cause the same to be done. They shall have full and complete power and authority to remove or cause to be removed any building, stall, booth, tent, steps, gate, fence, post, wire, pole, or other obstruction or nuisance thereon; and if the owner of the same shall fail or refuse to remove the same within such reasonable time as may be fixed by the mayor and city council, after notice thereto served upon such owner or his or her agent or tenant in charge, then the city authorities may remove the same at the owner's expense, and execution shall issue against the owner for the expenses thereof, which owner shall be also subject to punishment for maintaining a nuisance. They shall have full and complete power and authority to regulate, lay out, open, grade, drain, and control new streets, lanes, alleys, crossings, and sidewalks whenever, in their discretion, it may be necessary or proper to do so. They shall have full and complete power and authority to condemn property and exercise the right of eminent domain for the purpose of laying out and opening new streets, lanes, alleys, and sidewalks and for extending, widening, straightening, grading, draining, or in any manner whatever changing the grade, street lines, and sidewalks of the city. Whenever the mayor and city council shall desire to exercise the power and authority granted in this section, they may do so whenever the land to be condemned is in the hands of an owner, trustee, executor, administrator, guardian, agent, or other fiduciary in the manner provided by article IV, section II, paragraph V of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and code section 22-1-1 et seq., of the O.C.G.A. [(O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.)] 
Sec. 8-2. - Authority to vacate, close, or abandon streets or alleys to sell or alienate same. 
The mayor and city council are given the authority to vacate, close, or abandon certain streets or alleys, or both, when in the opinion of the mayor and city council the vacating, closing, or abandonment of the streets or alleys will not inconvenience the general public. The mayor and city council are given the right to sell or alienate streets or alleys or both and to give a title thereto as in other cases of sales of municipal property. 
Sec. 8-3. - Bonds for street improvements. 
The mayor and city council shall have power and authority to issue bonds for the purpose of street improvements including, but not limited to, paving in accordance with the constitution and general laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-1. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 9-2. - Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city, not inconsistent with this Charter, are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 9-3. - First election under this Charter. 
The first municipal election shall be the first Tuesday in November in 2003 at which time the appropriate council seats as designated in section 2-3 of this Charter shall be elected. All persons giving notice of candidacy for a city council seat shall designate the post being sought. Future elections to post positions shall be conducted as is provided by this Charter. 
Sec. 9-4. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this Charter takes effect as if the personnel and officers were appointed, hired, or elected under this Charter. 
Sec. 9-5. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 9-6. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are information only and are not to be considered as part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(d)  The term "gender" shall be interpreted as a word importing the masculine gender only and shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity under federal or state law. 
Sec. 9-7. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part hereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionally shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 9-8. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Brooklet in the County of Bulloch, approved August 21, 1906 (Ga. L. 1906, p. 548), is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are repealed. 
Sec. 9-9. - Effective date. 
This Charter shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Sec. 9-10. - General repealer. 
All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from 2004 Ga. Laws (Act No. 595), page 3989. 

 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Brooklet, Georgia," and may also be cited as "The Code of Ordinances, City of Brooklet, Georgia." 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Brooklet, Georgia. 
City council or council. The term "city council" or "council" means the city council of the city. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Brooklet, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Bulloch County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
Mayor and council. The term "mayor and council" means the mayor and council of the City of Brooklet Georgia. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural. Words used in the plural include the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officials, officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term the "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, courts, alleys, lanes, circles, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section or subsection, and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles thereof, or as any part thereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, state law references and other references that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendment to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ____________ of The Code of the City of Brooklet, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Brooklet, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered ____________ , that reads as follows:…." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or compulsory labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public places for a period not exceeding 30 days, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); authority to punish ordinance violations by requiring labor, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-10. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or approving any plat or subdivision. 
(10)  Any ordinance providing traffic regulations for specific areas, such as no parking zones, stop intersections, etc., not in conflict with this Code. 
(11)  Levying taxes that is not codified in this Code. 
(12)  Rezoning specific property or amending the zoning map or constituting or amending the land management code. 
(13)  Adopted for purposes which have been consummated. 
(14)  That is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Responsibility for records management. 
The clerk is responsible for records management activities on behalf of the city, and records shall be maintained in accordance with the approved retention schedule. 
(Code 1986, § 2-52; Ord. of 11-21-1983) 
State Law reference— Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 350-18-90 et seq. 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-21. - Time and place of special council meetings. 
Any meeting other than a regular meeting shall be called at such time and place as the mayor shall deem proper. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1) 
Chapter 3 - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 3-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 3-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the Charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This chapter shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the Charter. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 3-3. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined, does not include city employees, but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager or administrator, assistant to mayor and council for administration, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the City Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote for formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 3-4. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefor. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Brooklet nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a Municipal Court Judge of the City of Brooklet on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Brooklet. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 3-6. - Municipal court jurisdiction. 
The Municipal Court of the City of Brooklet shall hear and render decisions on all proper verified complaints filed under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 3-7. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the Clerk of the Municipal Court of the City of Brooklet. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the clerk of the municipal court shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this chapter. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the municipal court shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The municipal court is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the municipal court shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the municipal court is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the municipal court is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the municipal court shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)  The municipal court is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The municipal court is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)  Findings of the municipal court shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(h)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, ethics complaints against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, which are filed between the date of qualifying for municipal office and the date of certification of the election results will be held and will not be processed until the election results for that office have been certified. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 3-8. - Service of complaint. 
The municipal court clerk shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable, but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be made by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The municipal court shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the municipal court shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the municipal court, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right, but not the obligation, of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section of the chapter shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint, or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the municipal court or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 3-9. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the municipal court may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Bulloch County, Georgia, within 30 days after the decision of the municipal court. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2011, § 1) 
Sec. 3-10. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-17-2011, § 1) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 9-18-2014 repealed the former Art. II, §§ 6-19—6-27, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Chain grocery store means a grocery store with gross annual sales exceeding $1,000,000.00 in this city, or projected annual sales at the location for which the license is sought exceeding $1,000,000.00 based upon the operation of another of the chain's stores of similar size in a municipality with a population of 3,000 persons or less. 
Grocery store means a business offering for retail sale to the public grocery and related items excluding gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including but not limited to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). 
Licensee means the applicant for or holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, larger beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means, in the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Package licensee means the applicant for or holder of a license for the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine by the package. 
Person having an ownership interest in the licensee means any natural person, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company or corporation who possesses a 25 percent or greater ownership interest in the licensee. 
Person having the primary responsibility for managing the business means a person actively involved in the day-to-day operations of the business located on the licensed premises, and who has authority to prescribe any/or enforce rules, regulations and guidelines prescribed by the licensee for employees engaging in the sale or dispensing of malt beverages and/or wine on the licensed premises, and who has the final authority to discipline any employee violating such rules, regulations and guidelines. 
Person holding license on behalf of licensee means a natural person that holds the license on behalf of a sole proprietor, a corporation, a partnership, or other legal entity. 
Pouring licensee means the applicant for or holder of a license for the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine by the drink. 
Purchase of a going business means the sale by a licensee to a separate person or entity of substantially all of the stock in trade of the licensed business at the licensed premises, including the good will of the licensed business, and including the continued use of the trade name, together with an agreement by the seller not to use the same or confusingly similar trade name in the county. However, a purchase shall not be considered a "purchase of a going business" unless the business continues to be operated under the same trade name and at the same location for a period of 12 months subsequent to the date of purchase. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, air conditioned, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served on at least three days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and period of redecoration, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the service of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall provide at least 24 seats for its customers, and shall derive at least 50 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of food prepared on the premises. A restaurant must also have a valid food service establishment permit as required by O.C.G.A. § 26-2-371. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-20. - Purpose. 
This chapter has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community; to establish reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing, sale and dispensing of malt beverages and wine; to protect and preserve the schools; to give effect to existing land use; to protect those of minor age in the community; and to preserve reasonable and orderly land use, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values; to protect against the evils of concentration of outlets for malt beverages and wine in one person or entity or to prevent undesirable persons or entities from controlling the malt beverage and wine industry in the city; and to ensure that only grocery stores are licensed to sell malt beverages and wine in the city as an incidental part of their business and to protect against the evils of beer and wine stores per se; and to insure that only restaurants (and not bars per se) are authorized to sell malt beverages and/or wine by the drink. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-21. - License required. 
It shall be lawful to sell malt beverages and wine by the package, both wholesale and retail, in the city when granted a license by the city. Additionally, it shall be lawful to sell malt beverages and wine by the drink only when granted a license by the city. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-22. - Retail licensee qualifications—General requirements for individual licensees and persons holding a license on behalf of a sole proprietor, corporation or partnership. 
All individual licensees and/or persons holding a license on behalf of a sole proprietor, a corporation, a limited liability company, or a partnership shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  Such person shall be a resident of the United States. 
(2)  Such person shall be of good moral character and shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony, any violation of controlled substance laws, any violation of law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any violation of law prohibiting operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, in any state of the United States, within the five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(3)  Such person shall not have had his license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind revoked for cause by any city, county or state of the United States within five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(4)  Such person shall be the owner of the premises, or the holder of a valid written lease thereon, or the person with a primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the premises. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-23. - Same—Sole proprietor. 
The person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the licensed premises, or the owner of the premises, or the holder of a valid lease thereon shall be the holder of the license on behalf of a sole proprietorship, and shall possess all of the qualifications set forth in section 6-22. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-24. - Same—Corporation. 
The person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the licensed premises, or the holder of the majority of shares in the corporation shall be the holder of the license on behalf of the corporation, and shall possess all of the qualifications set forth in section 6-22. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-25. - Same—Liability company. 
The person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the licensed premises, or the holder of the majority interest in the limited liability company shall be the holder of the license on behalf of the limited liability company, and shall possess all of the qualifications set forth in section 6-22. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-26. - Same—Partnerships. 
The person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the licensed premises, or a general partner, shall be the holder of the license on behalf of the partnership, and shall possess all of the qualifications set forth in section 6-22. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-27. - Same—Persons having an ownership interest in licensee. 
Any person having an ownership interest in the licensee: 
(1)  Shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony, any violation of controlled substances laws, any violation of law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any violation of law prohibiting operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs in any state of the United States within the five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(2)  Shall not have had an ownership interest of 25 percent or greater in any entity which has had its license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind revoked for cause by any city, county or state of the United States within five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-28. - Grocery sales for package sales of beer and wine. 
(a)  General qualifications. A package licensee must prove that it is a grocery store. 
(b)  Making application. The licensee must prove that it has experienced grocery sales of at least $25,000.00 during the three months immediately preceding the filing of the application at the licensed premises or the premises to be licensed, excluding the sale of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including, but not limited, to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). Such proof shall be made by providing copies of sales tax returns and cancelled checks or other evidence of payment of sales tax together with an affidavit from the licensee or the person who shall hold the license on behalf of the licensee, swearing or affirming under oath that the premises have experienced grocery sales of at least $25,000.00 excluding the sale of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including, but not limited to, hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). The mayor and council may, in their discretion, require an audited financial statement by a certified public accountant providing for a detailed analysis of sales, categorizing sales of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes, and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including, but not limited to, hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). The cost of such audited financial statement shall be borne by the licensee. 
(c)  Checks and audits after issuance. The licensee is subject to subsequent checks and audits of its books and records after issuance of the license by the city clerk or his designated agent during regular business hours, the cost of which shall be borne by the city. The licensee shall maintain grocery sales of at least $50,000.00, excluding the sale of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including, but not limited to, hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items), during the 12-month period immediately preceding such licensee's application for renewal. If the license has been issued for a period of less than 12 months immediately preceding the filing of the application for renewal by such licensee, the $50,000.00 grocery sales requirement shall be prorated for the period in which such licensee has held a license immediately preceding the filing of the application for renewal. 
(d)  Checks and audits prior to renewal. The licensee must prove that it has experienced grocery sales of at least $50,000.00 for the period immediately preceding the filing of the application as set forth in subsection (c) above. Such proof shall be made by providing copies of sales tax returns and cancelled checks or other evidence of payment of sales tax together with an affidavit from the licensee or the person who holds the license on behalf of the licensee, swearing under oath that the premises have experienced grocery sales of at least $50,000.00 during the 12-month period immediately preceding such licensee's application for renewal (or in an amount prorated for the period in which such licensee has held a license immediately preceding the filing of the application for renewal) excluding the sale of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including, but not limited to, hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). The mayor and council may, in its discretion, and upon reasonable suspicion that the licensee has not experienced the requisite grocery sales, require an audited financial statement by a certified public accountant, providing for a detailed analysis of sales, categorizing gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes, and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including, but not limited to, hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items), the cost of which shall be borne by the licensee. 
(e)  Exceptions; chain grocery stores; purchase of going business. 
(1)  Chain grocery stores. The provision of this section requiring an applicant to prove grocery sales of at least $25,000.00 during the three months immediately preceding the filing of the application shall not, at the option of any chain grocery store applicant, apply to chain grocery stores. If such applicant's sales do not equal or exceed $250,000.00 for the first three months of operation subsequent to the issuance of a malt beverage and wine license, such license shall be revoked and the applicant must reapply for a malt beverage and wine license, which application shall not be considered for a period of three months subsequent to revocation under this section. The holder of the license on behalf of the applicant must furnish the city clerk sales tax returns and cancelled checks or other evidence of payment of sales tax for its first three months of operation within 30 days of the end of the three-month period in order to demonstrate requisite grocery sales, together with an affidavit from the person holding a license on behalf of the licensee that the subject chain grocery store has experienced grocery sales of at least $250,000.00 during the three-month period. Additionally, the mayor and council may, in its discretion, require an audited financial statement providing for a detailed analysis of sales, categorizing sales of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including, but not limited to, hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). The cost of such audited financial statement shall be borne by the licensee. 
(2)  Purchase of going business. The provision of this section requiring an applicant to prove grocery sales of at least $25,000.00 during the three months immediately preceding the filing of the application shall not, at the option of the purchaser of a going business holding a valid malt beverage and wine license in the city, apply to such applicant. If such applicant's sales do not equal or exceed $25,000.00 for the first three months of operation subsequent to the issuance of a malt beverage and wine license, such license shall be revoked and the applicant must reapply for a malt beverage and wine license, which application shall not be considered for a period of three months subsequent to revocation under this section. The holder of the license on behalf of the applicant must furnish the city clerk sales tax returns and cancelled checks or other evidence of payments of sales tax for its first three months of operation within 30 days of the end of the three-month period in order to demonstrate requisite grocery sales, together with an affidavit from the person holding a license on behalf of the licensee that the subject grocery store has experienced grocery sales of at least $25,000.00 during the three-month period. Additionally, the mayor and council may, in its discretion, require an audited financial statement providing for a detailed analysis of sales, categorizing sales of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including, but not limited to, hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). The cost of such audited financial statement shall be borne by the licensee. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-29. - Pouring license—Restaurant. 
(a)  General qualifications. A pouring licensee must prove that it is a restaurant. 
(b)  Making application. The licensee must prove that it meets or shall meet before commencing business the definition of a restaurant as provided in this article, except for the percentage of food sales, which must be subsequently proven as hereinafter set forth. 
(c)  Proof of food sales after issuance. 
(1)  Initial proof. The licensee must prove that at least 50 percent of its gross revenue for the first three months that it began selling beer and/or wine by the drink was derived from the sale of food prepared on the licensed premises, or such license shall be immediately revoked. Such proof as hereinafter set forth shall be provided to the city clerk within four months of the issuance of the license. Such proof shall be made by providing copies of sales tax returns, cancelled checks or other evidence of payment of sales tax; records of the licensee providing proof of the dollar amount from sales of alcoholic beverages; and an affidavit from the licensee or the person who holds the license on behalf of the licensee, swearing or affirming on oath that 50 percent of the gross revenue for the first three months that the licensee began selling alcoholic beverages by the drink was derived from the sale of food prepared on the licensed premises. The mayor and council may, in its discretion, require an audited financial statement by a certified public accountant providing for a detailed analysis of the sources of the gross revenue. The cost of such audited financial statement shall be borne by the licensee. 
(2)  Checks and audits after issuance. The licensee is subject to subsequent checks and audits of its books and records after issuance of the license by the city clerk or his designated agent during regular business hours, the cost of which shall be borne by the city. 
(3)  Checks and audits prior to renewal. The licensee must prove that at least 50 percent of its gross revenue is derived from food prepared on the licensed premises during the 12 months immediately preceding such licensee's application for renewal (or, if licensed for less than 12 months, for the period that the license has been held). The mayor and council may, in its discretion, and upon reasonable suspicion that the licensee has not met the requisite food sales for such period, require an audited financial statement by a certified public accountant, providing for a detailed analysis of the sources of gross revenue. The cost of such audited financial statement shall be borne by the licensee. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-30. - Sale of malt beverages and/or wine near churches, schools. 
No license to sell malt beverages and/or wine shall be granted at a location within 100 yards of any church, school building, school grounds, or college campus. As used in this article, the term "school building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). The 100-yard distance shall be measured along the most direct legal route of travel on the ground and from building to building at any part thereof. However, this provision shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to the adoption of this article, nor at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of malt beverages and/or wine was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding the application for a malt beverage and/or wine license. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-31. - Application forms; contents; change in information. 
(a)  All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made on forms furnished the applicant by the city clerk and shall indicate the following: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons having an ownership interest in the business applying for the license to sell malt beverages and wine, together with the interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other business license to sell malt beverages and wine in the city. 
(2)  The ownership of the land and building where the business is to be operated, together with a copy or copies of deeds to and leases thereon. 
(3)  Whether the licensee, the person who shall hold the license on behalf of the licensee, or any person having an ownership interest in the licensee, has been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony, any violation of controlled substances laws, any violation of law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any violation of law prohibiting operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, in any state of the United States within the five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(4)  Whether the licensee, the person who shall hold the license on behalf of the licensee or any person having an ownership interest in the licensee has had his license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind revoked for cause by any city, county or state of the United States within five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(5)  The name of the licensee (business entity), and the name, address and telephone number of the person who shall hold the license on behalf of the business entity, if different. 
(6)  A set of fingerprints of persons having an ownership interest in the licensee as well as the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee, which fingerprints must be processed through the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) and the National Crime Information Center (NCIC). 
(7)  Photographs of the person primarily responsible for managing the business, together with photographs of all persons with an ownership interest in the business. 
(8)  Any other information called for by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Any change in any relationship declared in the application with regard to persons interested in the ownership of the business, or in the relationship between the person holding the license on behalf of the business and the business itself, must be filed with the city manager when the change is made. The failure to so file within a period of 30 days after the change is made shall be grounds for cancellation, revocation or suspension of the license by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-32. - Application fee. 
A fee in the amount of $100.00 shall be paid to the city at the time of the filing of the application under this chapter to defray costs and expenses in connection with the filing of the application and the investigation of the applicant and of the facts contained in the application. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-33. - Public hearing on application. 
All applications for licenses shall be acted upon by the mayor and council after a public hearing and advertisement thereof in at least two consecutive issues of the legal organ of the city, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and the name of the person who shall hold the license on behalf of the applicant, if different, and if a partnership, the names of all general and limited partners, and if a corporation, the names of the person who shall have primary responsibility for managing the business together with the owners of at least 25 percent of the shares of stock in the corporation, together with the names of the officers and board of directors, and if a limited liability company, the names of the person who shall have primary responsibility for managing the business together with the owners of at least a 25 percent interest in the limited liability company, together with the names of any managers of the limited liability company, if any. The public hearing shall be held not sooner than ten days nor more than 20 days subsequent to the date of the first advertisement. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-34. - Issuance of license. 
When the malt beverage and wine license has been approved by the mayor and council and the applicant has deposited with the city manager the required application fee, occupation tax, and any other fees and taxes due the city by the applicant, a license will be issued. The license, when issued, shall authorize the licensee to conduct the retail sale of either malt beverages, wine, or both. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-35. - Term of license. 
Licenses issued under this chapter shall have a term beginning January 1 of the year of issuance and shall terminate on December 31 of the year of issuance at midnight. Licenses issued after January 1 of any given year shall be valid only through December 31 of that year at midnight, and such licensee shall pay all fees and taxes owed for a full year. In the event of revocation, surrender or suspension of the license prior to the expiration of the term, the holder shall not be entitled to receive any refund of any fees or taxes whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-36. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  Generally. Licenses under this chapter shall not be transferable except as provided in this section. 
(b)  Sole proprietor. If the holder of this license is the sole proprietor of the business, the license may, in the discretion of the mayor and council, be transferred to the personal representative of his estate or to a member of his immediate family upon the sole proprietor's death, provided that such person meets all of the qualifications set forth in section 6-23. If the holder of the license on behalf of the sole proprietor is not the owner of the business, but rather is the person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the premises, and such person ceases to be the person with such primary responsibility, the license may, in the discretion of the mayor and council, be transferred to a person meeting all qualifications set forth in section 6-23. 
(c)  Corporations/limited liability companies. If the holder of the license on behalf of a corporation or limited liability company ceases to be either the person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the premises, or the owner of a majority interest in the corporation or limited liability company, subsequent to the issuance of the license, the license may, in the discretion of the mayor and council, be transferred to a person meeting all qualifications set forth in section 6-24 or 6-25, as applicable. 
(d)  Partnerships. If the holder of the license on behalf of a partnership ceases to be either the person having primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the premises, or a general partner in the business, subsequent to the issuance of the license, the license may, in the discretion of the mayor and council, be transferred to a person meeting all qualifications set forth in section 6-26. 
(e)  Sale of licensed premises. No license shall be transferred from one business entity to another upon the sale or lease of the licensed premises. However, this subsection shall not apply to a sole proprietor or to a partnership which continues its business on the licensed premises in the form of a corporation or a limited liability company after issuance of the license provided that the sole proprietor remains the owner of 100 percent of the shares or interest in the corporation or limited liability company, or in the case of a partnership, as long as the same partners remain the owner of 100 percent of the shares or interests in the corporation or limited liability company. 
(f)  Transfer of location. The holder of a valid license issued as provided in this chapter may request that the license be transferred from the licensed premises to a new location of the licensed business, which license may be transferred upon approval by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-37. - Renewal of license. 
(a)  Renewal process. All holders of malt beverage and wine licenses in the city shall apply for renewal thereof for the subsequent year between November 1 of the current year for which the licensee holds a valid license and November 30 of such year. In the application for renewal, the licensee shall state any changes in information that was provided on the licensee's original application to the city for a malt beverage and wine license. A package licensee shall also provide proof of grocery sales as provided for in section 6-28(d). A pouring licensee shall also provide proof of sales of prepared foods on the licensed premises as provided for in section 6-29(c)(3). All malt beverage and wine licenses shall be deemed automatically renewed for the subsequent year unless the mayor and council deny renewal thereof on or before December 31 of the current year. There shall be no application fee for renewal of an existing license. If an application for renewal is not filed within the requisite time limits set forth herein, such licensee shall begin anew the application process as though the licensee had never held a malt beverage and wine license in the city. All applications for renewal shall be accompanied by payment of the malt beverage and wine license tax, which amount shall be returned if renewal of such license is denied. 
(b)  Change in information. In the event there has been a change in any person having an ownership interest in the licensee, or in the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee, a set of fingerprints of such new person or persons shall be made and processed through the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) and the National Crime Information Center (NCIC). If any such person has been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony, any violation of controlled substances laws, any violation of law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any violation of law prohibiting the operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, in any state of the United States within five years immediately preceding the filing of the application for renewal, said license shall not be renewed, or if already renewed, shall be revoked. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-38. - Allowing or permitting of breaking of packages or drinking of contents thereon on premises. 
No holder of a license which authorizes the sale of malt beverages and wine by the package in the city, nor any agents or employees of the licensee, shall knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the premises where sold or allow or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-39. - Prohibited acts on licensed premises. 
No holder of a license which authorizes the sale of malt beverages and wine at retail in the city by the package or by the drink, nor any agents or employees of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell malt beverages or wine to any person while this person is in an intoxicated condition; 
(2)  Permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace; 
(3)  Sell, offer for sale, or possess on the licensed premises any kind of alcoholic liquor, the sale of or possession of which is not authorized under this chapter; 
(4)  Sell malt beverages or wine, either retail or wholesale, within 100 yards of any church, school building, school grounds, or college campus; 
(5)  Sell malt beverages or wine to persons under the legal drinking age as provided by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-40. - Proper identification required for purchase. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or for any person to purchase malt beverages or wine in the city unless the purchaser exhibits proper identification to the seller. For purposes of this chapter, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes without being limited to a passport, military identification card or driver's license. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. This section applies to all persons regardless of age, and regardless of whether such person appears to be of proper and lawful age to purchase malt beverages or wine. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-41. - Wholesalers; license required for delivery. 
The wholesale dealers shall be licensed under this chapter before they can sell or deliver any malt beverage or wine to any establishment in the incorporated areas of the city, and if properly licensed, these sales or deliveries shall only be made to retailers properly licensed under this chapter for the operation of establishments in the city. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned, leased and operated by a wholesaler licensed under this chapter, and his license or permit shall at all times when deliveries are made in the city be in the conveyance making these deliveries and shall be subject all times to inspection by all duly authorized authorities of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-42. - Retailers; licensee required to accept delivery. 
The retail dealers in malt beverages and wine, licensed under this chapter shall not buy or accept deliveries of malt beverages or wine from wholesalers or other persons offering them for sale except from wholesalers duly authorized under this chapter. These retailers shall not accept delivery of malt beverages or wine except directly to the premises for which their license and permit was issued, and by no other means than a conveyance owned or leased and operated by a wholesaler licensed under this chapter to make deliveries of malt beverages and wine in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-43. - Beverages must be sold on licensed premises. 
All the malt beverages and wine in the possession of a licensed retailer shall be stored and sold in and upon the premises for which the license was issued, which premises shall be described in the application for licenses hereinabove referred to, and at no other place. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-44. - Hours of sale regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away or offer for sale, or in any other manner dispense or deliver any malt beverage or wine within the corporate limits of the city, except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell malt beverages and/or wines on Sunday or election day, or any other days as prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-45. - Public consumption. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any malt beverage or wine on or upon the public streets, roads or alleys in the city, or any public park or playground, or on any other public property. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-46. - Prohibition against consumption on premises. 
Persons obtaining retail licenses under this chapter for the sale of malt beverages and wine by the package shall not allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of their respective places of business. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-47. - Brown bagging prohibited. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own malt beverage or wine in any restaurant in the city, and malt beverages and wine consumed in a restaurant in the city shall only be that purchased from the licensee of the subject premises. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-48. - Signs, advertisements. 
(a)  No package licensee under this chapter shall advertise the sale of malt beverages or wine at his establishment by any sign or similar device on the exterior of the building in which his business is located, or at any other exterior location on the lot or parcel of land on which his building is located, or on any other tract or parcel of land within the city limits. Within the building in which his business is located, such licensee may display any number of signs, but such signs shall not be so prominently visible from outside such building as to defeat the intent of the restriction on exterior advertisement. 
(b)  Signs which are located in a window of a building in which a package licensee's business is located and all lighted signs, wherever located, shall be considered to be so prominently visible from outside such building as to defeat the intent of the restriction on exterior advertising. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-49. - Sale of malt beverages by package by quart or liter prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell by the package malt beverages in a quart or liter size container. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-50. - License tax. 
(a)  Package license. There shall be a license tax levied on all package licensees in the amount of $1,500.00 per year, which tax shall be due and payable upon the filing of the application for the license. 
(b)  Pouring license. 
(1)  Beer pouring license. There shall be a license tax levied on all pouring licensees for malt beverages only in the amount of $500.00 per year, which tax shall be due and payable upon the filing of the application for the license. 
(2)  Wine pouring license. There shall be a license tax levied on all pouring licensees for wine only in the amount of $500.00 per year, which tax shall be due and payable upon the filing of the application for the license. 
(3)  Combined beer and wine pouring license. There shall be a license tax levied on all pouring licensees for beer and wine in the amount of $1,000.00 per year, which tax shall be due and payable upon the filing of the application for the license. 
(c)  Refund of license tax. If the license is not issued in connection with such application, the license tax shall be returned. 
(d)  Renewal . In the case of renewal, the tax shall be due and payable at the time application is made for renewal, which amount shall be returned if renewal is denied by the mayor and council. 
(e)  Possible pro-ration. The Brooklet City Council in its discretion, may pro-rate the license tax for that portion of a year in which the issuance of a new or renewed license is delayed due to any mistake, error, or unreasonable delay caused by the city, the State of Georgia, or the United States, but only where such mistake, error, or unreasonable delay is not caused by or contributed to by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-51. - Excise tax—Imposed upon wholesale dealers. 
There is hereby imposed upon each licensed wholesale dealer an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages. 
a.  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
b.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(2)  Wine . For wine, a tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-52. - Same—Payment. 
Excise taxes imposed under section 6-51 shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the city by the wholesale dealer. Each wholesale dealer responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report itemizing for the previous calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages and wine, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. The wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the 20th day of the month following the calendar month in which the sales were made the tax imposed under this section. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-53. - Limitation on number of licenses per person. 
No natural person, partnership, limited partnership, corporation or other entity shall hold more than two malt beverage and wine licenses in the city; nor shall any such person or entity possess a 25 percent or greater ownership interest in more than two holders of malt beverage and wine licenses in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-54. - Suspension and revocation—For due cause. 
(a)  Grounds . The mayor and council may suspend, revoke or deny renewal of any malt beverage and wine license for due cause. For purposes of this section, due cause is defined as follows: 
(1)  The conviction of or a plea of nolo contendere by the licensee or any employee or agent of the licensee to a violation of any federal, state, county or municipal law or ordinance relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, which violation occurred on the licensed premises. 
(2)  The conviction of or a plea of nolo contendere by any person having an ownership interest in the business located on the licensed premises to any felony, any violation of controlled substances laws, any violation of law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any violation of law prohibiting operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs in any state of the United States subsequent to the date of issuance of the license. 
(3)  The revocation for cause by any city, county or state of the United States subsequent to the date of the issuance of the license with respect to an entity that a person having an ownership interest in the business located on the licensed premises as defined herein held an ownership interest in any such entity equaling or exceeding 25 percent. 
(4)  The failure to provide any change in information set forth in the licensee's original or renewal application for a malt beverage and wine license within 30 days after the date of such change. 
(b)  Hearing . 
(1)  Probable cause suspension by mayor. The mayor may, upon probable cause that there is due cause to suspend or revoke a malt beverage and/or wine license, immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter after an informal hearing with the licensee or the holder of the license on behalf of the licensee. Such hearing shall be held at City Hall between 8:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day, Sunday through Saturday, upon two hours' notice, verbal or written, by the Brooklet City Council or its designated agent, to the licensee or the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee. If the licensee or the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee fails to appear at the hearing, or if neither can be notified after reasonable effort, the mayor may, in his discretion, suspend any such license without hearing. 
(2)  Hearing before council. A hearing before the full mayor and council shall then be held after written notice to such licensee, or the person holding such license on behalf of the licensee, not sooner than two days nor later than ten days subsequent to the date of suspension. Such licensee shall be given at least two days' written notice of the hearing. All decisions of the mayor and council regarding the suspension or revocation of licenses issued under this chapter shall be in writing and the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee. 
(c)  Notice requirements where no probable cause suspension. In all other cases where there is no probable cause suspension by the Brooklet City Council, a licensee against whom suspension or revocation proceedings are being commenced shall be given at least five days' notice of a hearing before the mayor and council, which notice shall be in writing, and shall be mailed or delivered to such licensee or the person holding such license on behalf of the licensee. All decisions of the mayor and council regarding the suspension or revocation of licenses issued hereunder shall be in writing and the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-55. - Suspension and revocation—Violation of ordinance or state law. 
(a)  Grounds . The mayor and council may suspend, revoke or deny renewal of any malt beverage and wine license issued under this chapter for a violation by the licensee or by any employee or agent of the licensee of any provision of this article relating to the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, or any amendment thereto, or any provisions of Georgia law relating to the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, or any amendment thereto. It shall not be a prerequisite to proceeding under this provision that the licensee or any employee or agent of the licensee be convicted or plead nolo contendere in a court of law to such violation. 
(b)  Hearing . 
(1)  Probable cause suspension by mayor. The mayor, upon probable cause that there is due cause to suspend or revoke a malt beverage and/or wine license, immediately suspend any license issued under this article after an informal hearing with the licensee or the holder of the license on behalf of the licensee. Such hearing shall be held at City Hall between 8:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day, Sunday through Saturday, upon two hours' notice, verbal or written, by the mayor or his designated agent, to the licensee or the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee. If the licensee or the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee fails to appear at the hearing, or if neither can be notified after reasonable effort, the mayor may, in his discretion, suspend any such license without hearing. 
(2)  Hearing before council. A hearing before the full mayor and council shall then be held after written notice to such licensee, or the person holding such license on behalf of the licensee, not sooner than two days nor later than ten days subsequent to the date of suspension. Such licensee shall be given at least two days' written notice of the hearing. All decisions of the mayor and council regarding the suspension or revocation of licenses issued under this chapter shall be in writing and the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee. 
(c)  Notice requirements where no probable cause suspension. In all other cases where there is no probable cause suspension by the Brooklet City Council, a licensee against whom suspension or revocation proceedings are being commenced shall be given at least five days' notice of a hearing before the mayor and council, which notice shall be in writing, and shall be mailed or delivered to such licensee or the person holding such license on behalf of the licensee. All decisions of the mayor and council regarding the suspension or revocation of licenses issued hereunder shall be in writing and the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-56. - Conduct of hearings. 
At all hearings before the full council on the issue of suspension, revocation, or the denial of the renewal of any malt beverage and wine license, the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and to cross-examine opposing witnesses. Strict rules of evidence shall not apply. A majority vote of the council members present shall carry any motion. The mayor shall vote only in the case of a tie. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-57. - Revocation, suspension and other penalties revocation or suspension. 
If a majority of the council present at the hearing finds by a preponderance of the evidence that there are grounds for revoking or suspending a license, revocation of such license is authorized. The mayor and council, may, in its discretion, upon consideration of mitigating factors, impose a lesser penalty of suspension for a specific period of time. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-58. - Minimum suspensions for underaged sales. 
In cases of sales of malt beverages or wine to persons under the legal drinking age in violation of state law and/or this article, the following minimum suspension periods shall apply for any given calendar year: 
(1)  First violation (during current calendar year): 15 days 
(2)  Second violation (during current calendar year): 30 days 
(3)  Third violation (during current calendar year): Revocation 
In determining the number of violations under this subsection, only violations which occur on or after the date of the adoption of this article shall be considered. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the mayor and council from completely revoking a license or from suspending any license for a period of time in addition to the minimum periods set forth in this subsection. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 6-59. - Additional penalty. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Brooklet. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2014) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any living creature, domestic or wild. 
At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner, a member of his immediate family, or some other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or other holding device. 
Dangerous animal means any wild animal, reptile, or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle but is of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature, or other characteristics, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters; and any domestic mammal, reptile, or fowl which, because of its size, vicious propensity, or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. 
(Code 1986, § 3-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Fines. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50.00 for such violation. 
Sec. 10-3. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the city. 
(b)  The police officers of the city shall be authorized to use such force as is necessary to prevent any such dangerous or vicious animal from causing harm to any person or property. 
(Code 1986, § 3-2) 
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq. 
Sec. 10-4. - Strays. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats, or poultry to run at large in the city. If any such animal is found to be running at large in any public place in the city, it shall be impounded in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 3-3) 
Sec. 10-5. - Impoundment of animals running at large. 
(a)  Duty of police officer to seize and impound. It shall be the duty of every police officer to seize all animals running at large in violation of the provisions of this chapter and to impound such animals in the city pound or other suitable place until they can be turned over to the humane society. 
(b)  Notice to owner. Not later than two days after the impounding of any animal as provided subsection (a) of this section, the owner shall be notified or, if the owner of the animal is unknown, written notice shall be posted for five days on the front door of the city hall, which notice shall describe the animal and indicate the place and time of taking. 
(c)  Redemption of animals. The owner of any impounded animal may redeem the animal by paying all costs, charges, and penalties assessed, which have accrued through the time of redemption. Said amount shall be paid to the city clerk at which time the city clerk shall issue to the owner a certificate of release to be presented at the place of impoundment in order to obtain release of the animal. 
(d)  Disposition of unclaimed or infected animals. Upon the expiration of three days from the date of notice to the owner or five days from the posting of written notice, in the case of the owner being unknown, any animal impounded as herein provided which shall not have been redeemed either by the owner or by some other person, such animal may be disposed of in a humane manner. Any animal which appears to be suffering from rabies or affected with hydrophobia, mange, or any other infectious or dangerous disease shall not be released until the disease is arrested, or may be destroyed humanely as soon as such infection or disease is discovered. 
(Code 1986, § 3-4) 
Sec. 10-6. - Wild birds. 
(a)  City designated as bird sanctuary. The city hereby designates the entire area embraced within the corporate limits as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  Signs. Appropriate signs are hereby authorized to be erected, designating the city as a bird sanctuary. 
(c)  Trapping, etc., unlawful. It shall be unlawful to trap, shoot, hunt, or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any wild bird or fowl. This provision shall not apply to domesticated fowl such as chickens, guineas, etc. 
(d)  Destruction of nuisance species. If a species of bird is found to be a nuisance in the opinion of the mayor and council by a majority vote, then said species of bird may be destroyed in such manner as deemed advisable by the police department of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-17-1990, § 1) 
Secs. 10-7—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq. 

Sec. 10-31. - Running at large prohibited; removal of excreta. 
It shall be unlawful for dogs to run at large in the city, and all owners, harborers and keepers of dogs are hereby required to keep their dogs in a safe enclosure to prevent their running at large. If the dogs are carried outside the enclosure they must be kept on a leash and the leash must be held by an individual at all times. The owner of each dog or the person having control of a dog on public property or on private property in which the owner of the dog has no ownership interest, shall be responsible for the immediate removal of any and all excreta deposited by any such dog on public property or on private property in the City of Brooklet in which the owner of such dog has no ownership interest. 
(Code 1986, § 3-11; Ord. of 7-21-1980; Ord. of 6-21-2012, § 1) 
Sec. 10-32. - Annual rabies treatment. 
(a)  Required. All persons residing within the city limits who own, have, and keep dogs within said city limits, are hereby required to have said dogs treated annually for rabies by some licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  Failure of owner to have dog treated. If the owner of said dog, after ten days' notice to him, fails or refuses to have his dog so treated, the chief of police or any member of the police department of the city shall impound said dog in accordance with section 10-5 and said dog shall be treated for all intents and purposes as an animal running at large. 
(c)  Tag required. The owner of any dog shall be required to secure a tag from the veterinarian treating said dog. 
(Code 1986, § 3-13; Ord. of 7-21-1980) 
Sec. 10-33. - Number permitted to be kept; location. 
No person shall be permitted to keep, possess, or have more than three dogs within the city limits within 300 yards of the residence of said owner or within 300 yards of the residence of any other citizen in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 3-14) 
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES 

Sec. 14-1. - Scope of provisions. 
All property owners and visitors within the Brooklet City Cemetery and all lots hereafter to be sold therein are and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set out in this chapter, formulated and adopted by the mayor and council, and subject further to such other and additional rules and regulations, amendments or alterations as shall be adopted by the city for said Brooklet City Cemetery, the same being a public cemetery owned and operated by the city; and reference to such rules and regulations in instruments or deeds conveying the ownership of lots and the right of interment, shall have the same force and effect as if the same were set forth herein. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1) 
Sec. 14-2. - City responsible for care, upkeep and maintenance. 
All grading, landscape work and improvements of any kind, and care of lots shall be done, and all trees and shrubs moved, and herbage of any kind shall be planted, trimmed, cut or removed, only by the city. Permanent planting of grasses, shrubs, flowers, etc., shall be made by the city and further plantings may be permitted only at the discretion of the city council. The whole cemetery is to be landscaped. To keep it uniform, all plantings shall be under the control of the city, as shall removal of rubbish when necessary, raking and cutting of grass, trimming of trees and shrubbery and other care that the city may deem necessary. The ownership of rights of interment in lots shall not convey any right to do planting, etc., without express approval of the proper officials of the city. The city retains control and supervision of all lots that are sold in these sections, and retains the right to enter upon any lot and prohibit, modify or remove any structure, object, improvement, or adornment on such lot which may have been placed thereon, and which may be considered objectionable or injurious to the lot, adjoining lots, or the cemetery in general. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Reservation of rights. 
The right to enlarge, reduce, replan, or change the boundaries or grading of the cemetery, or of the section or sections, from time to time including the right to modify and change the locations of, or remove or regrade the roads, drives, and walks, or any part thereof, is hereby expressly reserved to the city. The right to lay, maintain, operate or alter, or change pipelines and gutters for sprinkling systems, drainage, etc., is also expressly reserved as well as the right to use said land for cemetery purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 4-3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Liability of city. 
The city shall not be liable for loss or damage to property or rights of lot owners arising from causes beyond its control, and especially from damage caused by the elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, mischief-makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots, or order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage is direct or collateral. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4) 
Sec. 14-5. - Order prerequisite to opening grave. 
An order or request in writing is required of the lot owner or authorized undertaker before a grave is to be opened, giving the name, age, sex, date of death, and location of grave in reference to the lot. 
(Code 1986, § 4-5) 
Sec. 14-6. - Use, maintenance of cemetery lots. 
(a)  Family memorial. Only one central or family memorial shall be allowed on a family lot, which said memorial shall be placed on the rear of the lot facing the drive, with a one-foot clearance between the base of the memorial and the back of the property line of said lot. 
(b)  Horizontal marker. In the event a horizontal marker is used on a grave, only material consisting of stone, marble or bronze may be used, and the top of the marker shall be placed flush with the finished grade of the surrounding ground. 
(c)  Depth of vault. The top of any vault or container holding a body shall be placed at least 12 inches below the finished grade of the surrounding ground. 
(d)  Borders, enclosures, walks. No coping, curbing, fencing, hedging, grave mounds, borders, or enclosures of any kind shall be allowed around any lot, and no walks of brick, cinder, tile, stone, marble, or terracotta, sand, cement, gravel, or wood shall be allowed on any lot. The city shall have the right to remove the same if so erected or placed. 
(e)  Liability of city. While the city shall exercise all possible care to protect raised lettering, carving or ornaments on any memorial or other structure on any lot, it shall not be liable for any damage or injury thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 4-6) 
Sec. 14-7. - Sale or resale of lots. 
Only four lots shall be sold to any one person, and in the event of the sale by an owner of either lot before the same is used, it must first be offered to the city at a price not exceeding the original purchase price plus two percent per annum as interest. If the city refuses to purchase said lot, it may be then sold to an individual on the same basis and at no greater price. 
(Code 1986, § 4-7) 
Sec. 14-8. - Removal of dead plants, flowers and containers. 
The city shall reserve the right to remove all cut flowers and potted plants that may be dead or otherwise objectionable, and will hold the same or the containers for two weeks after their removal, using ordinary care and diligence for their protection and safety, but shall assume no further liability in connection therewith. Owners shall call for the same within the specified time. 
(Code 1986, § 4-8) 
Sec. 14-9. - Injuring trees or plants; disturbing bird or animal life. 
All persons are prohibited from gathering flowers, either wild or cultivated, or breaking trees, shrubbery or plants or disturbing bird or other animal life in the cemetery. 
(Code 1986, § 4-9) 
Sec. 14-10. - Signs, notices, advertisements. 
No signs or notices or advertisements of any kind shall be allowed in the cemetery unless placed by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 4-10) 
Sec. 14-11. - Price of cemetery lots. 
The price of burial plots in the Brooklet City Cemetery shall be as established by the city council (see fee schedule). 
(Code 1986, § 4-11; Mo. of 6-20-1983) 
Chapter 18 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Emergency declared, mayor powers and area specified. 
(a)  The city will from time to time in the future, in all probability, have within its corporate limits fire, flood, civil disturbances and riots; therefore, it is deemed in the best interests of the city to exercise certain emergency police powers necessary to and incidental to the maintenance of the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  These powers shall be placed in the hands of the chief executive of the city. These powers should be exercised only in the event of an emergency as herein contemplated and shall only be exercised for such periods of time as the actual emergency exists. Said powers shall only be invoked after a declaration and proclamation of an emergency. 
(c)  In addition to any and all other powers, the mayor shall have further emergency powers as follows: 
(1)  The mayor shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.  That there is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. 
b.  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible. 
c.  Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists. 
d.  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
(2)  After declaration of such emergency the mayor, as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
a.  The power to use employees of the city, to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. 
b.  The power to close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists. 
c.  The power to impose emergency curfew regulations. 
d.  The power to close business establishments within the affected area. 
e.  The power to close any and all municipally owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public. 
f.  The power to do any and all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb, and property of the citizenry of the city. 
g.  No emergency power as set forth herein may be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by the mayor. However, upon declaration of the existence of a second or further emergency, the emergency powers as set forth herein may be exercised during such further emergency period or periods but never for more than 72 hours in one declared emergency period. 
h.  No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special, or called meeting of the city council. 
(3)  The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(Code 1986, § 2-55; Ord. of 10-2-1967) 
Chapter 22 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Office of health officer established. 
The office of health officer is established for the city through the county health department. 
(Code 1986, § 8-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Requirements and prohibitions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Human excreta means the bowel and kidney discharges of human beings. 
Sanitary privy means any privy which is so built, rebuilt, constructed or reconstructed as to conform with the plans and specifications promulgated and recommended by the department of public health of the state, which plans and specifications are hereinafter adopted in this section. 
Sanitary water closets means any flush toilet properly connected with the city sanitary sewerage system, or a septic tank of approved construction. 
Septic tank means an underground cavity with watertight walls into which flows the effluent of sanitary water closets and from which the effluent does not come to the surface of the ground. 
(b)  Sewerage systems. 
(1)  Every residence and building in which human beings reside, are employed or congregate, shall be required to have a sanitary method of human excreta disposal: namely, either a sanitary water closet connected with the city sewerage system, where sewer connection is available or in case such sewer connection is not available, either a septic tank of type approved by the department of public health of the state, or a sanitary privy. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to dispose of human excreta within the corporate limits of the city except in a sanitary water closet connected with the city sewerage system, where sewer connection is available; or in case such sewer connection is not available, in a septic tank of type approved by the department of public health of the state. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or leasing any premises in the city to permit the disposal of human excreta on any property leased or rented by such person or by his agent, except in a sanitary water closet connected with the city sewerage system where sewer connection is available, in a septic tank of the type approved by the department of public health of the state. 
(4)  No septic tank other than of type approved by the department of public health of the state shall be constructed or maintained within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1986, §§ 16-26, 16-27; Ord. of 11-12-1934) 
Secs. 22-3—22-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 22-20. - Use of public water system required for potable water. 
The City of Brooklet's public water system shall be used as the sole source of potable water within the city except as provided for in sections 22-21, 22-22 and 22-23. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 22-21. - Grandfathering of certain private wells. 
(a)  Private wells which are being used as a source of potable water at the time of the adoption of this article may continue to be utilized as a source of potable water provided that the owners thereof comply with the other provisions of this article, and any state and federal laws and regulations. Such wells are located at the following property addresses: 
(1)  Mallard Auto Parts, 16583 U.S. Highway 80, East, Brooklet, Georgia 30415 
(2)  William Stall, 18230 U.S. Highway 80 East, Brooklet, Georgia 30415 
(3)  Thomas Lanier, 18298 U.S. Highway 80 East, Brooklet, Georgia 30415 
(4)  George Benjamin Thompson, 18168 U.S. Highway 80 East, Brooklet, Georgia 30415 
(5)  Keith D. Brinson, 19077 U.S. Highway 80 East, Brooklet, Georgia 30415 
(6)  Jeramie & Nicole Lee, 719 Buie Road, Brooklet, Georgia 30415 
(b)  The owners of private wells set forth in subsection (a) hereof shall ensure that there is no interconnection between the private water supply and the city's public water system, and the means of preventing such interconnection shall be first approved by the city's building inspector, and shall be subject to an inspection under section 22-24. 
(c)  The owners of private wells set forth in subsection (a) hereof shall not levy any charge upon any person or entity for the use of any such well. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 22-22. - Private wells allowed where public system extension not economically feasible. 
The City of Brooklet shall not be required to extend the public water system where the city reasonably determines that the anticipated revenues resulting from such extension shall not be sufficient to recover the costs associated with such extension over the initial five-year period of service. Under such circumstances, the owner(s) of the property may apply for a private well permit for potable water purposes as provided for in section 22-23. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 22-23. - Permit for private well. 
No private well shall be constructed within the City of Brooklet unless a permit is obtained from the city. The following shall govern the application for approval of a permit to drill a private well: 
(1)  No private well shall be constructed to be used as a source of potable water unless the circumstances set forth in section 22-22 are applicable. Where such circumstances are applicable, any permit issued shall clearly provide that the well may be utilized as a source of potable water. Otherwise, the use of a private well as a source of potable water is prohibited except for wells grandfathered under section 22-21. 
(2)  A building permit to drill a private well shall be applied for, and such permit shall be issued, upon the applicant's meeting all applicable building, electrical and plumbing codes, and any other requirements under state or federal law or regulations, and upon approval by the building inspector, and payment of the applicable fee, which fee shall be set forth on a schedule of fees located at Brooklet City Hall. 
(3)  A private well shall meet any and all location requirements of the zoning ordinances of the City of Brooklet. 
(4)  Well construction shall comply with all state and federal laws or regulations, and with any recommendations from the State Department of Human Resources, or any similar agencies regulating wells within the State of Georgia. 
(5)  There shall be no interconnection between any private water supply and the city's public water system. The property owner(s) are responsible for the prevention of any such interconnection. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 22-24. - Inspection. 
Each private well system shall be made available for immediate inspection by the city at any time and without prior notice. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 22-25. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided for in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 7-19-2012) 
Chapter 26 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Insurer license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2007, and for each year thereafter, an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount established by the city (see fee schedule). For each separate business location in excess of one which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount established by the city (see fee schedule). For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 5-19-1994, § 1; Ord. of 9-20-2007(1), § 1) 
State Law reference— Local insurance taxes, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
Secs. 26-2—26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-21. - Due date for ad valorem tax. 
Every person upon whom an ad valorem tax is levied, shall pay the same to the city treasurer on or before the due date stated on the tax bill. 
(Code 1986, § 15-5) 
Secs. 26-22—26-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Occupational licenses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 26-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means the component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue purposes. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Practitioners of professions are: 
(1)  Lawyers; 
(2)  Physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 34-43-1 et seq.); 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 34-43-1 et seq.); 
(4)  Chiropractors; 
(5)  Podiatrists; 
(6)  Dentists; 
(7)  Optometrists; 
(8)  Psychologists; 
(9)  Veterinarians; 
(10)  Landscape architects; 
(11)  Land surveyors; 
(12)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(13)  Public accountants; 
(14)  Embalmers; 
(15)  Funeral directors; 
(16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
(17)  Architects; 
(18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors; 
(19)  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622(1); 
(20)  Owners or operators of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9; 
(21)  Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
(22)  Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
Such term shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fee means the payment required by the city as an exercise of its police power as part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business, the amount of which shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-1)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 
Sec. 26-47. - Administrative fee. 
A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee at a rate to be set by the mayor and council (see fee schedule) is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-2)) 
Sec. 26-48. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)  An annual regulatory fee in the amount shown below is imposed on persons engaged in certain businesses within the city. Those businesses and the amount of the regulatory fee shall be determined by the city (see fee schedule). 
(b)  If a person engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(c)  Every person subject to payment of the regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If a taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate shall be shown to any police officer (or any other person charged with enforcing this article) upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-3)) 
Sec. 26-49. - Occupation tax levied. 
(a)  An occupation tax in the amount established by the city (see fee schedule) is levied upon those persons with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state persons with no location or office in the state. 
(b)  Persons with no physical location in the city, but which perform services or sell products within the corporate limits of the city, shall be subject to the administrative fee and occupation tax if such person has more than nominal business activity within the city, including: 
(1)  One or more employees who exert effort within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns real or personal property which is located within the jurisdiction of the city and which generates income or is used to generate income. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-4)) 
Sec. 26-50. - Occupation tax limitations. 
(a)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business. 
(1)  If a person with no location or office in the city provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the person's gross receipts in this state, then the person shall be exempt from the occupation tax levied by this article. 
(2)  A person who has locations or offices elsewhere in the state who is subject to an occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall be subject to an occupation tax by the city, unless the person provides documentation to the city of current payment of an occupation tax, measured by the gross receipts of the person, to the other state local governments. 
(b)  Persons from out of state with no office or location in the state subject to an occupation tax under this article shall be required to pay an occupation tax to only one local government in the state. Such local government shall be the government of the municipal corporation or county in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or services are performed by the person. Such persons submitting documentation to the city sharing payment of such tax to another local government in the state shall be exempt from the occupation tax levied by this article. 
(c)  If a person commences business in the city on or after July 1 of any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(d)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to the occupation tax imposed by this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-5)) 
Sec. 26-51. - Business or occupation with more than one location in the city. 
Wherever a business or occupation is conducted at more than one location or place within the city, each such location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-6)) 
Sec. 26-52. - Taxation of professionals. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions, as defined in section 26-46, shall elect for their occupation tax either: 
(1)  The occupation tax as set forth in section 26-49; or 
(2)  A tax of $135.00 for each practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. 
(b)  Such election shall be made on or before February 1, 1997. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the professional on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-7)) 
Sec. 26-53. - Administrative, regulatory and occupation fees due annually; delinquencies. 
(a)  Each administrative fee, regulatory fee, and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be for the calendar year. Any administrative fee, regulatory fee, or occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid by April 1 of each year. Any amounts owed which are not paid by April 1 shall be subject to the penalties for delinquency as described in this article. For any new profession, occupation or business begun in the city after January 1 of any year the administrative fee, regulatory fee and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be obtained immediately upon beginning business, and if not so obtained shall be delinquent. A regulatory fee certificate and an occupation tax certificate indicating that the profession, occupation or business has paid the taxes owed shall be issued by the city clerk. Any person practicing a profession, occupation or business without having valid certificates issued to him shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 26-59. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the city clerk may proceed to collect the delinquencies in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-8)) 
Sec. 26-54. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every person subject to payment of the occupation tax amended by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer (or any other person charged with enforcing this article) upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-9)) 
Sec. 26-55. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied upon the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, of the state or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.); 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cotton seed or cotton seed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in the state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-10)) 
Sec. 26-56. - Confidentiality. 
Information provided by a person to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and the amount of the occupation tax or the levy or collection of the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article is confidential and exempt from disclosure. Such information may be provided by the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting an occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay an occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-11)) 
Sec. 26-57. - Evidence of state registration; other qualifications. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.) by the examining board of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Any person required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of any city certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(c)  Any person required to submit an annual application for continuance of that business shall do so before any certificate is issued. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-12)) 
Sec. 26-58. - Liability of officers and agents; certificate required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax required in this article shall be required to take out the necessary certificate for said business prescribed in this article. In default thereof, the officer or agents soliciting for or obtaining business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a certificate. Each person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the certificate provided herein within 30 days after commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of businesses, professions or occupations without having first obtained such certificate shall be subject to the penalties provided herein and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 26-59. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-13)) 
Sec. 26-59. - Due date; court penalty and interest. 
A penalty is imposed on each business and practitioner of an occupation which or who fails to apply for and obtain the appropriate certificate and to pay any and all regulatory and administrative fees and occupation taxes required by this article prior to April 1 of each year. Said penalty shall be in the amount of ten percent of the regulatory and administrative fees and occupation taxes determined to be due and owing under the provisions of this article. Such delinquency shall also bear interest at the rate of 1½ percent for each month or partial month of such delinquency. The penalties provided herein shall be in addition to any other penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-14)) 
Sec. 26-60. - Inspection of records. 
The city, through its employees, officers or agents, may inspect the books of any person subject to an occupation tax to determine the accuracy of the documents and information submitted by a business or practitioner to the city. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the regulatory fee certificate and right to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city or made available in the city for examination by the designated city agents. If, after examination of the books or records it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of improper designation of a dominant line of a business, profession or occupation, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and an additional interest of one percent per month of the amount of the deficiency shall be assessed. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-16)) 
Sec. 26-61. - Revocation. 
Failure of any person to pay an applicable administrative fee, regulatory fee or occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, shall result in any business tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate granted by the city under this article permitting such person to do business in the city for the current year being automatically revoked without any further action required of the city. No new occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax or fees herein required is unpaid nor shall such certificate be issued to a person who has failed to submit adequate records for inspection as may be required by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-17)) 
Sec. 26-62. - Execution, liens. 
(a)  The city clerk, or designee, upon any tax or installment of any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue an execution for the amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, including interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month accruing thereon. The lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax as provided by the Code and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien for said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time that such tax or installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the appropriate city agent upon the property of the person liable for said tax and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and cost allowed by law. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(b)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon execution issued by the city against any person defaulting on an occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the entry of the nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution was issued pays the tax in full, together with all interest penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges for services and goods due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-18)) 
Sec. 26-63. - Application to prior delinquencies. 
This article does not repeal or affect the enforcement of any ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore passed for fees and taxes levied when such fees and taxes have not been paid in full. Such ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore passed providing for the issuing and enforcing execution for taxes or assessments required by such ordinances or that imposed fines or penalties for nonpayment of such tax, or failure to pay the regulatory fees pursuant to such ordinances, or failure to comply with the other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax is fully paid. 
(Ord. of 12-19-1996, § 1(9-19)) 
Secs. 26-64—26-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNSHOPS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means: 
(1)  Any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of his duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into contact with members of the public; 
(2)  Any person working for an owner or pawnbroker; or 
(3)  Any person who is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this article. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, consignment or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawnshop transaction means to take or receive any article of property or, from any customer, by pawning, pledging, trading, exchanging, purchasing, or other means. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 26-82. - Regulation as to employees and managers. 
(a)  No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person is found to be in compliance with the qualifications as described in this section. Upon complying with the requirements of this article, a permit card authorizing such person to be a pawnshop employee will be issued. Each employee and/or manager will be required to renew the permit card annually. The permit card and occupation tax certificate will expire annually, on the date established generally for expiration of the occupation tax certificate. All persons having any interest in the proposed business including each owner, employee, manager, and pawnbroker shall, while on the pawnshop premises, have in their possession and available for inspection such permit card. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The following qualifications shall apply to all employees and managers: 
(1)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the chief of police or his designee and a search of the criminal record of the person completed. Such application shall include the applicant's name, fingerprints, social security number, date of birth, and prior arrest record; though an applicant's arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall not give rise to a presumption or inference of guilt. The applicant must also provide positive identification, only official government-issued pictured identification accepted (e.g., driver's license, passport, military card, or state identification card). 
(2)  The chief of police or his designee shall conduct a complete and exhaustive search relative to any police record of the applicant. 
(3)  In the event the applicant is qualified for employment in a pawnshop under this section and there is no record of a violation of this article, the chief of police or his designee shall issue a permit to the applicant, by mail, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not qualified for a permit and therefore ineligible for employment in a pawnshop, the chief of police or his designee shall notify the person in writing that they are not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and their right to appeal. 
(4)  No person who has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within ten years preceding the date of application shall be issued a permit. For purposes of this article, a conviction or plea of guilt or nolo contendere entered under the Georgia First Offender Act, O.C.C.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., shall be ignored. Provided, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender status or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(5)  No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed, or misrepresented any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application to the police chief for a pawnshop permit under this section. 
(6)  All permits issued through administrative error can be terminated and seized by the chief of police or his designee. 
(7)  Replacement permits will be issued within 30 days of the original date, upon paying one-half of the fee charged for pawnshop permits. After 30 days of the original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(8)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city police department, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any officer or designee of the city police department. 
(9)  No pawnshop owner shall allow any employee or manager to work on the premises unless the employee or manager has in his possession a current valid city permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the city police department may be used for a maximum of 30 days from the date of issue. Pawnshop owners are required by this article to inspect and verify that each employee or manager has in his possession a valid current pawnshop permit. Issuance of this fee receipt shall allow the applicant to work in the position applied for only until such time as the required criminal history background investigation is completed. The temporary privilege conferred by issuance of this fee receipt shall expire immediately upon completion of such background investigation. If the background investigation indicates that the applicant does not meet the requirements for issuance of a pawnshop permit, the applicant may appeal the denial of the permit as provided in this article. However, issuance of this fee receipt and the temporary privilege granted thereby shall not be construed as conferring any right or privilege to the applicant to continue working in the position for which the permit sought during the pendency of the appeal from the denial of a permit under this article. 
(10)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a pawnshop occupation tax certificate to file with the chief of police or his designee the name of the establishment, the occupation tax certificate number and a list of all employees, including their date of birth, social security number, home address and home telephone numbers twice annually; during the month of June and again during the month of December. 
(11)  If it is determined that any person issued a pawnshop permit has falsified, concealed, or misrepresented any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme in the application for the pawnshop permit, such permit shall be revoked or canceled. 
(12)  City employees who are directly involved in the issuance of pawnshop permits or in the regulation of pawnshops shall not be eligible for a permit. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 5) 
Sec. 26-83. - Daily report to police; required format. 
Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report, in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, of all pawnshop transactions that occurred during 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. 
(1)  Such daily reports shall be computer generated in a software format that is compatible with software utilized by the city police department, or in other such written form as may be permitted by the chief of police. 
(2)  Daily reports shall list all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold, the pawn transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the property including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and any other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of the transaction. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 12) 
Sec. 26-84. - Property not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition; location of property; police holds. 
(a)  All property received through any pawnshop transaction shall be held for at least 30 days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise, except when property is redeemed as per a pawn transaction contract. 
(b)  All property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or purchased shall be held and maintained by the pawnbroker on the premises of the pawnshop or, if impracticable, at such other location as may have been previously approved in writing by the chief of police or his designee. The chief of police shall not approve any off-premises storage facilities located outside the city. 
(c)  The city police department has the authority to place property that is the subject of police investigation on "police hold." In that event, the city police department shall notify the pawnbroker of the need for a police hold and identify all property subject to the police hold. Upon notification, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to maintain the subject property until such time as the property is released from police hold status or the property is confiscated as evidence. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 13) 
Sec. 26-85. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agents or employees to receive through any pawnshop any property from minors. A minor, for the purpose of this section, is an individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 14) 
Sec. 26-86. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The city police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. Sworn officers of the city police department and civilian employees designated by the chief of police shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this article or the city Code. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 15) 
Secs. 26-87—-26-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 26-106. - Required; filing of application to conduct business; renewal. 
All persons before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects, or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall first file an application with the city police department for an annual permit to conduct such business. The issuance of such permit will be based on a criminal history background investigation of the applicant. The cost of the permit/criminal history background investigation shall be $50.00, or a fee established by the city council. This fee is imposed to cover investigative expenses and/or administrative costs associated with issuing an initial permit for all owners. In the event an owner has more than one pawnshop, then each location will be assessed the above fee. This fee is nonrefundable in the event an applicant, for any reason, is not issued a permit and/or an occupational tax certificate. Owners are required to renew the permit upon expiration thereof and shall be required to pay a renewal fee established by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 2) 
Sec. 26-107. - Prerequisite to issuance of occupation tax certificate. 
No occupation tax certificate required by this article shall be granted to any person until a permit required by section 26-106 has been issued or approved by the city police department. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 26-108. - Application; contents. 
The application for the annual permit required by section 26-106 shall state the street number and address at which the business is proposed to be operated. The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth, photograph, and social security number of all persons, including pawnbrokers and employees, having any interest in the proposed business, plus any additional information, including fingerprints, deemed necessary by the city police department. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 26-109. - Denial, suspension or revocation—Generally. 
A permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the chief of police or his designee where the pawnbroker or employee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a permit, fails to meet all qualifications set forth under the provisions of this division, or violates any provision of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 6) 
Sec. 26-110. - Same—Hearings. 
No permit shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  Written notice; right to appeal. 
a.  The chief of police or his designee shall provide written notice to the applicant of his order to deny, suspend or revoke the permit. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. Any applicant who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the chief of police may have a review thereof by appeal to the city council. 
b.  Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the chief of police, and, in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00. The city clerk, at his discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if it is determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing such appeal. The city council may, at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote. 
(2)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 60 days of the date of filing with the city clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing, and the appellant shall bear the cost thereof. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. Before hearing an appeal, each member of the city council shall sign an affidavit to be part of the record that he is not related to or personal friends with any owner of the establishment in question in the appeal being considered and that he has no financial interest in the outcome of the appeal. Should any member be unable to sign such an affidavit, that member shall not serve on that appeal and the case shall be heard by the remaining members of the city council. 
(3)  The findings of the city council shall be forwarded to the city clerk within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk or his designee to notify the appellant of the action of the city council. 
(4)  The findings of the city council shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
a.  Contrary to law or ordinances; or 
b.  Unsupported by the preponderance of evidence on the records as a whole. 
(5)  The findings of the city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of such finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 82-7) 
Sec. 26-111. - Records and information to be maintained; display of transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprinting; records storage. 
(a)  Engaging in the business of pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling used or previously owned merchandise, furniture, machinery, appliances, utensils, firearms, gold, silver, coins, precious metals, jewelry, and precious stones within the unincorporated areas of city is hereby declared to be affected with the public interest due to the opportunity it affords for the disposal of stolen property. 
(b)  In the public interest and as set forth herein, all pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting all pawnshop transactions. 
(1)  All pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting accurate descriptions of all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold to the pawnbroker. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The pawnbroker shall assign a pawnshop transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the pawnshop transaction number. 
(2)  The tag bearing the pawnshop transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This subsection does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however, the pawnbroker shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this subsection. 
(3)  The pawnbroker shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a pawnshop transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government-issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. 
(4)  The pawnbroker shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(5)  The pawnbroker shall photograph, with a digital camera, the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(6)  The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any property the fingerprint of the righthand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the property. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one pawn transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature should be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(7)  Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging cannot be accepted by the pawnbroker unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt, or other proof of purchase from the place of purchase, to the pawnbroker who shall retain the receipt or proof of purchase on file. 
(8)  The pawnbroker shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four years and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 11) 
Secs. 26-112—26-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OCCUPATION TAX CERTIFICATE 

Sec. 26-131. - Application; renewals; qualifications. 
(a)  All persons desiring to engage in the business, trade or occupation of a pawnshop shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, make application for an occupation tax certificate in the form and manner prescribed by the city. 
(b)  The application shall include, but not be limited to, the information required on all occupation tax returns, along with the following additional information: 
(1)  The full name, date of birth, address and social security number of the applicant. 
(2)  The full names, dates of birth and social security numbers of any other persons having an ownership interest in the business. In the case of a corporation, this list shall include owners of ten percent or more of the common or preferred stock. 
(3)  The full names, dates of birth and social security numbers and titles of corporate officers, where appropriate. 
(4)  The full names, addresses, telephone numbers, dates of birth, title and social security numbers of individuals to be employed. 
(5)  A copy of the alcohol, tobacco and firearms license, where applicable. 
(c)  All occupation tax certificates granted under the provisions of this division shall expire annually, on the date established generally for expiration of the occupation tax certificates. 
(d)  Certificate holders who desire to renew their certificates shall file the application and all applicable fees with the city clerk on the form prescribed for renewal of the certificate for the following year. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before the annual deadline provided for all businesses for filing of renewal applications, with payment of tax being due on the date set for occupation taxes generally. 
(e)  All occupation tax certificates granted hereunder shall be for the full calendar year and are not subject to proration. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the renewal applicant to obtain renewal permits as required by this article. 
(g)  The following occupation tax certificate qualifications shall also apply: 
(1)  No occupation tax certificate required by this division shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or registered resident alien. Where the owner-applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this article shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a corporation, a certificate will be issued jointly to the corporation, president or chief executive officer and to the majority stockholder. Where the applicant is a partnership, the certificate may be issued to a partner or general partner. 
(3)  An occupation tax certificate for the practices listed herein may not be issued where the applicant has been convicted or pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere, and has been released from parole or probation, to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or has been convicted of any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any pawnshop occupation tax certificate, the applicant shall, by duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither the applicant nor any of the other owners of the establishment have been convicted or have pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or have been convicted of any felonies, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices. Should any applicant, partner, or officer engaged in operating a pawnshop, after a certificate has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or enter a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or any felony, or any crime involving theft or fraudulent practices, the certificate and/or permit shall be immediately revoked or canceled. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 8) 
Sec. 26-132. - Suspension or revocation—Procedures. 
(a)  A certificate may be suspended or revoked by the city clerk or his designee where the certificate holder furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a certificate and failing to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city clerk or his designee shall revoke the certificate for any premises where goods are pawned during a period of suspension. 
(c)  The city clerk or his designee may suspend or revoke the certificate of any establishment which does not meet the qualifications set forth in this division any time such knowledge becomes known to him. 
(d)  An act or omission of a certificate holder, owner of more than 20 percent interest in the establishment, or employee of the certificate holder or establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this division will subject the certificate holder to suspension or revocation of its certificate in accordance with the provisions of this article, when the city clerk or his designee determines to his own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; provided, however, in the case of an employee, the city clerk or his designee must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the certificate holder, were condoned by the certificate holder, or where the certificate holder has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(e)  The city clerk or his designee may suspend or revoke the certificate of any establishment whenever it can be shown that a certificate holder hereunder no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the certificate was conditioned or whenever the certificate holder has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city. 
(f)  Wherever this article permits the city clerk or his designee to suspend any certificate issued hereunder but does not mandate the period of such suspension, such discretion shall be exercised within the guidelines of this subsection. 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such certificate. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out above: 
a.  Consistency of penalties mandated by this article and those set by the city clerk or his designee. 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
c.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by the certificate holder. 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the certificate holder to take remedial or corrective steps. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 9) 
Sec. 26-133. - Same—Hearings. 
No certificate shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  Written notice; right of appeal. 
a.  The city clerk or his designee shall provide written notice to the applicant or certificate holder of his order to deny, suspend or revoke the certificate. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or certificate holder of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. Any applicant or certificate holder who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city clerk or his designee may have a review thereof by appeal to the city council. 
b.  Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the final order or action of the city clerk or his designee, and, in order to defray administrative costs, must be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00. The city clerk, at his discretion, may waive or reduce the filing fee amount if its determined the fee would create a hardship on the individual filing such appeal. The city council may, at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote. 
(2)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 60 days of the date of filing with the city clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, then such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing, and the appellant shall bear the cost thereof. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. Before hearing an appeal, each member of the city council shall sign an affidavit to be part of the record that he is not related to or personal friends with any appellant or any owner of the establishment in question in the appeal being considered and that he has no financial interest in the outcome of the appeal. Should any member be unable to sign such an affidavit, that member shall not serve on that appeal and the case shall be heard by the remaining members of the city council. 
(3)  The findings of the city council shall be forwarded to the city clerk within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the appellant and the chief of police or his designee of the action of the city council. 
(4)  The findings of the city council shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
a.  Contrary to law or ordinances; or 
b.  Unsupported by a preponderance of evidence on the records as a whole. 
(5)  The findings of the city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of such finding by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 12-20-2007, § 10) 
Secs. 26-134—26-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 26-151. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Chief of police means the Chief of Police of the City of Brooklet, Georgia, or his or her designee for the administration of this chapter. 
Impacts government services on public rights-of-way means where a reasonable person would reasonably expect a need for the provision of municipal services to a degree significantly over and above that which the city routinely provides under ordinary every day circumstances. 
Producer or host means any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing and conducting an event. 
Special event or event means any organized activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or march, rally or assembly which takes place on a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or occurs on private property and impacts government services on public rights-of-way. 
Vendor means any person or persons who engage in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way. The definition of vendor, as used in this article, shall not be construed to include or prohibit a permanent business, operating under the provisions of the occupation tax ordinance and other applicable laws, from displaying goods or merchandise on a public sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to the permanent business structure so long as such displays do not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic and so long as other laws and ordinances pertaining to such business or displays are complied with. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 26-152. - Permits. 
(a)  Required . It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in the City of Brooklet without having obtained a valid permit for such event. 
(b)  Exemptions . The following special events are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Special events where the attendance that is reasonably expected is less than 75 people; 
(2)  Special events occurring on private property used and occupied as a private residence, which special event is hosted by at least one of the occupants of such private residence, regardless of the number of attendees; 
(3)  Special events occurring upon a city or county-owned sports facility, including without limitation, a ball field, tennis court or pool, provided that the special event constitutes a use for which the sports facility was intended, and regardless of the number of attendees; 
(4)  Special events hosted by a church on property owned by the church, but only if the property is used on a regular basis, at least bi-monthly, to conduct worship services, and regardless of the number of attendees; 
(5)  Events hosted by a school on property owned by the school or a governmental entity, provided that the property is used on a regular basis, at least weekly, to conduct classes; 
(6)  Funeral processions conducted under the supervision and direction of a funeral director in conjunction with any funeral; 
(7)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its agency. 
(c)  Geographic limitation; responsibility for security and sanitation service. A special event shall be limited to the specific geographic area(s) within which the event is to take place and the producer of a special event shall be responsible for the provision of private security and sanitation services within the boundaries of the event during the event and for a period of one hour past the conclusion of the event or until the area is cleared of all activities and structures related to such event. The chief of police shall determine the amount of private security reasonably required for the event that is to be provided by the producer, if any. 
(d)  Time limitation. Except for clearing of the area, no special event shall be allowed to continue beyond the time approved on the permit for the event. 
(e)  Delineation of boundaries; preservation of areas for circulation. The outermost boundaries of the special event shall be fully and clearly delineated on a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ x 11 inches in size, and attached to the application for a permit. All public streets and/or sidewalks within and adjacent to such area(s) shall be clearly identified. The chief of police, or designee, shall require, as part of the approval for the event, that areas no less than five feet in width shall be designated and preserved for public circulation and access to adjoining business establishments outside the area(s) delineated for the event. 
(f)  Maps for walks or runs. The producer of a special event such as a walk or run, as to which the provisions of subsection (d) above would not be practicable, shall submit with the application for a permit a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ x 11 inches in size, showing the exact route of the course for the walk or run. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 26-153. - Application; fee. 
(a)  A producer of a special event shall make application for a permit for such event at city hall on a form prescribed by the chief of police. Application forms may be obtained from the police department. 
(b)  An application for a special event should be filed at least 30 days prior to the date the event is scheduled to occur. However, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the event. 
(c)  A nonrefundable application fee of $10.00 shall be paid at the time the application for a permit is filed. Such fee shall be payable to the City of Brooklet by cash, money order, or cashier's check. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 3) 
Sec. 26-154. - Identification of producer. 
The producer of an event, if a group or organization, shall be fully identified on the application. However, a special event permit shall be issued only to an individual person, who may be the actual producer or a designated agent of the producer, and such individual person shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements, of this chapter and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 4) 
Sec. 26-155. - Administrative review. 
The chief of police shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department and/or other agency whose services the chief of police determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the chief of police in facilitating the event and services required. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 5) 
Sec. 26-156. - Special conditions on permit. 
Each department of the government reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the chief of police may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provisions of this article. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 6) 
Sec. 26-157. - Final approval of permit; minimum review. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to approve and issue a permit for a special event after considering all comments and conditions of the reviewing departments and agencies as well as other information pertaining to the proposed event as described on the application, and after the payment of all applicable fees and costs. 
(b)  A minimum of ten working days shall be allowed for the administrative review of an application and the issuance of a permit. 
(c)  The chief of police shall either issue or deny the permit no later than 30 working days following the date the completed application is filed. If the permit is denied, the producer shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reason(s) for the denial. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 7) 
Sec. 26-158. - Emergency issuance of permit. 
In extraordinary circumstances, the chief of police, shall be authorized to waive or otherwise expedite any or all of the review process and to issue a special event permit upon payment by the producer of all applicable fees and costs for such event. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 8) 
Sec. 26-159. - Permit fees. 
The fee for a permit to conduct a special event shall be based on all services to be provided by the government for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the government to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services calculated by each government department. If, at the conclusion of the event, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the producer of the event shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 9) 
Sec. 26-160. - Liability. 
The producer of any special event shall hold harmless the City of Brooklet, its officers, employees and agents from liability of damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such waiver shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. The producer shall be responsible for providing any and all other insurance that may be necessary for any special event. The amount and kind of insurance required shall be determined by the chief of police, or his designee, after considering the nature of the special event, and the potential for harm and the degree of harm to persons and property. The producer shall provide proof to the chief of police, or his designee, that such insurance is in effect prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 10) 
Sec. 26-161. - Vendors. 
(a)  Sales permitted. The sale of food, or any merchandise or services of any type by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided such vendor is approved and authorized in writing by the producer of the event and shall be conducted in accordance with such conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the producer and submitted as part of the application for a permit. 
(b)  Authorization of vendors. The producer of a special event shall have sole responsibility and authority to allow or disallow sidewalk or street vending as a component of an event. Such identification shall be not less than three inches, shall state that the bearer is an official participant in the event, and shall bear the signature of the producer of the event. 
(c)  Identification required. Any vendor authorized by the event producer shall be required to prominently display on his or her person a badge identifying the vendor as an authorized participant in the event. Such identification shall be not less than three inches by three inches, shall state that the bearer is an official participant in the event, and shall bear the signature of the producer of the event. 
(d)  Permit not required. Vendors authorized by the producer of an event as a component of the event shall not be required to obtain any separate vendors permit to operate during the period of the event. However, all other vendors, of whatever nature, not authorized as a participant in the special event shall obtain the appropriate licenses and permits as required under other applicable ordinances. 
(e)  Unauthorized vending prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor not authorized by the producer of a special event as provided under this section to engage in such business within a distance of 25 yards of such event from one hour before until one hour after the event. 
(f)  Food sales. The vendor of any food, whether hot or cold, as a part of a special event shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the county health department. It shall be the responsibility of the producer of an event to assure compliance with this section by any such vendors. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 11) 
Sec. 26-162. - Glass containers prohibited. 
The use of glass containers within the area of any special event shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 12) 
Sec. 26-163. - Police services. 
Traffic and crowd control shall be provided by the City of Brooklet Police Department and/or the Bulloch County Sheriff's Department, and the number of officers and/or special arrangements shall be determined by the Chief of Police of the City of Brooklet. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 13) 
Sec. 26-164. - Toilet facilities. 
The producer of a special event shall be required to provide temporary outdoor toilet facilities at any event at which 100 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. The number of toilets and their locations shall be determined by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 14) 
Sec. 26-165. - Tents, stages, etc. 
Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands or other temporary facilities constructed or erected as a part of a special event shall be approved by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 15) 
Sec. 26-166. - Street closing. 
The complete or partial closure of any street, sidewalk or other public way as a part of a special event shall be approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 16) 
Sec. 26-167. - Banners, signs, etc. 
Temporary, noncommercial banners or signs may be permitted overhead across public streets for the purpose of designating "starting" and "finish" lines for a race. Small banners, pennants, signs or other decorations which do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and which do not damage or deface any tree or public structure, may be allowed as part of a special event. Approval of the chief of police shall be obtained by the event producer for any banners or signs permitted in this section. The producer of the event shall be responsible for the removal of such banners, pennants or decorations within 48 hours after the close of the event. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 17) 
Sec. 26-168. - Duration of permit. 
No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid prior to or past the date of the special event for which it is issued. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 18) 
Sec. 26-169. - Cessation of activities. 
The safety, health, welfare and good order of all citizens and the community shall be first and foremost and every special event shall be conducted in such manner. The chief of police may terminate any activity, whether a part of or the entire event, which does not meet this community standard. upon notification of the event producer in person by the chief of police to cease any activity, it shall be unlawful for such producer and/or any participants to permit such activity to continue. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 19) 
Sec. 26-170. - Picketing and demonstrations, etc. 
Any person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession or other activity protected by the U.S. Constitution shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any public or private place. Any person, group or organization engaged in such activities is required to make application as set forth in section 26-153(a) and (b) of this article. However, any such person, group or organization shall be exempt from the permit requirement in section 26-152(a) of this article and the fees set forth in section 26-153(c) of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 20) 
Sec. 26-171. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, and/or imprisonment of not more than six months. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 21) 
Chapter 30 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Scope of chapter provisions. 
Any place, public or private, which because of the accumulation of filth, trash, weeds, uncut grasses, shrubs, bushes, garbage, junk or water, tends to cause sickness and endangers the health of the public or any individual; or any place, which, because of filth, trash, garbage, junk or water, becomes unsightly or causes a smell offensive to the public or to any individual; or any place which because of the nature of the business carried on there disturbs the peace and quietude of the public; or any place which because of the practices of those frequenting the same tends to corrupt the morals or is offensive to the natural sensibilities of the community as interpreted by the city council is declared a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-31; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-31) 
Sec. 30-2. - Conditions prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, allow, permit, maintain or continue any nuisance on premises within the limits of the city. 
Sec. 30-3. - Trash and weeds. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying any lot, tract, parcel of land or premises within the city to permit to grow thereon weeds or noxious vegetation to an extent which might endanger the public health or is unsightly. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause or permit uncut grass, shrubs, bushes or weeds on any property under such circumstances that the grass or weeds are breeding places for insects, rodents or reptiles or is a fire hazard. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-33; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-33) 
Sec. 30-4. - Places permitting water to drain on public property or property of another. 
Any place, whether a place of business or not, that allows water to escape and pond, run through or collect on the premises of another, or to collect, pond or run through any of the streets, alleys or other property of the city, is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-34; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-34) 
Sec. 30-5. - Dilapidated or unfit buildings. 
(a)  Authority of city council to adopt ordinances relating to unfit buildings. The city council as the governing body of the municipality is authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9, to adopt ordinances relating to the dwellings, buildings, or structures within the city which are unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses and not in compliance with applicable codes, which are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or which constitute an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
(b)  Duty of owner to construct and maintain structure or property in accordance with applicable codes. It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(c)  Building inspector to exercise powers prescribed by chapter. The city building inspector is designated to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter. 
(d)  Filing of complaint; investigation. 
(1)  Who may file; complaint charges; building inspector to investigate or inspect. Whenever a request is filed with the city building inspector or his designee by the city council or any other public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the city building inspector or his designee shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(2)  Investigation resulting in issuance of complaint in rem against lot, etc.; service of summons and copy of complaint on owner. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; the city building inspector or his designee may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the city building inspector or his designee to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(3)  Hearing. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the municipal court, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(4)  Court determination; findings in writing to be served upon owner. If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order as follows: 
a.  Repair, alteration or improvement. If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
b.  Demolition and removal. If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
The court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A (O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Failure to comply with court order. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the city building inspector or his designee may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The city building inspector or his designee shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(6)  Demolition by building inspector; salvage of useable materials. If the city building inspector or his designee has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. 
(7)  Cost of demolition to be lien against property. The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-36; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-36) 
Sec. 30-6. - Abatement of nuisances by order of municipal court. 
(a)  Authority of court; imposition of lien. The municipal court of the city, having jurisdiction to hear and determine questions of the existence of nuisances within the city and, if found to exist, to order abatement under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, is authorized to implement the following procedures to deal with nuisances affecting properties within the city: 
(1)  The owner of any property which has been declared by the court as a nuisance shall be given a reasonable amount of time in which to comply with any order to abate the nuisance. 
(2)  If the owner of property which has been declared to constitute a nuisance fails to comply with the court's order, the court may direct the chief of police to take steps specified in a court order to repair, alter, improve, clear or demolish, clean or otherwise remedy the situation that causes the property to be a nuisance. 
(3)  The amount of the cost of the repair, alteration, cleaning, removal or demolition authorized by the court and undertaken by the city shall be a lien against the property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach as a lien for ad valorem taxes to the real property upon the filing of an itemized statement of the total costs incurred. The filing shall be made in the office of the city clerk on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. 
(b)  Enforcement of lien. The city shall enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal of the nuisance as follows: 
(1)  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within 30 days after perfection of the lien, that is, filing on the lien docket, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at a rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as prescribed in this subsection. 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien or any portion thereof be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon a default in payment of the lien under subsection (b)(1) of this section, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (b)(2) of this section, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable statutes relating to tax liens. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon the property, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-35; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-35) 
Secs. 30-7—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-31. - Defined. 
For the purposes of this article, a motor vehicle shall be determined to have been abandoned in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  If it is partially dismantled or wrecked and it is left on a street, road, alley or sidewalk for a period of five days or longer. 
(2)  If it is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessees thereof for 48 hours or longer. 
(3)  If it is left on any public street, road, alley or sidewalk for seven days or longer. 
(4)  If it is partially dismantled, wrecked, incapable of self propulsion, or is in an unsightly condition and is left by the owner on his own property for 30 days or longer. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-38; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-38) 
Sec. 30-32. - Discarded, dismantled vehicles on public or private property. 
(a)  Unlawful when constituting health hazard or unsightly nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or on his premises, or on any street or land in the city, any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked motor vehicle or parts thereof; and the city, when such motor vehicles are in such condition that they constitute a health hazard or unsightly nuisance, may remove and dispose of such motor vehicles notwithstanding the fact that such motor vehicles may be located upon private property. 
(b)  Removal by city; sale; money exceeding expenses to go to owner. When the city, in its discretion, determines that any vehicle in the condition set out in subsection (a) of this section should be removed, the city shall cause such vehicle to be moved and sold. If the vehicle has any monetary value, the proceeds received from such sale that exceed the cost of wrecker service and other expenses incidental to the moving of such vehicle shall be given to the owner of such vehicle upon his application for such funds at any time within 30 days after the removal of such vehicle. 
(c)  Unclaimed funds. If the owner of the vehicle is unknown, or any funds for the sale of the vehicle remain in the hands of the city, and no application is made by the owner within 30 days from the date of its seizure, the funds shall be forfeited and become the property of the city. The city will give notice to the public of any funds remaining in its hands by publication of notice in one issue of the official organ of the county on a yearly basis. 
(d)  Exception. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to apply to any such motor vehicle which shall be located within the premises of any junkyard complying with the laws of this state relating to the licensing and regulating of motor vehicle junkyards. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-37; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-37) 
Sec. 30-33. - Removal. 
(a)  Written notice to owner. Any abandoned motor vehicle may be removed to a storage area for safekeeping by or under the direction of the police department of the city or other person so designated by the city. Written notice by mail of such removal shall be promptly given to the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  Removal from private property. No abandoned vehicle shall be removed from privately owned premises without the written consent of the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, unless the same has been found by the chief of police to be a health or safety hazard or constitutes a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-39; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-39) 
Sec. 30-34. - Disposition of abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  Payment of costs required prior to reclaiming. The owner of any removed abandoned vehicles, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the city clerk all reasonable costs, incidental to the removal, storage and locating of the owner. 
(b)  Failure to pay costs; sale; notice required. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the costs, or should his identity or whereabouts be unknown and unascertainable after a search by the chief of police or designated agent and after notice as herein prescribed, the stored vehicle may be sold after 20 days' notice has been given to the state department of motor vehicles, 20 days' notice to any lien holder of record, and after the vehicle has been held for not less than 30 days and notice of sale has been published once a week for two weeks in the official organ of the county. 
(c)  Manner of sale. The abandoned vehicle shall be sold in the manner set forth below: 
(1)  A vehicle of an appraised value of less than $100.00 may be disposed of by any means in the discretion of the chief of police, including private sale. A vehicle of an appraised value of $100.00 or more shall be sold at public sale, after notice as provided in subsection (b) of this section, on the first Tuesday of any month in the manner and at such time as sheriffs' sales are held. 
(2)  The proceeds of any sale shall be forwarded to the clerk of the city who shall pay from the proceeds of the sale the costs of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and sale, and liens in that order. If, after the sale, the ownership at the time of the removal is established satisfactorily to the clerk, the owner shall be paid so much of the proceeds as remains after the payment of the foregoing costs and liens. Otherwise, any remaining proceeds shall be forfeited and deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-40; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-40) 
Sec. 30-35. - Immunity. 
No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to the possession of any abandoned, lost or stolen motor vehicle for disposing of it as contemplated herein. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-42; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-42) 
Sec. 30-36. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to authorized automobile dealers or to authorized junk dealers in the operation of their businesses. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-43; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-43) 
Sec. 30-37. - Owner to pay costs of removal; failure to pay. 
(a)  The owner of any junked vehicle removed by the city shall pay to the city clerk all reasonable costs incidental to the removal. 
(b)  Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the charges incurred by the city to remove the junk vehicle, there shall be a lien against the real property from which the junk vehicle was removed. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-44; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-44) 
Chapter 34 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage in any violent, tumultuous, obstreperous, or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. Fighting between two or more persons in which physical contact is made shall be deemed to be disorderly conduct within the meaning of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-1) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 34-2. - Discharge of weapons and projectiles. 
(a)  Firearms and bows and arrows. 
(1)  No person shall discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm or bow and arrow without written permission from the chief of police containing a statement as to the duration of such permission and a statement as to the purpose and circumstances for which such permission is granted. Permission may be granted for such purposes which shall include, but not be limited to, the disposal of poisonous and otherwise harmful snakes; the disposal of squirrels which are causing health hazards or damage to property; and the disposal of other vermin which are harmful to health or property. Permission shall only be granted to those persons who, in the sole discretion of the chief of police, are responsible adults. 
(2)  This subsection shall not apply to: 
a.  Any authorized federal, state, county or municipal officer in the legitimate pursuit of his duties nor to one exercising his right of self-defense as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-3-21, 16-3-23, 16-3-23.1, 16-3-24 and 16-3-24.1. 
b.  Archery classes conducted under the supervision of the county board of education or its duly authorized personnel. 
(b)  Airguns and slingshots. No person under the age of 18 years shall discharge any airgun or slingshot within the city without being under the direct supervision of an adult. 
(Ord. of 5-15-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 34-3. - Drinking in public and public drunkenness. 
(a)  Drinking in public. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building. 
(b)  Public intoxication. It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place within the city, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, parks, squares, streets, public buildings, or other public places, or within the curtilage of any private residence not his or her own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language, or by acting in such a way as to endanger his or her life or safety, or that of any other person or persons. 
(c)  Penalty . Any violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Brooklet. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-5; Ord. of 5-18-2017(1)) 
Sec. 34-4. - Fireworks prohibited. 
Fireworks of any kind shall not be shot on the streets or roads of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-6) 
Sec. 34-5. - Handbills and advertising matter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, post or nail any paper, metal, wood or other signs for advertising material of any character on any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole, on any street or alley within the city. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-22; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-22) 
Sec. 34-6. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Curfew after 11:00 p.m. for persons age 16 years or younger. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor 16 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place in the incorporated area of the city unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, Sunday through Thursday, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the following day; and on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When a minor is upon an emergency errand by his or her parents or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(3)  When a minor is returning directly home from a school or church activity; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be at the above-referenced places during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from activity involving the exercise of the first amendment rights of speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with interstate travel through the city excepted in all cases from the curfew; and 
(7)  When the minor is on the property of or the sidewalk directly adjacent to building in which he or she resides. 
(b)  Responsibility of parents. 
It shall be unlawful for the parents, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child 16 years of age or younger to permit or by insufficient control to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in subsection (a) within the city, Sunday through Thursday, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day; and on Fridays and Saturdays, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day except in circumstances set out in subsections (1) through (7) of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Penalties. 
Failure to comply with any of the requirements and provisions of this section shall constitute a violation and any violator upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 30 days or both. 
(Ord. of 3-19-2009) 
Sec. 34-7. - Failure to appear in court. 
(a)  Any person who has been charged with or convicted of the commission of a misdemeanor or ordinance violation within the city, and has been set at liberty on bail or on his own recognizance upon the condition that such person will subsequently appear at a specified time and place, commits the offense of failure to appear if, after actual notice to such person in open court, notice of the time and place to appear being indicated on any citation or summons given to such person, or notice to such person by mailing to such person's last known address or otherwise being notified personally in writing by a court official or officer of the court, such person fails without sufficient excuse to appear at that time and place. 
(b)  A person convicted of the offense or failure to appear shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $150.00. 
(Ord. of 10-18-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. of 10-18-2014 set out provisions intended for use as § 34-6. To avoid duplication of section numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 34-7. 
Secs. 34-8—34-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 34-29. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambient sound level means the noise associated with a given environment, exclusive of a particular noise being tested, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and far; exclusive of intruding noises from isolated identifiable sources. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of alleviating or resolving an emergency. 
Impulsive sound means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms. 
Noise means any sound which disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Noise disturbance means any sound which endangers or injures the welfare, safety or health of a human being, or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or devalues or injures personal or real property. 
Noise sensitive activities means activities which should be conducted under conditions of exceptional quiet and clearly posted with "Noise Sensitive Area" signs, because of the noise sensitive activities conducted therein. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, or lane or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public space means any real property, including any structure thereon, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Real property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property divisions. 
Receiving land use means the use or occupancy of the property which receives the transmission of sound as hereinafter defined. 
Residential means any property on which is located a building or structure used wholly or partially for living or sleeping purposes. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
Used or occupied. Either word shall be deemed to includes the terms "intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-7) 
Sec. 34-30. - General prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable people within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-8) 
Sec. 34-31. - Prohibited acts enumerated. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device for an unreasonable period of time, or the use of any siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle or equipment. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of any sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used, or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(4)  Regulation of sound equipment and sound amplifying equipment. 
a.  Except for activities for which a permit has been issued by the city under this section, no person shall so operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, or phonograph, amplifier, or loudspeaker, or similar device so as to: 
1.  Create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or within a noise sensitive area. Provided, however, bars, taverns, lounges, night clubs, dance halls, game rooms and similar activities which produce a noise that is plainly audible beyond the premises shall be deemed a noise disturbance in violation of this article. 
2.  Create a noise which is plainly audible to any person other than the operator of the device, when operated on a common carrier, or public right-of-way or public place or space. 
b.  Sound equipment permitted. Except as hereafter provided, no person shall use, operate or cause to be used or operated any radio, record player, tape deck or player, loudspeaker, amplifier, sound truck or other device for producing, reproducing or amplifying sounds, hereinafter referred to as "sound equipment," upon the public streets or in any building or upon any premises, public or private, so as to produce a noise disturbance. Provided, however, the following activities, where authorized by the city, may use sound equipment which produces a sound not to exceed 90 dBA when measured at a distance of 50 feet from such equipment. Where the receiving land is residential, such equipment may only be used from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.: 
1.  Public health and safety; 
2.  Fairs, carnivals and similar activities; 
3.  Parades, processions, excursions and associated activities; 
4.  Outdoor concerts and theatrical events; 
5.  Outdoor neighborhood functions such as lawn and pool parties, street dances and similar activities; 
6.  Civic and religious activities; and 
7.  Recreational and athletic activities. 
(5)  Animals and birds. No person shall own, possess or harbor any animal or fowl which howls, barks, or emits audible sounds that are unreasonably loud or disturbing and which are of such character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. For the purposes of this article, the term "barking dog" means a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls, or makes any other noise to create a nuisance to any person at any time of the day or night regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property. 
(6)  Loading and unloading. No person shall so load, unload, open, close or handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, refuse, garbage cans, motor vehicles, or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive area. 
(7)  Construction or repairing of buildings. 
a.  The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. 
b.  If the building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest if such work were to be prohibited, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(8)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court which the same are in use of, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such an institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(9)  Piledrivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-9) 
Sec. 34-32. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; 
(2)  The emission of sound in the performance of emergency functions; 
(3)  Agricultural activities, exclusive of those involving the ownership or possession of animals; 
(4)  Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation; 
(5)  Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes; 
(6)  The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons or in fireworks displays for which a permit has been issued; 
(7)  Emergency work or repair work by governmental entities and public workers. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-10) 
Sec. 34-33. - Permit to exceed. 
(a)  Generally. A person shall be exempt from the provisions of subsection (d) of this section, upon obtaining a permit to exceed from the city. 
(b)  Action by the police chief. The police chief or his designee shall act upon such application, the police chief shall consider, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The nature of the request; 
(2)  The previous experience with the applicant; 
(3)  The time of the activity; 
(4)  Other activities in the vicinity of the proposed; 
(5)  The cultural or social benefits of the proposed activity; 
(6)  The effect of the activity on any adjacent residential areas; and 
(7)  The location of sound speakers at the discretion of police chief or his designee. 
(c)  Application and permit fee. An application for a permit to exceed must be submitted to the city at least five business days prior to the event for which such permit is needed. 
(d)  Security deposit. A deposit in the amount of $100.00 must be paid at the time an application for a permit to exceed is submitted. The purpose of this deposit is to secure the performance of the party requesting the permit to exceed. Upon satisfaction of all of the conditions of the permit to exceed, such deposit shall be immediately refunded to the applicant. 
(e)  Conditions of permits. A permit to exceed shall specify the date, time period and location to which it applies. The permit shall also prescribe the conditions necessary to minimize the adverse effects the event may have upon the community or surrounding neighborhoods. The police chief may require, but, shall not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  That permit holders change the arrangement of the amplifying equipment or sound instruments upon the request of the city police department so as to minimize the disturbance to others resulting from the position or orientation of the amplifying equipment. 
(2)  Adequate provisions to ensure the proper cleanup of any litter resulting from the event for which the permit to exceed was obtained; 
(3)  If over 50 people attend the event for which the permit to exceed was obtained, adequate private security shall be provided for the purpose of crowd and traffic control. The adequacy of such private security shall be determined by the city police department. 
(f)  Limit on permits. Permits to exceed shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Permits will only be granted for temporary purposes not to exceed 16 continuous hours in any one time period. 
(2)  No permit shall be granted for the time period between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(g)  Cooperation. Permit holder shall agree to cooperate with the city police department in enforcing this article by having the signer of the permit available at the site of the event during the activity. 
(h)  Schools. Any school recognized by the city and/or the county board of education as a learning institution shall be required to obtain a permit to exceed for school activities and/or school functions but the fee will be waived. 
(Code 1986, 7-11; Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-11) 
Sec. 34-34. - Enforcement. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-12) 
Chapter 38 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; vehicles scattering load, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248.1. 

Sec. 38-19. - Allowing litter, foul odors, etc., to remain on or emanate from property or causing such on the property of another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass on the rights of others through the neglect of property by causing or allowing unsightly litter, foul odor or potentially dangerous devices to remain on or emanate from the property, or to discard, abandon or cause such on public property or other's private property. Provided however, odors generated by legitimate, commercial agricultural activities shall not be deemed to constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-13; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-13) 
Sec. 38-20. - Scattering of refuse and littering prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by the county for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare and consistent with other provisions of this article, as well as other applicable laws, ordinances and resolutions. 
(b)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of subsection (a) of this section, it shall establish a rebuttable presumption that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this section which is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs to belonged to such person, there shall be established a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any refuse, building material, building material waste, cement sludge, asphalt sludge or other substances accumulated as a result of construction, repairs to existing facilities, demolition of existing structures on or into any public or private road, shoulder of any public or private road or public or private ditch. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-21; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-21) 
Sec. 38-21. - Loading and unloading areas. 
All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The number of containers necessary for each area shall be as required to maintain clean, neat and sanitary premises. The owner of the premises and the occupant thereof shall jointly and severally maintain surveillance to ensure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-24; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-24) 
Sec. 38-22. - Parking lot receptacles. 
(a)  Required; number and type; collection. All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles distributed within the parking area. The city council or its designee shall have authority to determine the number and types of receptacles necessary to provide proper containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the manager of the parking lots to collect the refuse and trash deposited in such containers and store this material in an approved location as provided in section 38-59. 
(b)  Obligation to use. It shall be the obligation of all persons using the parking areas to use such refuse receptacles or containers as provided in section 38-59 for the purpose intended, and it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, scatter or throw upon any such parking lot, any refuse, garbage or trash of any kind. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-25; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-25) 
Sec. 38-23. - Construction and demolition sites. 
(a)  On-site refuse receptacles required; number. All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials and other trash procured by those working on the site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. The number of refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers shall be determined by the size of the job. 
(b)  Removal of dirt, mud, construction materials, etc. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of construction or demolition shall be removed by the contractor upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-26; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-26) 
Sec. 38-24. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  Property. All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a litter-free condition. 
(b)  Sweeping into sidewalks or streets. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-30; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-30) 
Secs. 38-25—38-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 38-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biomedical waste means any solid waste which contains pathological waste; biological waste; cultures and stacks of infectious agents and associated biological waste; contaminated animal carcasses, including body parts; bedding and other waste from such animals; chemotherapy waste; discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have been contaminated. 
Building materials means any material such as lumber, brick, plaster, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures. 
Bulk container means a metal container of not less than four cubic yards nor larger than 42 cubic yards and constructed so that it can be emptied mechanically by specially equipped trucks. 
Business trash means any waste accumulation of dust, paper and cardboard, excelsior, rags or other accumulations, other than garbage or household trash, which are usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices and similar businesses. 
Commercial establishment means any retail, manufacturing, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental or other nonresidential establishment at which garbage or trash may be generated. 
Debris means sand, dirt, broken brick, blocks, broken pavement or other similar materials suitable for fill. The term "debris" shall not include household garbage or other types of refuse such as wood or wood products which are subject to decomposition or decay. 
Disposal site means an area, location, tract of land or a facility used or intended to be used for the disposal of solid waste, or putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except it shall not include the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling in which the owner, occupant or lessee of said land or facility resides. 
Garbage means the byproducts of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay, may serve as a breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, fecal matters and explosives. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges, and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, waste materials or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled as specified herein. 
Loading and unloading areas means space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons. 
Multiple unit means any duplex, apartment, group of apartments or condominium used for dwelling places of more than one family. 
Refuse means solid waste accumulations consisting of garbage, household trash, yard trash, industrial trash, hazardous refuse, and business trash. 
Refuse receptacle means a metal or plastic container for refuse, of substantial construction, with tightfitting lids, and provided with handles and/or wheels sufficient for safe and convenient handling. Such receptacles shall have a capacity of not less than 22 gallons nor more than 32 gallons and shall be kept in serviceable condition at all times. 
Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one family. 
Small dead animals means cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size. 
Waste means solid waste and liquid waste. 
Yard trash means waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery, cuttings or clippings usually created as refuse in the case of trees or bushes. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-14; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-14) 
Sec. 38-53. - Authority of city council regarding disposal of refuse. 
The collection, transportation and disposal of refuse shall be under the supervision and control of the city council, who shall have the authority to establish routes and days of collection, types and locations of refuse containers, and such other matters, pertaining to the collection, transportation and disposal of refuse as it may find necessary and to change and modify the same. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-15; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-15) 
Sec. 38-54. - Collection by city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect solid waste within the city, except from his own residence or business or industrial property. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-16; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-16) 
Sec. 38-55. - Receptacles and containers required. 
It shall be required of every person in possession, charge or control of any place in or from which building materials, business trash or industrial waste is accumulated or produced to provide and at all times to keep in a suitable place readily accessible to the city collection crews or private collection agencies, adequate and suitable receptacles and containers capable of holding all such waste materials which would ordinarily accumulate between the times of successive collections. The city council or its designee shall determine the quantity and location of said receptacles and shall determine whether said receptacles and containers are serviceable. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-17; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-17) 
Sec. 38-56. - Receptacles and containers to be safe. 
All receptacles and containers as required hereunder shall be of such construction and design and shall be maintained in good and serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacles or containers which do not conform to the provisions of this article or which have ragged or sharp edges or any other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents hereof or the public generally, after proper notice, has not been replaced, may be removed as refuse. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-18; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-18) 
Sec. 38-57. - Precollection practices. 
(a)  Biomedical waste. No biomedical waste shall be placed in a container for collection by the city. 
(b)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in containers as specified in this section. 
(c)  Garbage. All garbage being placed in containers for collection shall have drained from it all free liquid, and should be wrapped, bagged or enclosed in paper or plastic materials. 
(d)  Household trash. All household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its deposit in refuse receptacles. Household trash shall be combined with garbage. 
(e)  Injurious trash items. All waste material of an injurious nature such as broken glass, lightbulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes, shall be securely wrapped to prevent injury to the collection crews. 
(f)  Hazardous refuse and building materials. No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection by the city nor shall the same be collected by the city. 
(g)  Yard trash. No yard trash shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of garbage by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-19; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-19) 
Sec. 38-58. - Storing of refuse and trash. 
All accumulations of refuse and trash shall be stored or placed for collection in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse or trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property except as stated herein. 
(2)  Blockage of storm drain. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles or containers on, upon or over any storm drain, or so close thereto as to be drawn by the elements into same. 
(3)  Unauthorized accumulations. Any accumulations of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public street, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited. Failure of an owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulations shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(4)  Junk. It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling, any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery, equipment, building material, motor vehicle or other item, which is either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, and which is not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. Any such item which remains on the property of the occupant for a period of ten days after notice of violation of this section shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city without further notice with the reasonable costs of said removable to be paid by the owner to the city clerk. This section shall not apply to licensed junk dealers. 
(5)  Scavenging. Scavenging from any collection container is prohibited, and it shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to enter, examine and sift through the contents of, or remove any matter from any collection container. 
(6)  Enforcement, remedies and penalties for violation. If any person violates any provision of this article, the chief of police or his designee may issue a citation detailing the nuisance. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-20; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-20) 
Sec. 38-59. - Commercial establishments. 
(a)  All commercial establishments, all multiunit developments and all manufactured home communities shall store their refuse in containers as specified herein so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishments. Approved methods of containerization include refuse receptacles, bulk containers and detachable containers. Spillage and overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by said establishment when and as it occurs. 
(b)  All commercial establishments shall have a bulk container unless their refuse and trash can be suitably contained in refuse receptacles approved by the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put household garbage, trash or any other waste in a commercial dumpster within the city without permission from the owner or lessee of said dumpster, or the owner of the commercial establishment. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any article, trash or other material from any commercial dumpster without permission from the owner. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter material from a commercial dumpster around the commercial dumpster. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-23; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-23) 
Sec. 38-60. - Special refuse disposal. 
(a)  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers in the city. 
(b)  Hypodermic instruments. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by wrapping or securing same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection persons. 
(c)  Cardboard boxes and cartons. Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
(d)  Scrap and used tires. Pursuant to authority granted in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1, no person shall collect, store or transport scrap and used tires for processing or disposal in contradiction to current state law or this article. 
(1)  No person may store more that 100 scrap or used tires, or combination of the two, except those persons specifically authorized by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1. Any persons, other than those specifically exempted, found storing in excess of 100 scrap or used tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as provided in this article. 
(2)  Any person disposing of scrap or used tires must take the tires to either a state authorized and licensed business accepting scrap and used tires for disposal, further processing, reconditioning or recycling, or to a county operated recycling center. Scrap and used tires may not be buried, burned, dumped or disposed of in any manner other than as outlined within this section and article. Any person disposing of such tires in any manner contrary to these provisions shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-27; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-27) 
Sec. 38-61. - Responsibility of owners and agents. 
The owners or agents, tenants or lessees of all residential units and commercial establishments shall be responsible for compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2003, § 7-29; Ord. of 8-19-2004, § 7-29) 
Sec. 38-62. - Garbage fees. 
The costs for garbage collection shall be as established by the city council (see fee schedule). 
(Code 1986, § 6-11; Ord. of 7-15-2004(2), § 1) 
Sec. 38-63. - Trees, shrubbery, branches, yard trimmings, etc. removed by contractor. 
All individuals, firms, businesses, partnerships, proprietorships or corporations engaged in the business of yard maintenance, landscaping, nursery operation or in the business of trimming or removing trees, shrubbery, or similar growth, who shall contract with the property owner, the owner's agent or occupant to perform services on the property shall remove from the property all yard trimmings, sawdust, branches, stumps and all portions of the byproducts of the services performed, as well as all rubbish associated therewith including rocks, concrete, dirt and trimmings. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2010) 
Sec. 38-64. - Removal for compensation. 
It shall be unlawful for any firm, partnership, proprietorship or corporation to trim trees or bushes, do landscaping or yard work for compensation within the city unless the byproduct from those services is immediately removed from the premises and placed or deposited by the contractor in the city designated landfill or hauling station. Compensation shall be interpreted to include receiving as compensation the wood, limbs and other residue from such trimming and cutting. Any form of compensation shall place the burden of disposal directly upon the individual or contractor performing the task. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2010) 
Sec. 38-65. - Preparation for collection of yard trash. 
Yard trash resulting from work where a contractor or person receiving compensation is not involved, shall be placed on the street curb in order that it may be removed without the collector going into the yard or place of business, and any exceptions to this subsection shall be determined at the discretion of the city clerk or his/her designee. The city council shall establish fixed days for the removal of this material and so publish the schedule. Yard trash for street pick up should be separated as follows: 
(1)  Leaves, straw, grass clippings; 
(2)  Limbs with a maximum of five inches in diameter, placed with butts toward street; 
(3)  Shrubbery trimmings and vines. 
(Ord. of 8-20-2010) 
Chapter 42 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Obstructing streets, sidewalks. 
(a)  Unlawful. No person shall place any lumber or timber, or leave any vehicle, barrels or boxes or any other obstruction in or on any of the streets or sidewalks of the city, so that passage thereon is impeded. 
(b)  Necessary obstructions; regulations. 
(1)  Permit required; scope. Whenever it shall become absolutely necessary for any one to obstruct said streets or sidewalks, or any part thereof, permission shall first be obtained from the mayor who shall under no circumstances grant a permit to obstruct more than one-half the width and not over 100 feet of length of said street. If the obstruction desired is a sidewalk, the mayor shall, if he thinks the circumstances require it, grant a permit to obstruct all of said sidewalk in width, but not more than 100 feet in length. 
(2)  Barricade and lights required. Each person to whom said permit is granted shall keep at each end of said obstruction from sundown to sunup, a proper barricade and a lighted lantern or lanterns, the light therefrom to be sufficient to make the obstruction plainly visible. 
(Code 1986, §§ 13-1, 13-2) 
Sec. 42-2. - Fences, ditches on line of street, sidewalk. 
No fence or ditch shall be erected or dug on the line of any street or sidewalk in the city without obtaining a permit from the mayor. 
(Code 1986, § 13-3) 
Sec. 42-3. - Erection of telephone or telegraph poles; permit required. 
No one shall erect any telephone or telegraph poles on the streets or sidewalks of the city without first obtaining a permit from the mayor. 
(Code 1986, § 13-4) 
Sec. 42-4. - Removal of utility poles required upon notice. 
(a)  Authority. It shall be the duty of any electric light company, telephone or telegraph company, or any other public utility now existing under franchise from the city or otherwise, or hereafter authorized to set poles for the stringing of wires thereon, upon notice from the mayor and council to that effect, to remove or reset any poles belonging to such company, its successors or assigns, when such removal or resetting of poles is necessary in the judgment of the mayor and council, to facilitate the improvement of any street or portion of street by changing the grade thereof or otherwise, or to allow the improvement or promote the convenience of any lot on such street, the expense of the removal to be borne by the company using the poles. 
(b)  Failure to comply. Upon failure or refusal to remove or reset such poles upon ten days' notice from the mayor and council the city will enter upon the property aforesaid and remove or reset such poles, charging the expense of same to the company owning or controlling the same, the said expenses added to the business license of said company for the next ensuing year, and no license to do business in the city shall be issued to said company until the expense of removing or resetting said pole has been paid. 
(Code 1986, § 13-5) 
Sec. 42-5. - Excavations for water and sewer connections, other purposes. 
(a)  Approval required. No person shall excavate any street of the city for the purpose of laying sewer or water pipes or for any other purpose unless such person shall have first obtained the approval therefor from the mayor and council, and under such regulations for such excavation and laying of said pipes and the making of such connections as are now in existence or may hereafter be provided by the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  Pavement to be restored. Wherever a connection is made and the street is excavated as provided herein, if the street is to be paved at the time of such excavation, the person at whose instance the connection was made shall replace the street paving and sidewalk along and through the connection to as good a condition as it was before the work was commenced and shall pay to the city the cost of such work if the work is done by employees of the city. 
(c)  Bond required. As a prerequisite to such excavation and connections to sewers and water pipes and before the person performing such work shall obtain such permission he shall execute a bond with good security to be approved by the clerk of council, conditioned to pay the said mayor and council any damages it may sustain by reason of the excavation and the making of said connections. 
(Code 1986, § 13-6) 
Sec. 42-6. - Areas adjacent to railway tracks to be maintained in good condition. 
(a)  Duty. All railway companies, corporations, individuals, or company of individuals, who now have or may hereafter have, own, maintain, use or operate by lease or otherwise, any railway track in the city, shall be and are hereby required to keep all streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, etc., where said track adjoins or crosses said street, lanes, alleys or sidewalks in a good and safe condition for travel. 
(b)  Grade of grade crossing. All grade crossings where a railway track crosses a street shall not be more than ten percent grade. 
(c)  Notice to correct condition. The city shall give railway companies, or other parties above named, 15 days' notice to put any place in the condition above required and if said parties shall fail or refuse to fix same, then the city shall fix same and issue execution instanter against said parties for the amount expended. 
(Code 1986, § 13-7) 
Sec. 42-7. - Display of merchandise on streets and sidewalks; special permission required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place and display his goods, wares, or merchandise on the streets and sidewalks of the city, or offer them for sale thereon, without special permission to do so granted by the mayor or mayor pro tem of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 13-8) 
Sec. 42-8. - Installation of sidewalks, curbs, and gutters; publication; protest against improvements; pro rata assessment of cost of improvements against abutting property. 
(a)  Whenever the mayor and council shall deem it necessary to pave any street or part thereof or to install or improve sidewalks, curbs, and gutters within the limits of the city, the mayor and council shall, by resolution, declare such improvements necessary to be done, and shall publish such resolution once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the city and published in the county. If the owner of a majority of the linear front footage of the lands abutting on said proposed improvements shall not within 15 days after the last day of publication of such resolution, file with the clerk of the city council their protest in writing against such improvements, then the mayor and council shall have power to cause the improvements to be made, and to contract therefor, and to make assessment and to fix liens as provided for herein. Any number of streets or any parts thereof proposed to be improved may be included in one resolution. Any protest or objection shall be made as to each street separately. 
(b)  Each lot or parcel of land abutting such improvements shall be charged on the basis of linear front footage at an equal rate per foot of such frontage with its just pro rata of the entire cost of the said improvements, less any amounts paid by railroads or others, and less any amounts received from the federal or state governments as federal aid or state aid road funds for such improvements, and less any amounts appropriated from the general receipts of the city for such improvements. 
(Code 1986, § 13-9) 
Sec. 42-9. - Street numbers. 
(a)  Posting required. The owner or owners of fee simple title to or a life estate or estate for years in any real estate upon which there is situated a residence, business or other building or structure to which there is assigned a street number by the city, shall post the street number of such business, residence or other building or structure in one of the following manners: 
(1)  By affixing the street number to the front of the residence, business, building or other structure in a prominent manner such that the same can be easily viewed from the street or road upon which such residence, business, building or other structure fronts; 
(2)  By incorporating the street number into or onto a sign located on the property, subject to any sign regulations that the city may have in place, in such a manner that the same can be easily viewed from the road upon which such residence, business, building or other structure fronts; or 
(3)  By affixing the street number to a mailbox, fence or other appurtenance associated with the residence, business, building or other structure in a prominent manner such that the same can be easily viewed from the street or road upon which such residence, business, building or other structure fronts. 
(b)  Assignment of street numbers by city. The city has established an address numbering system, and shall utilize such system, or may establish a new numbering system, for assigning numbers to businesses, residences or other buildings or structures within the city. Any structure with a continuous roofline, which has power connected and/or can reasonably be occupied, shall be assigned a separate number. A number or alphabetical letter shall be assigned for each separate and distinct occupant or division (i.e., apartment, company, etc.) within a building or other occupied structure. No temporary or aesthetic addresses will be assigned for any structures or bare properties within the city. Existing numbers shall be changed only as necessary to ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of the 911 system for Bulloch County, as determined in the judgment of the appropriate city official or officials. Appropriate notification of the address assigned under the terms of this section to each residence, business, building or other structure shall be provided to the appropriate post office of the United States Postal Service. 
(c)  Size . 
(1)  Residential properties. The size of street numbers posted on property zoned residential shall be a minimum of three inches in height, and shall not exceed four inches in height. 
(2)  Non-residential properties. The size of street numbers posted on property zoned anything other than residential shall be a minimum of four inches in height, and shall not exceed one foot in height. 
(d)  Variances . Any person desiring a variance from the size requirements for street numbers may make application for such variance to the Brooklet City Council by making such request in writing, and further requesting that such matter be placed on the agenda of a subsequent city council meeting. 
(e)  Existing structures . The Mayor and Council of the City of Brooklet shall encourage the owner or owners of the fee simple title to or a life estate or estate for years in any real estate upon which there is situated a residence, business, or other building or structure, to the extent already not properly posted in accordance with this section, to post the assigned numbers in accordance herewith within 60 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived. It shall be unlawful for any number to be posted other than the number assigned by the city. The cost and installation of the number shall be paid for by the owner or owners of the fee simple title to or a life estate or estate for years in any such applicable residence, business or other building or structure to which there is assigned a street number by the city. 
(f)  Building permits. No building permit shall be issued for any residence, business or other building or structure to be erected, repaired, altered or modified in the city after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived until the owner or owners of the fee simple title to or a life estate or estate for years in the real estate upon which there is situated a residence, business or other building or structure to which is assigned a street number by the city until the applicable person has obtained the assigned number from the city, and properly posted such number in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-3, 9-20-2018) 
Secs. 42-10—42-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 42-21. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Brooklet, Georgia, or his or her designee for the administration of this article. 
Impacts government services on public rights-of-way means where a reasonable person would reasonably expect a need for the provision of municipal services to a degree significantly over and above that which the city routinely provides under ordinary every day circumstances. 
Producer or host means any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing and conducting an event. 
Special event or event means any organized activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or march, rally or assembly which takes place on a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or occurs on private property and impacts government services on public rights-of-way. 
Vendor means any person or persons who engage in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way. The definition of vendor, as used in this article, shall not be construed to include or prohibit a permanent business, operating under the provisions of the occupation tax ordinance and other applicable laws, from displaying goods or merchandise on a public sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to the permanent business structure so long as such displays do not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic and so long as other laws and ordinances pertaining to such business or displays are complied with. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 1) 
Sec. 42-22. - Permits. 
(a)  Required . It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in the City of Brooklet without having obtained a valid permit for such event. 
(b)  Exemptions . The following special events are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Special events where the attendance that is reasonably expected is less than 75 people; 
(2)  Special events occurring on private property used and occupied as a private residence, which special event is hosted by at least one of the occupants of such private residence, regardless of the number of attendees; 
(3)  Special events occurring upon a city or county-owned sports facility, including without limitation, a ball field, tennis court or pool, provided that the special event constitutes a use for which the sports facility was intended, and regardless of the number of attendees; 
(4)  Special events hosted by a church on property owned by the church, but only if the property is used on a regular basis, at least bi-monthly, to conduct worship services, and regardless of the number of attendees; 
(5)  Events hosted by a school on property owned by the school or a governmental entity, provided that the property is used on a regular basis, at least weekly, to conduct classes; 
(6)  Funeral processions conducted under the supervision and direction of a funeral director in conjunction with any funeral; 
(7)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its agency. 
(c)  Geographic limitation; responsibility for security and sanitation service. A special event shall be limited to the specific geographic area(s) within which the event is to take place and the producer of a special event shall be responsible for the provision of private security and sanitation services within the boundaries of the event during the event and for a period of one hour past the conclusion of the event or until the area is cleared of all activities and structures related to such event. The chief of police shall determine the amount of private security reasonably required for the event that is to be provided by the producer, if any. 
(d)  Time limitation. Except for clearing of the area, no special event shall be allowed to continue beyond the time approved on the permit for the event. 
(e)  Delineation of boundaries; preservation of areas for circulation. The outermost boundaries of the special event shall be fully and clearly delineated on a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ x 11 inches in size, and attached to the application for a permit. All public streets and/or sidewalks within and adjacent to such area(s) shall be clearly identified. The chief of police, or designee, shall require, as part of the approval for the event, that areas no less than five feet in width shall be designated and preserved for public circulation and access to adjoining business establishments outside the area(s) delineated for the event. 
(f)  Maps for walks or runs. The producer of a special event such as a walk or run, as to which the provisions of subsection (d) above would not be practicable, shall submit with the application for a permit a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ x 11 inches in size, showing the exact route of the course for the walk or run. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 2) 
Sec. 42-23. - Application; fee. 
(a)  A producer of a special event shall make application for a permit for such event at city hall on a form prescribed by the chief of police. Application forms may be obtained from the police department. 
(b)  An application for a special event should be filed at least 30 days prior to the date the event is scheduled to occur. However, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the event. 
(c)  A nonrefundable application fee of $10.00 shall be paid at the time the application for a permit is filed. Such fee shall be payable to the City of Brooklet by cash, money order, or cashier's check. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 3) 
Sec. 42-24. - Identification of producer. 
The producer of an event, if a group or organization, shall be fully identified on the application. However, a special event permit shall be issued only to an individual person, who may be the actual producer or a designated agent of the producer, and such individual person shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements, of this chapter and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 4) 
Sec. 42-25. - Administrative review. 
The chief of police shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department and/or other agency whose services the chief of police determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the chief of police in facilitating the event and services required. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 5) 
Sec. 42-26. - Special conditions on permit. 
Each department of the government reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the chief of police may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provisions of this article. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 6) 
Sec. 42-27. - Final approval of permit; minimum review. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to approve and issue a permit for a special event after considering all comments and conditions of the reviewing departments and agencies as well as other information pertaining to the proposed event as described on the application, and after the payment of all applicable fees and costs. 
(b)  A minimum of ten working days shall be allowed for the administrative review of an application and the issuance of a permit. 
(c)  The chief of police shall either issue or deny the permit no later than 30 working days following the date the completed application is filed. If the permit is denied, the producer shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reason(s) for the denial. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 7) 
Sec. 42-28. - Emergency issuance of permit. 
In extraordinary circumstances, the chief of police, shall be authorized to waive or otherwise expedite any or all of the review process and to issue a special event permit upon payment by the producer of all applicable fees and costs for such event. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 8) 
Sec. 42-29. - Permit fees. 
The fee for a permit to conduct a special event shall be based on all services to be provided by the government for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the government to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services calculated by each government department. If, at the conclusion of the event, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the producer of the event shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 9) 
Sec. 42-30. - Liability. 
The producer of any special event shall hold harmless the City of Brooklet, its officers, employees and agents from liability of damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such waiver shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. The producer shall be responsible for providing any and all other insurance that may be necessary for any special event. The amount and kind of insurance required shall be determined by the chief of police, or his designee, after considering the nature of the special event, and the potential for harm and the degree of harm to persons and property. The producer shall provide proof to the chief of police, or his designee, that such insurance is in effect prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 10) 
Sec. 42-31. - Vendors. 
(a)  Sales permitted. The sale of food, or any merchandise or services of any type by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided such vendor is approved and authorized in writing by the producer of the event and shall be conducted in accordance with such conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the producer and submitted as part of the application for a permit. 
(b)  Authorization of vendors. The producer of a special event shall have sole responsibility and authority to allow or disallow sidewalk or street vending as a component of an event. Such identification shall be not less than three inches, shall state that the bearer is an official participant in the event, and shall bear the signature of the producer of the event. 
(c)  Identification required. Any vendor authorized by the event producer shall be required to prominently display on his or her person a badge identifying the vendor as an authorized participant in the event. Such identification shall be not less than three inches by three inches, shall state that the bearer is an official participant in the event, and shall bear the signature of the producer of the event. 
(d)  Permit not required. Vendors authorized by the producer of an event as a component of the event shall not be required to obtain any separate vendors permit to operate during the period of the event. However, all other vendors, of whatever nature, not authorized as a participant in the special event shall obtain the appropriate licenses and permits as required under other applicable ordinances. 
(e)  Unauthorized vending prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor not authorized by the producer of a special event as provided under this section to engage in such business within a distance of 25 yards of such event from one hour before until one hour after the event. 
(f)  Food sales. The vendor of any food, whether hot or cold, as a part of a special event shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the county health department. It shall be the responsibility of the producer of an event to assure compliance with this section by any such vendors. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 11) 
Sec. 42-32. - Glass containers prohibited. 
The use of glass containers within the area of any special event shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 12) 
Sec. 42-33. - Police services. 
Traffic and crowd control shall be provided by the City of Brooklet Police Department and/or the Bulloch County Sheriff's Department, and the number of officers and/or special arrangements shall be determined by the chief of police of the City of Brooklet. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 13) 
Sec. 42-34. - Toilet facilities. 
The producer of a special event shall be required to provide temporary outdoor toilet facilities at any event at which 100 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. The number of toilets and their locations shall be determined by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 14) 
Sec. 42-35. - Tents, stages, etc. 
Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands or other temporary facilities constructed or erected as a part of a special event shall be approved by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 15) 
Sec. 42-36. - Street closing. 
The complete or partial closure of any street, sidewalk or other public way as a part of a special event shall be approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 16) 
Sec. 42-37. - Banners, signs, etc. 
Temporary, noncommercial banners or signs may be permitted overhead across public streets for the purpose of designating "starting" and "finish" lines for a race. Small banners, pennants, signs or other decorations which do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and which do not damage or deface any tree or public structure, may be allowed as part of a special event. Approval of the chief of police shall be obtained by the event producer for any banners or signs permitted in this section. The producer of the event shall be responsible for the removal of such banners, pennants or decorations within 48 hours after the close of the event. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 17) 
Sec. 42-38. - Duration of permit. 
No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid prior to or past the date of the special event for which it is issued. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 18) 
Sec. 42-39. - Cessation of activities. 
The safety, health, welfare and good order of all citizens and the community shall be first and foremost and every special event shall be conducted in such manner. The chief of police may terminate any activity, whether a part of or the entire event, which does not meet this community standard. Upon notification of the event producer in person by the chief of police to cease any activity, it shall be unlawful for such producer and/or any participants to permit such activity to continue. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 19) 
Sec. 42-40. - Picketing and demonstrations, etc. 
Any person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession or other activity protected by the U.S. Constitution shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any public or private place. Any person, group or organization engaged in such activities is required to make application as set forth in section 42-23(a) and (b) of this article. However, any such person, group or organization shall be exempt from the permit requirement in section 42-22(a) of this article and the fees set forth in section 42-23(c) of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-25-2015, § 20) 
Chapter 46 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Adoption of traffic act; penalty for violation. 
(a)  The provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-1-1 and O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6- 1 et seq.) are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1986, § 17-2; Ord. of 8-20-1979) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt rules of road by reference, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq. 
Sec. 46-2. - Riding bicycles, rollerskating and skateboarding upon sidewalks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to rollerskate, rollerblade, ride a skateboard, or ride a bicycle on any public sidewalk located within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 17-9; Ord. of 5-19-1980; Ord. of 1-24-2008, § 1) 
Sec. 46-3. - Coasters, rollerskates and similar devices; use restricted. 
No person upon rollerskates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and except upon streets set aside as play streets when and as authorized by ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 17-12) 
Sec. 46-4. - Go-carts and similar vehicles; use prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on the streets or sidewalks of the city any form of gasoline powered vehicle, commonly called a go-cart or any other vehicle having such shape and dimensions, power and other characteristics of the go-cart type of vehicle, the same being described in a general way as having a flat platform for a body with no hood or fenders and powered by one or more small air-cooled gasoline motors. 
(Code 1986, § 17-14) 
Sec. 46-5. - Speed zones. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183, the following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
(1)  On-system highways. 

 
Signs to be erected by the department of transportation for all state routes. 
(2)  Off-system highways. 

 
Signs to be erected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 051200, 5-18-2005) 
Sec. 46-6. - Speed detection devices. 
The police department of the city is hereby authorized to employ in its traffic control duties the use of speed detection devices. Said speed detection devices are those devices as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-14-1. Any patrol officer employed by the city and on regular duty for the city may employ a speed detection device for traffic control within the city limits. Speed detection devices shall only be used on those streets, roads or highways within the city limits which have been approved by the city council. Said speed detection devices shall be used only in accordance with the Laws of Georgia as promulgated in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-14-1, 40-4-2, on the following designated streets, roads and highways: 

 
(Code 1986, § 17-15; Ord. of 4-20-1981) 
Sec. 46-7. - No parking. 
A no parking ordinance which was recommended by the state highway department of transportation was adopted for the grocery store/service station located at the Northeast intersection of Cromley Road and State Highway 26 (U.S. 80). The no parking will apply to the shoulder of Highway 26 between the curb and the pavement edge. 
(Code 1986, § 17-52; Ord. of 7-1984) 
Secs. 46-8—46-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES 

Sec. 46-20. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Brooklet Personal Transportation Vehicle Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2017-2, 8-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-21. - Findings and intent. 
The ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Personal transportation vehicles (PTVs) and other similar vehicles are not designed or manufactured to be used on public highways, streets and roads, (hereafter "public roads") and the city in no way advocates their operation on the public roads within its jurisdiction. Adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived is not to be relied upon as a determination by the city that operation of PTVs on public roads is safe or advisable if done in accordance with this article. By regulating such operation the city is merely addressing safety issues. All persons who operate or ride in PTVs on public roads do so with their own judgment and at their own risk, and must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the city has no liability in negligence, nuisance or under any other cause of action for losses resulting from the use of PTV on roads, sidewalks, rights-of-way or other public property under this article. Any person who operates a PTV or other similar vehicle is responsible for procuring appropriate insurance as may be required by any state law or this article as a condition of operating PTVs and other similar vehicles on the roads of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2, 8-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-22. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, as it may be amended from time to time, are adopted and incorporated by reference herein. The current definition of personal transportation vehicle (sometimes referred to herein as "PTV") set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 is, in relevant part, as follows: "Any motor vehicle: (i) with a minimum of four wheels; (ii) capable of a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 mph; (iii) with a maximum gross vehicle unladen or empty weight of 1,375 pounds; and (iv) capable of transporting not more than eight persons. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2, 8-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-23. - Registration. 
(a)  A fee of $15.00 shall be paid to the city to register each and every PTV by the owner for use of such PTV on the public streets and roads within the city, which fee shall be charged by the city to cover the costs of implementing and maintaining this article. It shall be the duty of every owner of a PTV that is operated on public streets, roads, right-of-way or other public property in the jurisdiction of the city to register the PTV with the city clerk prior to operating the PTV on any public street, road, right-of-way or other public property within the city. 
(b)  Registration with the city shall include a record of the model, make, any vehicle identification number or serial number on such PTV, the name and address of the owner, a contact phone number, and any other such information as the city shall require, all of which shall be maintained by the city clerk. 
(c)  Upon registration with the city, each PTV shall be issued a registration decal from the city signifying such registration. The decals must be affixed in the vicinity of the left rear taillight in such a manner as to be visible at all times and shall remain permanently with such PTV unless the PTV is sold or the registration decal is destroyed. A PTV registration is valid for two years. 
(d)  The failure to have a current registration decal affixed to a PTV for use on a public street, road or other public property in the city shall be a violation of this article and subject the owner of such PTV to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. 
(e)  The registration decal issued by the city shall be non-transferrable from the PTV for which it was obtained. 
(f)  Upon transfer of the PTV to the ownership of another person, the PTV must be re-registered with the city within ten business days of the change in ownership. Such re-registration fee shall be in an amount of $15.00. If the registration is not transferred within ten business days it shall be considered an unregistered PTV and subject the owner of such PTV to penalties set forth in section 1-8. 
(g)  PTV dealers and distributors, along with other commercial establishments may rent PTVs to the public for use on designated public streets, roads, rights-of-way or other public property. Each such establishment renting PTVs shall be required to maintain a written record of each person who rents each PTV. Renters shall be required to furnish positive identification, shall be provided a copy of this article to read, and must be at least 18 years of age. The registration fee, along with all licensing and operation regulations, shall be the same as those which apply to other PTVs under this article. Each dealer or other commercial establishment obtaining registration decals for rental PTVs must provide a copy of liability insurance at the time such dealer or commercial establishment obtains the registration decals. 
(h)  Only those persons 18 years of age and older may register a PTV. PTV registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(i)  Any owner registering a PTV with the city agrees to abide by all of the requirements of state law and this Code. By registering a PTV with the city, the owner verifies that the vehicle qualifies to be classified as such under state law and this Code. 
(j)  The city council may, at its discretion, and by resolution, waive registration requirements for special events of a limited duration to which out-of-city residents may bring PTVs as participants. Such special events shall last no longer than seven calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2, 8-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-24. - Operation. 
(a)  All PTVs shall be equipped with: 
(1)  A braking system sufficient for the gross weight and passenger capacity of the vehicle, including a parking brake; 
(2)  A reverse warning device functional at all times when the directional control is in the reverse position; 
(3)  A main power switch. When the switch is in the "off" position, or the key or other device that activates the switch is removed, the motive power circuit shall be inoperative. If the switch uses a key, it shall be removable only in the "off" position; 
(4)  Two operating head lights and two tail lights; 
(5)  Horn; 
(6)  Rear view mirror; 
(7)  Reflex reflectors; 
(8)  Hip restraints and handholds, or a combination thereof; 
(9)  Safety warning labels; and 
(10)  At a minimum, all factory installed safety systems. 
(b)  Every gasoline-powered PTV shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. 
(2)  The exhaust system in its own shall be securely fastened, including the consideration of missing or broken brackets or hangers. 
(3)  The engine and power mechanism of every gasoline-powered PTV shall be so equipped, adjusted, and turned, as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any gasoline-powered PTV to operate or permit the operation of such gasoline-powered PTV on which any devise controlling or abating atmospheric conditions, which is placed on the gasoline-powered PTV vehicle by the manufacturer, to render the devise unserviceable by removal, alteration, or other interference with its operation. 
(5)  All gasoline-powered PTV shall be maintained in such condition so that they are incapable of "backfiring," or otherwise operating so as to make loud noises; or create noise as a result of an operator's equipping the gasoline-powered PTV with a certain device. 
(c)  No PTV shall be permitted to operate on any street within the city limits where the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour. 
(d)  Except as prohibited by law, PTV shall be permitted to cross over city streets and roads on which the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour as long as the PTV is traveling from one city street or road with a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less to another street or road with a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less. No PTV may cross any street, road or highway which is part of the state highway system (presently, Highway 80) unless such crossing is made at a crossing or intersection designated for that purpose by the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT). At this time, the GDOT approved highway crossings are at the following locations: 
(1)  SR 26 at Cromley Road; 
(2)  SR 26 at Parker Avenue; and 
(3)  SR 26 at East Lane Street (Buie Road). 
(e)  PTV owners shall maintain their PTV in a manner which ensures that an unobstructed view from the driver's seat to the rear is maintained at all times the PTV is in operation on public road. 
(f)  The maximum occupancy of a PTV traveling on public streets, roads, rights-of-way or other public property shall be one person per designated seat. 
(g)  All operators of PTV shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the designated public roads, streets, rights-of-way or other public property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2, 8-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-25. - Personal transportation vehicle operator licensing regulations. 
Only those persons possessing a valid motor vehicle driver's license issued by the State of Georgia or other state of the United States of America may operate and drive a PTV on designated public roads, streets, rights-of-way or other permitted public property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2, 8-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-26. - Insurance. 
The owner or operator of a PTV is liable for his own actions. Any person who operates or owns a PTV is responsible for procuring liability insurance and verifying coverage in terms sufficient to cover risks involved in operating such PTV on designated public streets, roads, rights-of-way or other public property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2, 8-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-27. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(a)  Blocking a public access to any public roads, streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way or other public property of the city shall be prohibited, except for permitted events. 
(b)  All operators and passengers of PTV shall remain seated at all times during the operation of the PTV. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2, 8-17-2017) 
Sec. 46-28. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any of the terms of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court or other court of appropriate jurisdiction and, upon conviction, punished as provided in section 1-8 and/or appropriate state statute. 
(Ord. No. 2017-2, 8-17-2017) 
Chapter 50 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Permit required for connection to city service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or connect any outlet, hydrant, faucet or other device for diverting water, electricity or other city service from the city, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the proper authority. 
(Code 1986, § 16-29; Ord. of 3-16-1981) 
Secs. 50-2—50-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-20. - [Commitment to water conservation and efficience.] 
(a)  Whereas, water conservation is defined as any beneficial reduction in water loss, waste of use an includes all measures or water use efficiency. 
(b)  Whereas, water conservation is a sound water management tool and can result in long-term economic, social, financial, and environmental benefits. 
(c)  Whereas, developing new sources of water infrastructure is typically more expensive than extending the life of existing supplies through water conservation and efficiency. 
(d)  Whereas, when coupled, energy and water efficiency can result in significant financial and natural resource savings. 
(e)  Whereas, the Town of Brooklet recognizes that through water conservation and efficiency, other cities have achieved significant reductions in water use; and the Town of Brooklet can benefit from setting water conservation benchmarks and goals. 
(f)  Whereas, the mayor and council members of the Town of Brooklet recognize and accept the responsibility to be a leader and to implement water conservation and efficiency practices by (1) assessing the conservation potential in our own building fixtures, practices and policies; (2) retrofitting high water use fixtures in government buildings; (3) encouraging city employees to implement water conserving practices in their work. 
(g)  Whereas, the Town of Brooklet recognizes that water loss and unaccounted for water can lead to problems in water availability, cost of services, and delivery reliability; therefore shall investigate the costs and benefits of implementing a thorough metering, leak detection and leak repair program for water treatment and delivery systems. 
(h)  Whereas, the Town of Brooklet shall promote conservation and efficiency where practiced by (1) educating citizens on the many benefits and importance of conservation; and (2) empowering citizens to make sustainable decisions regarding indoor and outdoor water use. 
(i)  Whereas, the Town of Brooklet shall investigate and adopt water conservation oriented ordinances to help the town and her citizens save water, save money and save time. 
(j)  Whereas, the Town of Brooklet shall revisit all articles herein when new requirements and information become available. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2008(2)) 
Editor's note— Ord. of Dec. 18, 2008(2), did not specifically amend the Code. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 50-20. 
Sec. 50-21. - Inspections of water pipes, meters and fixtures. 
The director of public works, or his designated assistant, may enter the premises of any water taker at any reasonable time to examine the condition of the water pipes, meters, and fixtures. 
(Code 1986, § 16-1) 
Sec. 50-22. - Application for water use; deposit. 
Application for the use of water shall be made to the city clerk by the owner or agent of the property to be benefited, designating the location of the property and stating the purpose for which the water may be required. A deposit in the amount established by the council (see fee schedule) shall be paid before water can be turned on. 
(Code 1986, § 16-2) 
Sec. 50-23. - Service tap fees. 
The cost for a five-eighths service tap fee shall be as established by the council (see fee schedule). 
(Code 1986, § 16-3; Mo. of 9-19-1983; Ord. of 8-16-2001, § 1(16-3)) 
Sec. 50-24. - Size of service tap; exception. 
No service tap shall be more than five-eighths inch in diameter; however, the director of public works may grant special permission for larger taps where the water supply and service facilities are sufficient to permit such taps. Where a larger tap is permitted, the director shall fix the tapping charge therefor. 
(Code 1986, § 16-4) 
Sec. 50-25. - Water meters. 
Each building or structure using city water shall have a water meter installed by the city, which may be installed either in a curb box or inside of the building at the option of the property owner. All such meters are the property of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 16-5) 
Sec. 50-26. - Service line regulations. 
No more than one building shall be permitted to use a water service line. Each service line shall contain a stopcock and wastecock where the water may be turned off. 
(Code 1986, § 16-6; Mo. of 4-13-1932) 
Sec. 50-27. - Sprinkling restrictions. 
In case of water shortage or scarcity, the mayor and council may by resolution place any restrictions upon the use of water for irrigation or sprinkling purposes which such body deems necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 16-8) 
Sec. 50-28. - Water rates. 
(a)  Residential. The municipal water rates for residential customers within the city service area shall be as established by the city (see fee schedule). 
(b)  Commercial. Contracts for commercial water customers shall be negotiated individually with the mayor and council. 
(Code 1986, § 16-9; Mo. of 1-16-1978; Ord. of 7-15-2004(1), § 1) 
Sec. 50-29. - Due date; water utility board, powers and notice requirement. 
(a)  General rule. All water bills shall be due on or before the 15th day of the month following the reading of the meter, and if not paid by such date, a penalty of $20.00 shall be added thereto and paid by the customer. 
(b)  Water utility board . There is hereby established a water utility board, which shall consist of two members of the city council, and one member from the city administration, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor. The board shall meet at 6:30 p.m. on the 3rd Thursday of each month, or such other time or times as may be designated by the city clerk. The term of each utility board member shall be one year, provided that any member may hold over beyond such one-year term until a new member is appointed by the mayor. The mayor is further authorized to fill the vacancy of any member for such member's unexpired term. 
(c)  Powers of water utility board . The water utility board is authorized to reasonably extend payment due dates and/or set up reasonable payment plans in cases that come before it in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the customer contends, and city water department confirms, that there has been a water leak on the customer's side of the meter; or 
(2)  The customer demonstrates financial hardship due to circumstances reasonably beyond the control of the customer. 
The water utility board shall not have the power to forgive all or any portion of the bill in question. 
(d)  Written notice from customer required. The water utility board shall have no jurisdiction or power to act unless the customer (or the customer's representative) files a written request with the city clerk prior to the due date of the utility bill in question. Otherwise, such utility bill shall be due in full on the original due date. If such written request is filed by the customer (or the customer's representative), the due date for the utility bill in question shall automatically be extended until the next meeting of the water utility board, at which time the board shall determine whether the payment due date should be further reasonably extended and/or whether a reasonable payment plan should be set up. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4, 9-20-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-4, adopted Sept. 20, 2018, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1986, § 16-10; Ord. of 9-19-2014. 
Sec. 50-30. - Discontinuance of service; fine for turning on meter prior to payment of bill. 
Unless the water utility board defers the payment due date pursuant to section 50-29 above, the meters for water bills not paid by the 15th of the second billing month shall be locked until the bill is paid in full. Anyone turning the meter on before the bill is paid will be fined in an amount established by the city council (see Fee Schedule). 
(Ord. No. 2018-4, 9-20-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-4, adopted Sept. 20, 2018, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1986, § 16-11; Mo. of 4-21-1980; Ord. of 9-19-2014. 
Sec. 50-31. - Charges for turning water on. 
If the water supply to any premises is turned off for any reason, a charge in the amount established by the city (see fee schedule) shall be made for turning the water back on. 
(Code 1986, § 16-12; Mo. 8-21-1978) 
Sec. 50-32. - [Fee schedule.] 
Monthly Rates and Charges 

 
REU = Residential Equivalent Unit 
Residential trash\12.00 
Commercial trash\19.00 
Overhead Sprinkler Systems: 
The charge for any overhead sprinkler systems installed in any facilities inside the city limits other than single-family residences shall be $15.00 per month for any area up to and including 10,000 square feet and $1.50 per additional 1,000 square feet. The charge for any overhead sprinkler systems installed in any facilities outside the city limits other than single-family residences shall be $15.00 per month for any area up to and including 10,000 square feet and $1.50 per additional 1,000 square feet. 
Tap-In Fees: 
Water tap-in fees shall be charged on the basis of residential units or residential equivalent units according to the tap-in fees listed hereinafter. Any fractional units resulting from the calculation of residential equivalent units shall be treated as a whole unit. In addition to the tap-in fees, installation fees shall be charged in accordance with schedules listed hereinafter. Installation fees shall cover only connection to existing mains that are adjacent to location to be served; the actual costs of any extensions necessary shall be charged in addition to tap-in and installation fees. All fees and charges shall be paid by the customer or customers at whose request the connection is made. 
Water tap-in fees shall be charged as follows: 
Four hundred fifty dollars for each residential unit or residential equivalent unit. 
The water tap-in fee for connecting to water mains for fire protection purposes shall be as follows: 

 
The director may authorize licensed master plumbers to install connections to water or wastewater facilities upon written application. Water meters shall be supplied to authorized licensed master plumbers at cost; all other related accessories for water or sewer connections may be supplied to authorized licensed master plumbers. The director shall require payment of installation fees as listed herein or reimbursement of actual costs for any installations not specifically covered. All work done by other than city personnel shall be done only under the supervision of licensed master plumbers authorized to perform such work. The director shall require that all installation is performed in accordance with specifications and/or standards conforming to sound engineering practices; in the event that such installation is not made in accordance with specifications and/or standards, the director may require the installation to be corrected or removed and reinstalled as necessary. 
Installation Fees: 
Installation fees shall cover only connection to existing mains that are adjacent to location to the be served, the actual costs of any extensions necessary shall be charged in addition to tap-in and installation fees. All fees and charges shall be paid by the customer or customers at whose request the connection is made. 
Water installation fees for making taps into the city water mains or water lines and installing water meters or providing water meters for plumbers to install shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
Installation fees for meters larger than two inches shall be charged on the basis of reimbursement to the city for all actual costs incurred in making the installation. 
Installation fees for installations requiring additional facilities including but not limited to manholes or flow metering installations shall be charged on the basis of reimbursement to the city for all actual costs incurred in making the installation. 
Charges for any installation not covered in standard pricing shall be calculated in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
All hourly charges shall include travel time to and from the job location. Work performed outside regular business hours at the request of customers shall be charged at 150 percent of the rates in the schedule. Miscellaneous charges shall include actual charges for equipment rented to perform the work. The above schedule shall also be used to calculate charges when city staff or equipment is used on private facilities. The staging charge shall be used for construction but may be waved for other types of work at the discretion of the director. 
Charges for Miscellaneous Services: 
If any action taken by unauthorized persons inside a meter box causes damages to a curb stop or a cover or lock connected to a curb stop, the resident or customer responsible for the premises shall be charged a fee of $50.00 for each incident in addition to other fees and charges. 
Deposits, Late Fees and Service Charges: 
Deposits shall be a two and one-half times the monthly bill for all services, as estimated by the director using whatever data may be available, with a minimum deposit of $100.00 per unit for water. 
In the event a utility bill has not been paid by the past due date printed on the bill, the account may be subject to an additional late fee of ten percent of the balance owed and not less than $5.00. Late fees may be incurred whether or not the service is disconnected. 
In the event that service has been cut off for nonpayment of any city utility bill or other action resulting in unauthorized use of city services, service shall not be restored until the unpaid bill and service fees provided by this section are satisfied. Before service is restored, the following service fees shall be paid by the user cumulatively for each action taken to prevent unauthorized use of city services: 
(1)  Turn-on after a delinquent cut-off and locking meter ..... $50.00 
(2)  Removal of meter ..... 125.00 
(3)  Removal of straight line ..... 150.00 
(4)  Cutting off water at main ..... 300.00 
Payment of these fees shall not exempt any user from any civil or criminal action resulting from violations of this chapter. 
In addition to the fees and deposits otherwise provided hereinabove, each applicant for service shall pay in advance an account establishment charge of $30.00 for either new service or transfer of service from one location to another. 
Residential Equivalent Units: 
A residential equivalent unit is that portion of a user's facility that has an impact on the water and wastewater system equivalent to a single-family residence. The determination of a facility's residential equivalent units shall be based on estimated water consumption as shown in guidelines below or on square footage. Peak water consumption of 300 gallons per day or a floor space of 3,000 square feet, shall be the equivalent of one residential unit. The method which results in the greater number of equivalent residential units shall be applied. The standards in the table below shall be used in the determination of water consumption. If the table does not provide information for a particular application, the estimated water consumption shall be as calculated by the director in accordance with sound engineering practices using information available from Georgia EPD, USEPA, or standard reference materials commonly used for estimating flows. 

 
** Add 300 gallons per machine to amount indicated if laundry or dish washing machines are installed. 
In the event a facility is made up of more than one smaller component facility, the determination of residential equivalent units shall be calculated as the sum of all component's residential equivalent units. 
Notwithstanding, in a case involving a site utilizing its own private water supply and distribution system to multiple locations resulting in the production of domestic-type waste water only, such as employee restrooms and showers, such that reading and maintenance of meters would create excessive costs and hardship in the judgement of the director, the city may bill on flow estimates calculated on the basis of an average flow per employee times the average number of employees at such facility for the recovery of costs of transporting and treating the wastewater. 
Adjustments in Billing: 
The city does not make adjustments for water leaks. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2008(3); Ord. of 6-15-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. of Dec. 18, 2008(3), did not specifically amend the Code. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 50-32. 
Secs. 50-33—50-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OUTDOOR WATER USE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Dec. 16, 2010 repealed former Division 2, §§ 50-51—50-56, and enacted a new Division 2 as set out herein. Former Division 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 12-18-2008(1), §§ 391-3-30-.01—391-3-30-.06. 

Sec. 50-51. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable City of Brooklet Ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 50-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this division. 
(b)  The mayor, or his designee, shall be the enforcement authority for this division. The mayor, or his designee, may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means authorized by law. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2010) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 101-1. - Application of Code chapter 1. 
The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code applies to this subpart. 
Chapter 105 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State building code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 105-1—105-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State building code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-19. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of this article, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1978, § 5-131; Ord. No. 1993-05, 11-18-1993) 
Sec. 105-20. - Mandatory state codes adopted. 
The standards enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)—(9)(B)(i)(VIII), which standards are mandatory pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a), are hereby adopted. 
Sec. 105-21. - Permissive state codes adopted. 
The standards enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(IX)—(9)(B)(i)(XI), are hereby adopted. 
Sec. 105-22. - Appendices to adopted codes. 
The following appendices to the standards adopted in this division are adopted: 
(1)  International Building Code. 
a.  Appendix E ( Supplementary Accessibility Requirements ). 
b.  Appendix H ( Signs ). 
(2)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
a.  Appendix E ( Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings ). 
b.  Appendix G ( Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs ). 
c.  Appendix J ( Existing Buildings ). 
Secs. 105-23—105-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 105-48. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for the administration and enforcement of this article. In this division all of the codes heretofore adopted shall be referred to as the "technical codes," as may be adopted by the state or city. 
Sec. 105-49. - Code remedial. 
(a)  Generally. The standards adopted in division 1 of this article are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this article except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this article shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
Sec. 105-50. - Scope. 
(a)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(b)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
Sec. 105-51. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe. 
Secs. 105-52—105-75. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Powers and Duties of the Building Official 

Sec. 105-76. - Authority to enforce provisions of technical codes, issue citations, etc. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes; is hereby given the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter and the technical codes; is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas; and is authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with their spirit and purpose. 
Sec. 105-77. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the technical codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the technical codes; provided, that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter or the technical codes. 
Sec. 105-78. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
Sec. 105-79. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the technical codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application of plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of code provisions. The building official, may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the technical codes. 
Sec. 105-80. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with ordinance or state law. 
Sec. 105-81. - Requirements not covered by technical codes. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
Sec. 105-82. - Alternative materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them; provided, any such alternative has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternative; provided, the building official finds that the alternative for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent to that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternative. 
Secs. 105-83—105-107. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Permits, Inspections and Certificates 

Sec. 105-108. - Permit application. 
(a)  When required; application. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for that work. 
(b)  Exceptions. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the state minimum mechanical code; 
(5)  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; or 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(c)  State license required. Applications for electrical, mechanical or plumbing permits may only be made by, and will only be issued to, an individual holding a valid state electrical, mechanical or plumbing license or to an individual performing work on a single-family dwelling or farm-owned and -occupied by the individual applicant; provided, however, all work pursuant to such permit must be in conformity with all provisions of the technical codes and this chapter. 
(d)  Joint responsibility. It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner and contractor to see that a permit is obtained before any work is commenced. 
(e)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work; provided, the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(f)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit; provided, that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(g)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent; or, if the work is to be performed by a contractor, the application must be signed by the licensed contractor or individual owner or occupant. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(h)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than nine days each may be allowed by the building official for the application; provided, the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
Sec. 105-109. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with his official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to such drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All Group A, E and I occupancies; 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high; and 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistant wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistant floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquidtight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
Sec. 105-110. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to law as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the building code as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit; provided, the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
Sec. 105-111. - Permit issuance or denial. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet the provisions of the technical codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where such building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant presents to the building official a plat or survey certified by a state-registered land surveyor, or other evidence acceptable to the building official, showing the location of applicable street rights-of-way and building setback lines; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in the state minimum international building code. 
Sec. 105-112. - Contractor's responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing. 
Sec. 105-113. - Conditions of the permit. 
(a)  Permit intent; validity. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the technical codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(b)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, he shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. If such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are approved by the building official. 
(c)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit he shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans, "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
Sec. 105-114. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees as prescribed in subsection (d) of this section have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate account of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing the application, in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges established by the city (see fee schedule). 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of the building alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
Sec. 105-115. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing buildings inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services; provided, that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or his representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as are necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. This inspection shall require a pressure test. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. This inspection shall require a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all duct work, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed have been concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to insure compliance with all the requirements of this Code, and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel and structural frames. Reinforcing steel or structural frame work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
Sec. 105-116. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Required prior to building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Such certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuance. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building that may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Existing building. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection of service utilities. No person or other entity (including public utility companies) shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize the disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of an emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
Sec. 105-117. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose that will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
Sec. 105-118. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
Secs. 105-119—105-149. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals 

Sec. 105-150. - Established. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
Sec. 105-151. - Membership; terms and vacancies; quorum and voting. 
(a)  The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall consist of three members, all of whom shall be residents of the county. One member shall have experience in one of the following fields: professional engineering, architecture or building construction. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(b)  Each member shall be appointed for a term of four years, but shall continue to serve until reappointed or a replacement is named. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the council. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the council, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(c)  Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting all business of the board. 
Sec. 105-152. - Building official to serve as secretary. 
The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and failure of a member to vote. 
Sec. 105-153. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in section 105-154, to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the building, gas, mechanical and plumbing codes. 
Sec. 105-154. - Appeals. 
(a)  Conditions for appeal. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system; 
(2)  The provisions of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes do not apply to this specific case; 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case; or 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The construction board of adjustment and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing code or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others; 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes to other buildings, structures or service system; 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system; and 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Conditions of the variance. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the building, gas, mechanical and plumbing codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of these codes. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(e)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system that, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeals to a shorter period. 
Sec. 105-155. - Procedures of the board. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing code. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 15 calendar days after the notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in each case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If the decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed, in writing, in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after the filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
Secs. 105-156—105-178. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF LOW FLOW PLUMBING DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Low flow plumbing devices, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 105-179. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Sec. 105-180. - New construction restrictions. 
(a)  No construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(b)  There shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type that does not meet the requirements of subsections (a)(1)—(5) of this section. 
Sec. 105-181. - Repair or renovation restrictions. 
The requirements of section 105-180 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after April 1, 1992, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
Sec. 105-182. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 105-180 and 105-181 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the persons with disabilities; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (a)(3), or (a)(4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the director of inspections for the city. 
Sec. 105-183. - Enforcement; citations. 
This article shall be enforced by the building official. Citations for violations may be issued by the building official. 
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's subdivision ordinance, being an appendix to the zoning ordinance adopted on March 4, 2002. Amendments to the original ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the section remains unchanged from the original zoning ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the city Code. Material encased in brackets has been editorially supplied. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1. - General definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, or as set forth in section 2 of this article, all words used in this chapter [ordinance] shall carry their customary dictionary meanings. 
Sec. 2. - Additional definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter [ordinance] shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cul-de-sac means a dead end street where there is room to turn at a circular end. 
Master plan (same as a comprehensive plan) means any part or element of the overall plan for development adopted by the city council. 
Street means, relates to, and includes a right-of-way affording primary access to abutting property including avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, lanes, alleys, and other public or private ways. 
Subdivider means an individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity (or agent therefor) that undertakes the activities covered by these regulations. Inasmuch as the subdivision plat is merely a necessary means to the end of assuring satisfactory development, the term "subdivider" is intended to include terms "developer" and "builder" even though the persons involved in successive stages of the project may vary. 
Subdivision means a division of a tract or parcel of land (which existed at the time of the enactment of this zoning ordinance as one contiguous parcel for zoning purposes) into three or more lots, building sites, or divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of conveyance, transfer, improvement, sale, legacy or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new street (regardless of the number of lots) or a change in existing streets, and includes a resubdivision, provided however, that the following are not included within this definition: The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards set forth in this chapter [ordinance]. 
Sec. 3. - Purpose. 
This chapter [ordinance] is enacted to encourage the development of an economically sound and stable community; to assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments; to assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; to the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, education, and other public purposes; to assure, in general the development of areas in harmony with the master plan of the community; and to secure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for observance both by the subdivider and the planning commission. 
Sec. 4. - Four-step review. 
The procedure for review, consideration, and approval of a subdivision plat consists of four separate steps. These are: 
A.  Review of sketch plans by the building inspector and zoning administrator; 
B.  Consideration and approval of sketch plans by the planning commission; 
C.  Review of preliminary plats by the building inspector and zoning administrator with subsequent approvals by the planning commission and city council; and 
D.  Review of final plat by the building inspector and zoning administrator. 
Steps A, B and C shall be completed prior to making any street improvement or installing any utilities. Step D shall be completed prior to the sale of any lots in the proposed subdivision. 
Sec. 5. - Conflict with other laws. 
When the provisions of this chapter [ordinance] specify more restrictive standards than required by any other statute, the requirements of this chapter [ordinance] shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
ARTICLE II. - SKETCH PLANS 

Sec. 1. - Sketch plan review procedures. 
At least 25 days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the planning commission, the subdivider shall submit to the zoning administrator 12 copies of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. If phase development is contemplated, then a sketch plan for each phase will be required simultaneously. Included with the sketch plan must be a sketch map which shows the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area. The purpose of the sketch plan is to assist the subdivider prior to extensive site planning necessary for the preparation of the preliminary plat and to enable the subdivider to become familiar with the regulations affecting the land to be subdivided. Utilizing the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance, the building inspector, zoning administrator and the planning commission shall review and approve, disapprove, or approve with modification the sketch plan within 45 days from the meeting at which it is considered. Pertinent comments and recommendations shall be noted in the minutes of the planning commission meeting. Failure of the subdivider to submit a preliminary plat within 18 months from the approval of the sketch plan will require resubmittal of the sketch plan to the planning commission for reconsideration. 
Sec. 2. - Sketch plan. 
Scale. The sketch plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. 
Vicinity map. The sketch plan shall include a vicinity map at a scale not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding development. 
Other requirements. The sketch plan shall show: 
A.  Proposed name of subdivision; 
B.  Name, address and telephone number of petitioner, architect, surveyor, engineer and designer; 
C.  All names and addresses of all property owners of the site; 
D.  All names and addresses, as listed by the county assessor, of all owners of the land adjacent to the site and location of those property lines; 
E.  North indicator; 
F.  Date of preparation; 
G.  Total acreage of the tract to be subdivided, lot layout, and estimated lot sizes; 
H.  Zoning district classification of land to be subdivided and adjoining land; 
I.  Existing and proposed uses of land throughout the subdivisions, including streets, roads, utility easements, and land reserved or dedicated for public or common use; 
J.  In case of a resubdivision, a copy of the existing plat with the proposed resubdivision superimposed thereon; 
K.  Location of natural features such as streams, lakes, swamps, and land subject to flood based on a 100-year flood frequency on the property to be subdivided; 
L.  Location of existing buildings on the property to be subdivided; 
M.  Location of city limit lines and county lines (if applicable); 
N.  Sketch plan shall be on one sheet where practical. If the complete plan cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
Subdivision of part of property. The subdivider shall submit a sketch plan of such subdivider's entire tract even though such subdivider's present plans call for the actual development of only a part of the property. 
Recorded deed and plat. Along with the sketch plan, the subdivider shall submit a copy of the recorded deed vesting title in the owner(s) and a copy of any recorded plat showing the property. 
Sec. 3. - Fees. 
A sketch plan fee in the amount specified on the chart of fees maintained by the city clerk shall be paid upon filing. 
ARTICLE III. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 1. - Submission of plat. 
Following the sketch plan approval stage of proposed land subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission and zoning administrator the following: 
A.  The preliminary plat and other documents as specified hereafter. 
B.  A letter requesting review and approval of the preliminary plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of a hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent. 
C.  A preliminary plat filing fee in the amount specified on the chart of fees maintained by the city clerk. 
Sec. 2. - Review of preliminary plat. 
The zoning administrator shall review the preliminary plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this chapter [ordinance], and the requirements of the zoning ordinance, and shall take into consideration the general requirements of the community and the best use of the land to be subdivided. 
Sec. 3. - Preliminary plat procedures. 
A.  The zoning administrator shall transmit a copy of the application for preliminary plat approval to each member of the planning commission for their review and recommendation. Further, the zoning administrator will provide a copy of the application to each city council member and the mayor. The planning commission shall have a 60-day period subsequent to the receipt of the preliminary plat application from the zoning administrator within which to make its recommendation to the city council. If the planning commission fails to submit the recommendation within the 60-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the preliminary plat as submitted. Prior to taking action on the application for approval of a preliminary plat, the planning commission must hold a public hearing at the regularly scheduled date and time for planning commission hearings. 
B.  Upon a recommendation being submitted by the planning commission, the city council shall conduct a review and either approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the preliminary plat. The city council shall have a 60[-day] period within which to make its decision after receipt of the recommendation by the planning commission. 
Sec. 4. - Tentative and conditional nature of the preliminary plat approval. 
Tentative and conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the building inspector and zoning administrator. 
Sec. 5. - Expiration of tentative approval of preliminary plat. 
The tentative approval shall expire after one year unless an extension of time is granted by the planning commission. 
Sec. 6. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
The preliminary plat shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Number of copies. Twelve copies of the preliminary plat shall be furnished by the subdivider. 
B.  Form. The preliminary plat shall be drawn clearly and legibly at scale of one inch equals 100 feet, or less. The sheet size shall not be less than 16 inches by 24 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
Sec. 7. - Data required on preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed architect, engineer or land surveyor and contain the following information: 
A.  Proposed subdivision name or identifying title and acreage to be subdivided. 
B.  Name and address of owner of record, subdivider, architect, surveyor, engineer, designer and owners of adjoining property. 
C.  Date and north point. 
D.  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. A certificate from an authorized engineer or surveyor shall be required stating the drainage from the property is adequate and will not adversely affect adjacent property owners. 
E.  Exact boundaries and acreage of the tract to be subdivided by distances and bearings. 
F.  Existing and proposed easements and their approximate location, width and distances. 
G.  Names and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and alleys on and adjacent to the tract. 
H.  Location and type of existing and proposed sewerage and storm drainage and water supply facilities and other utilities on or adjacent to the tract, showing proposed connection. 
I.  Sites, if any, and their acreage, to be reserved or dedicated for public uses. 
J.  Present zoning classifications of land to be subdivided and adjoining land. 
K.  Vicinity map showing location of subdivision and its relationship to the rest of the city and surrounding countryside. This may be shown at a smaller scale. 
L.  The names, where appropriate, and locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, buildings, parking, recreation areas and facilities, yards and other open spaces. 
M.  Utility and drainage plans shall be provided including all information required by the Bulloch County health department and the city street and water departments. All such utility and drainage plans shall be prepared and approved by a licensed professional engineer. The subdivider shall be responsible for all such costs. 
N.  Location, dimensions, and treatment of all required buffers, landscaped or planted areas including fences. 
O.  A preliminary outline of proposed protective covenants, including provisions for the organization and financing of a homeowner's association where appropriate. 
P.  All preliminary plats must contain warranties, representations and/or a contract with a licensed professional engineer to provide inspections and certifications that the subdivision "as built" complies with the terms and conditions of the approved plans. 
Q.  The acreage of each draining area affecting the proposed subdivision. The drainage area may extend beyond the area to be subdivided. 
R.  Layout of streets, roads, alleys, public crosswalks, and widths, road names, or designations, grades and cross sections. 
S.  Profile of proposed streets showing natural and finished grades with percent of grade slope. 
T.  Detailed layout of all lots, including building setback lines; scaled dimensions on lots; utility easements with width and use. 
U.  Construction drawings of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe size, location of manholes, and points of discharge and percolation tests, soil borings and wells as specified by the health department. 
V.  Plans of all drainage provision, retaining walls, curbing, planting, anti-erosion devices or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with or as a part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area of land tributary to the site and estimated runoff of the area served by any drains. 
W.  Construction drawings, prepared and approved by an engineer licensed in the state of Georgia, of water supply system with pipe sizes and locations of hydrants and valves. 
X.  Proposed major contour changes to areas where substantial cut and/or fill is to be done. 
Y.  A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence and the timing of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures. 
Z.  Total number of lots, total acreage, total length and width of new streets. 
Sec. 8. - Review and approval. 
The preliminary plat shall be approved by the planning commission only after review and approval of the following: 
A.  The Bulloch County health department shall review the sewage disposal facilities to be provided on all preliminary plats after being provided with such percolation tests or other information as it may require. In addition, it shall make determinations in all matters concerning the public health, as specified herein. Such determinations and recommendations shall be forwarded to the building inspector and zoning administrator in writing. 
B.  A land disturbing activity permit, pursuant to the Bulloch County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, including all amendments in effect as of the date of application for such permit, shall be required prior to any land disturbing activity on the project site. "Land-disturbing activity" includes, but is not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. An approved sediment and erosion control plan and review by the soil conservation service and/or other agencies or officials designated by the building and zoning official is required as part of the application for the permit. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 1. - Compliance with article. 
Subdivider shall observe the general requirements and design standards of land subdivisions provided in this article. 
Sec. 2. - Public sites and open spaces. 
A.  When a proposed school site or other public building site, park, or other land for public use is located in whole or part in the subdivision, the planning commission may require that, as a prerequisite to plat approval, such sites shall be dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition by the appropriate public agency. 
B.  Areas for parks, playgrounds, or other public uses shall be not less than five percent of the subdivided area. 
C.  Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to a public use that the planning commission finds not required or suitable for such public use, the planning commission shall refuse to approve the plat. 
D.  The approval of a plat by the planning commission shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the city of the dedication of any streets or other grounds shown upon the plat. 
Sec. 3. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the commission to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other use as may increase danger to health, life, or property, or aggravate the flood hazard, but such land shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation. 
Sec. 4. - Lots. 
Lots shall front upon a public street. Lot lines shall be generally perpendicular or radial to street lines. Lot dimensions shall meet the requirements of the comprehensive zoning ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is located. Corner lots shall be increased in size wherever necessary so as to provide that any structure to be placed thereon shall conform to the minimum setback lines as required in the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 5. - Blocks. 
The length shall not exceed 1,200 feet or be less than 400 feet and the width sufficient to provide for two tiers of lots, but irregularly shaped lots indented by cul-de-sac streets and containing interior parks will be acceptable when properly designed and provision made for maintenance of interior parks. 
Sec. 6. - Streets. 
A.  Conformance to existing streets: The arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation of the principal streets in adjoining subdivisions or for their proper projection when adjoining property has not yet been subdivided. 
B.  Street names: Street names shall require the approval of the planning commission and Bulloch County 911 services. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets. 
C.  Street jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
D.  Dead end or cul-de-sac streets: Dead end or cul-de-sac streets shall not be greater in length than 500 feet. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least 60 feet with an outside pavement radius of at least 50 feet. 
E.  Reserve strips: Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys and public grounds shall not be permitted unless the control is placed in the hands of the city council under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
F.  Street intersections: Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees unless required by unusual circumstances. 
G.  Curb radii: Curb radii at street intersections shall be at least 25 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a radius of at least 30 feet shall be required. 
H.  Easements: Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided where necessary for utilities or drainage. 
Sec. 7. - Geometric standards and other requirements of streets. 
Streets shall conform to the following minimum standards and requirements: 

 
ARTICLE V. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS IN SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 1. - Preliminary plat approval prior to construction. 
Construction of improvements shall not commence until the preliminary plat has been approved. 
Sec. 2. - Improvements installed by subdivider. 
The subdivider shall be required to install or have installed, at its own expense, the following improvements: 
(1)  Monuments: Two concrete monuments at least 36 inches in length and four inches square with a suitable center point at each street intersection on the right-of-way line, and iron pin monuments less than three-fourths inch in diameter and 24 inches long at all points on boundary lines of lots where there is a change in direction, and at all lot corners. 
(2)  Streets: At least 1.5 inches of Georgia D.O.T. specification hot plant mix asphalt on a base of at least seven inches of stabilized gravel or eight inches of crushed limestone, or equivalent. No final grading or paving of the street, or construction or installation of utilities in the bed of a street shall be permitted until the grade has been officially established. No paving shall begin until underground utilities are installed and approved and the compacted base has been inspected and approved by (1) the official representative of the city, (2) a licensed professional engineer employed by the subdivider, and (3) the a licensed professional engineer selected by the city. 
(3)  Water mains: Where a public water main is within 1,500 feet of the subdivision at its nearest point, the subdivider shall at its sole expense connect with such water main. In all cases, where feasible, water systems shall be looped. In such cases, mains of at least six inches shall be required. The subdivider shall be responsible for the costs of all tap-ons and extensions to existing municipal facilities. 
(4)  Sanitary sewer: Wherever a public sanitary sewer is within 1,500 feet of the subdivision at its nearest point and connection by gravity flow is feasible, the subdivider shall connect with such sanitary sewer and provide connection for each lot. The size of the mains shall be at least eight inches. The subdivider shall be responsible for the costs of all taps, life [lift] pump stations, manholes, and extensions to existing municipal facilities. Where sanitary sewers are not available, an oxidation pond, septic tank, or other disposal device designed and installed according to standards of the appropriate governmental agency may be permitted. 
(5)  Storm sewers: Storm sewers, catch basins, and traps shall be provided in each subdivision. They shall be designed to carry not less than the storm water from a rainfall expected to occur once in ten years, with a runoff factor of 90 percent for pavements and buildings and a variable runoff factor depending on the topography of the ground for other areas. Storm drainage design shall be based upon Talbot's Formula. All storm sewage calculations shall be verified by a licensed professional engineer employed by the subdivider. 
(6)  Curbs and gutters: Upon review, the planning commission may or may not require that curb and gutters be installed. If required, valley gutters may be permitted on grades over six percent. 
(7)  Easements: Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the developer shall provide easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines for utilities; such easements shall be at least 20 feet wide. 
(8)  Sidewalks: Pedestrian sidewalks of at least four feet in width. Pedestrian easements shall also be provided to grant access to recreation areas and/or school sites when, in the opinion of the planning commission, sufficient access is not provided by proposed streets. All sidewalks are to be minimum of four feet in width, four inches in thickness of 2,500 p.s.i. concrete, with three-foot wide handicap ramps at intersections. 
(9)  Street signs: There shall be placed at least one standard reflectorized street name sign at every intersection, and two diagonally opposed when deemed necessary by the planning commission. 
(10)  Utility installation: Public utility installation costs for gas, telephone, electrical, cable television, and street lights shall be borne by the developer or utility company. Installation shall be on street right-of-ways, specified easements, or under streets prior to paving of streets. All utilities shall be underground. 
(11)  Fire hydrants: One fire hydrant within 500 feet of each residence or other structure measured over streets, and at any other location designated by the city water department. 
(12)  Variances or other improvements: Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Likewise, because of particular conditions or circumstances relative to a particular subdivision, the planning commission may require the installation of sidewalks, streets, trees or other improvements not specifically set forth herein. Any variance thus authorized or additional improvements thus required are to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning on which the variance or addition was justified set forth. 
(13)  Street light requirement: Subdivider shall install street lights for the benefit of the subdivision in a manner sufficient to light the streets. Subdivider shall maintain the street lighting system. The subdivider shall submit/obtain the design approval of a licensed professional engineer as to the appropriate configuration of the lighting system. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 1. - Procedure for final plat approval. 
The subdivider shall submit to the zoning administrator five copies of the final plat. 
Sec. 2. - Review of final plat. 
The zoning administrator and building instructor [inspector] shall review the final plat for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat and pursuant to the rules and regulations of this chapter [ordinance]. The final plat may be approved, disapproved, or approved subject to modifications. 
Sec. 3. - Recording of the final plat. 
Upon approval of the final plat, with the signature of the zoning administrator and clerk of the city thereon, the subdivider shall have the plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. The subdivider shall have the responsibility for payment of the recording fees. 
Sec. 4. - Final plat specifications. 
The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat and certain additional specifications as follows: 
(1)  Exact location and description of monuments. 
(2)  Exact location, widths, and names of all streets and alleys, within and immediately adjoining tangents. 
(3)  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. 
(4)  Lot line width dimensions to the nearest one-tenth, and bearings. 
(5)  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(6)  Location and dimensions of all improvements constructed or installed. 
(7)  A set of the recorded covenants or restrictions, if any, shall either be recorded on the final plat or on an attached document to the final plat. 
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 1. - Plat approval. 
After this chapter [ordinance] shall have been put into effect, any subdivision that fails to meet the requirements of this chapter [ordinance] shall be disapproved by the planning commission. 
Sec. 2. - Recording of plats. 
No plat of a subdivision lying within the corporate limits of the city shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county unless it has been given final approval by the building inspector and zoning administrator. The description by metes and bounds on the instruments of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such requirements. The recording of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the building inspector and zoning administrator shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 9-20-2007(2), § 1) 
Sec. 3. - Sale or transfer of lots. 
The subdivider of any land within the city who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved by the building inspector and zoning administrator and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 9-20-2007(2), § 2) 
Sec. 4. - Performance bond or bank letter of credit. 
Prior to the final approval of the plat, the subdivider shall furnish to the city a performance bond to insure the completion of improvements as proposed. The bond shall be with a surety or in the form of a bank letter of credit, in an amount and containing terms and conditions satisfactory to the city. The city shall have the power to enforce such bond or letter of credit by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. The form of the bond or letter of credit is subject to the approval of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-20-2007(2), § 3) 
Sec. 5. - Acceptance of streets and water systems by the city. 
The city shall not accept title to or assume responsibility for maintaining any street or water system until at least one year after the street has been paved, or in the case of the water system, a licensed professional engineer certification, and until at least 50 percent of the lots have been built upon. 
Sec. 6. - Acceptance of sewage and water system. 
The city shall not accept title to or assume responsibility for maintaining or supplying any water system or sewage system until appropriate certifications are received. 
Sec. 7. - Building permit. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the city limits unless the street giving access to such lot is a public street. Any building erected in violation of these provisions is an unlawful structure and the building inspector, city attorney or other agent of the city shall enjoin such erection or cause the building to be vacated or removed. 
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's zoning ordinance, adopted on March 4, 2002, as exhibit A to such ordinance. Amendments to the original ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the section remains unchanged from the original zoning ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the city Code of Ordinances. Material encased in brackets has been editorially supplied. The ordinance that adopted the zoning ordinance reads as follows: 
;le=2;The City of Brooklet, Georgia, hereby finds that it is desirable for the city to establish and promulgate certain standards and regulations with regard to the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density and distribution of population, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities and other purposes so as to lessen congestion in the streets; to provide adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; to protect property against blight and depreciation; to preserve aesthetic beauty; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; and to promote the general health, safety, morality and welfare in connection with the use and development of land, buildings, and structures throughout the City of Brooklet and for other purposes. 
;le=2;BE IT ORDAINED, BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BROOKLET, AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY AUTHORITY OF THE SAME, THAT: 
 ;le=2; Section 1. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Brooklet is hereby amended by adopting the following "Zoning Ordinances" to be codified as chapter 18 and attached and marked exhibit "A" to the Code of Ordinances for the City of Brooklet. This exhibit A shall be attached to the minutes of the council meeting adopting this ordinance. 
 ;le=2; Section 2. The "Zoning Ordinances" of the City of Brooklet, Georgia, previously adopted, and codified in Chapter 18 of the ordinances of the City of Brooklet and the provision for the city planning commission codified as article III, chapter 2, § 2-26 through § 2-35 are hereby repealed in their entirety. It being the intent of the city to adopt these zoning ordinances to replace the heretofore mentioned ordinances previously adopted, except that any conditions of zoning imposed by the former zoning ordinances or rights of enforcement of the prior zoning ordinance which accrued prior to repeal shall remain in full force and effect. Furthermore, all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
 ;le=2; Section 3. If any portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair the remaining portions unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
 ;le=2; Section 4. This ordinance shall become effective on the 4th day of March, 2002. 
 ;le=2; Section 5. It is the intent of the city council and it is hereby enacted that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code for the City of Brooklet, and that sections of this ordinance be renumbered and/or relettered in order to accomplish such intention. 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - ENACTMENT, SHORT TITLE, JURISDICTION, PURPOSE 

Sec. 1-1. - Enactment clause. 
The city council comprised of the mayor and council of Brooklet, Georgia, under the authority granted by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 4, of the Georgia Constitution of 1983, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following articles and sections. 
Sec. 1-2. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of Brooklet, Georgia." 
Sec. 1-3. - Jurisdiction. 
This ordinance shall govern the use of all land and the development thereof within the corporate limits of the City of Brooklet, Georgia. 
Sec. 1-4. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance shall be to promote the proper location, height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the sizes of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density and distribution of population, and the uses of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, public activities and other purposes so as to lessen congestion in the streets; to provide adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements; to promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; to protect property against blight and depreciation; to preserve aesthetic beauty; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; and to promote the general health, safety, morality and welfare in connection with the use and development of land, buildings, and structures throughout the City of Brooklet and for other purposes. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of the ordinance, certain terms and words used herein are defined as follows: 

Sec. 2-1. - Interpretation of certain terms and words. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel". 
The word "constructed" includes the word "erected", "built", "altered", "rebuilt", and "repaired". 
The word "used" or "occupied", as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied". 
The word "map" or "zoning map" refers to the document entitled "Official Zoning Map of Brooklet, Georgia," which is dated the date of the adoption of this ordinance (3-4-2002), is certified by the mayor as the "Official Zoning Map of Brooklet, Georgia," is kept in the zoning administrator's office, where it is available for public inspection, and is incorporated herein by reference. 
Section 2-2. Accessory building. A detached structure designed for a use which is clearly incidental to and subordinate to the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. Types of accessory structures include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Detached garage and/or carport. 
B.  Storage buildings and/or barns. 
C.  Free standing greenhouses. 
D.  Pool houses. 
E.  Tennis courts. 
F.  Freestanding workshops. 
G.  Gazebos. 
Section 2-2(a). Accessory use. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building, and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
Section 2-3. Administrator, zoning. The representative whom the city council has designated as its agent for the administration and enforcement of these regulations. 
Section 2-4. Alley. A private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Section 2-5. Alteration, building or structural [structure]. Any change in the supporting members of a building except such a change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or moving of a building from one location to another. 
Section 2-6. Apartment. A room or group of rooms providing complete living quarters for occupancy by one family and which is part of a residential building designed for occupancy by two or more families. 
Section 2-7. Apartment house. A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by two or more families living independently of each other. 
Section 2-8. Boarding or rooming house. Any dwelling in which two or more persons either individually or as families are housed for payment with or without meals. 
Section 2-9. Buffer strip. A space developed or improved with evergreen trees or other plantings and/or a fence or wall which may be required in certain locations to reduce the conflicting or adverse effects of different uses abutting each other. 
Section 2-10. Building. Any structure which is (a) permanently affixed to the land; (b) has one or more floors and a roof; and, (c) is bounded by either an open area or the lines of a zoning lot. A building shall not include such structures as billboards, signs, fences, or radio towers. 
Section 2-11. Building height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade along the front of the building to the highest point of the building. 
Section 2-12. Building inspector. The representative whom the city council has designated as its agent for the purpose of insuring compliance with building codes. 
Section 2-13. Building, main or principal. The principal building on a lot or building site designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted; where a permissible use involves more than one structure designed or used for the primary purpose, as in the case of group houses, each such permissible building on one lot as defined by this ordinance shall be construed as comprising a main building. 
Section 2-14. Building site. "Building site" means the ground area of one lot or the ground area of two or more lots when used in combination for a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces required by this ordinance. 
Section 2-15. Business or commerce. The purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service, substance or commodity for livelihood or profit; or the management of office buildings, offices, structures and premises by professions and trade rendering services. 
Section 2-16. Care home. An orphanage, rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, boarding home for the aged, or similar use established to render domiciliary care, but not including facilities for the care of mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, drug addicts and not including nursery schools. 
Section 2-17. Center-line of a street. The center-line of a street is the line surveyed and monumented by the governing body as such, or if a center-line has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
Section 2-18. Club or lodge, private. An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
Section 2-19. Curb cut. The providing of ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Section 2-20. Dwelling. A building designed or used for permanent living quarters for one or more families. 
Section 2-21. Dwelling, single family. A detached building used and either designed or constructed for one family. 
Section 2-22. Dwelling, multi-family. A building either designed, constructed, altered, or used for two or more families housed in separate and adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a common wall or common floor connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. 
Section 2-23. Dwelling unit. An enclosure of one or more rooms, including kitchen facilities, designed or constructed as a unit for residential occupancy by one family. 
Section 2-24. Family. One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit and provided further the maximum number of individuals that may be considered a single family is six related individuals; provided further, that unless all members are related by blood, marriage or adoption no such family shall contain over three persons. In addition, the related family may have up to two additional individuals living with them. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. Unless a variance is granted the maximum number of individuals that may comprise one family is six. 
Section 2-25. Farm. Any plot or tract of land consisting of at least three acres and devoted to agricultural purposes. 
Section 2-26. Floor area, gross. The total number of square feet of floor area in a building determined by horizontal measurements between the exterior faces of walls, excluding basement areas, porches, carports, and garages. 
Section 2-27. Home occupation. An occupation or activity and the sale of the products/services when such occupation or activity takes place in the same building used as a private residence or in an accessory building, and is conducted by residents only. Such activity shall be confined to 25 percent of the total floor area of the principal building on the lot. See Section 6-1. 
Section 2-28. Hospital. Any institution receiving in-patients, or a public institution receiving out-patients, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium for the treatment and care of mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, or drug addicts, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
Section 2-29. Hospital, animal. "Animal hospital" means an establishment in which veterinary services, clipping, bathing, boarding and other services are rendered to dogs, cats and other animals and domestic pets. 
Section 2-30. Junk yard. Any land or building, used for the abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting, or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarded materials, or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage, or salvaging of three or more automobiles or other vehicles, machinery, or parts thereof, whether for profit or not. 
Section 2-31. Kennel. A place where four or more adult dogs or cats are kept, whether by owners of the dogs and cats or by persons providing facilities and care, whether or not for compensation. An adult dog or cat is an animal of either sex, altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of four months. 
Section 2-32. Lot, corner. A lot having frontage on two or more public streets at their intersection. See section 3-14. 
Section 2-33. Lot depth. The average horizontal length between the front and rear lot lines. 
Section 2-34. Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
Section 2-35. Lot, double frontage. A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one street. 
Section 2-36. Lot width. The distance between the side lot lines, measured along the front yard setback line as established by this ordinance, or if no setback line is established, the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured along the street right-of-way line. 
Section 2-37. Map (zoning map). The word "map" or "zoning map" refers to the document entitled "Official Zoning Map of Brooklet, Georgia," which is dated the date of the adoption of this ordinance [3-4-2002], is certified by the mayor as the "Official Zoning Map of Brooklet, Georgia," is kept in the zoning administrator's office, where it is available for public inspection, and is incorporated herein by reference. App. B § 2-38 
Section 2-38. Manufactured home/building. Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et. seq. 
Section 2-39. Manufactured home/building community. Land used or intended to be used, leased or rented for occupancy by three or more manufactured buildings to be used for living or commercial purposes of any kind, together with automobile and parking space and incidental utility structures and facilities required and provided in connection therewith. This definition shall not include manufactured home sales lots on which unoccupied manufactured homes are parked for purposes of inspection and sale. See section 3-12 for the definition of a mobile office. 
Section 2-40. Modular building. Single[-family] and multi-family houses, apartment units, commercial buildings, and permanent additions thereof, comprised of one or more sections that are intended to become real property, primarily constructed at a location other than the permanent site, built to comply with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq., and shipped with the most permanent components in place to the site of final assembly. For purposes of this chapter [ordinance], a modular building shall not include a mobile office as defined herein or any manufactured building as defined herein. To be distinguished from a manufactured home/building, a modular building must be permanently affixed to the real property and aesthetically meet the guidelines set forth in section 3-28. 
Section 2-41. Non-conforming use. Any lawful use existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance that does not conform with the use for the district as specified in this ordinance. 
Section 2-42. Nursing home. A "nursing home" is a facility which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision; it maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home. (This would include a hospital and a care home.) 
Section 2-43. Nursery school. An agency, organization or individual providing daytime care of four or more children not related by blood or marriage or not the legal wards or foster children of the attendant adult. 
Section 2-44. Principal use. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained. 
Section 2-45. Professional office building. A building constructed for or remodeled for use as office space for professions including, but not limited to, medical, dental, legal, forestry, surveying, financial, architectural, engineering, real estate, or insurance. See section 6-5. 
Section 2-46. Public street. Right-of-way dedicated to the city or owned by the city for public street purposes. 
Section 2-47. Setback line. Building: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided. 
A.  Building setback, front: The minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way, or an official future street right-of-way, and the front of a building [or] structure on a lot. The front setback distance applies to the full width of the lot and is parallel to or concentric with the street right-of-way. 
B.  Building setback, rear: The minimum allowable distance between the rear property line of a building [or] structure and a lot. The rear setback applies to and extends the full width of the lot. 
C.  Building setback, side: The minimum allowable distance between the side property line and a building or structure on a lot. The side setback applies to the full depth of a lot. 
Section 2-48. Shopping center. Two or more commercial establishments in a single building with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property. 
Section 2-49. Sign. Any surface, fabric, or device bearing lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter designed to convey information visually and exposed to public view; or any structure including billboard or poster panel designed to carry the above visual information. 
Section 2-49.1. Sign, attached. Any permanent sign attached to a building, whether the wall, roof, window, door, or painted on the building. 
Section 2-49.2. Sign, free-standing. Any permanent sign attached to the ground that is wholly independent of any building or similar structure, which includes signs mounted on a pole, "monument"-type signs, or signs attached directly to the ground. 
Section 2-49.3. Sign, permanent. Any sign that is intended to be in place for more than six months. 
Section 2-49.4. Sign, temporary. Any sign that is not intended to be in place for more than six months. 
Section 2-50. Special exception. A special exception is a use which within certain districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts by the city council after the council has (1) reviewed the proposed site plans for the use, its location within the community, its arrangement and design, its relationship to neighboring property and other conditions peculiar to the particular proposal which would determine its desirability or undesirability; (2) has found the proposal not to be contrary to the intent of this ordinance; and (3) has approved the use as specified. 
Section 2-51. Street. Relates to, and includes streets and avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, and other ways. See section 2-46. 
Section 2-51.1. Major street. A street having a 60-foot right-of-way and/or designated as a Georgia highway or a county road. 
Section 2-51.2. Minor street. A street deeded to the City of Brooklet, Georgia, having less than a 60-foot of right-of-way. 
Section 2-52. Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, manufactured homes, billboards, swimming pools, and fall-out shelters but does not include walls or fences. 
Section 2-53. Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building such as foundations, bearing walls, columns, beams, floor or roof joints, girders or rafters, or changes in roof or exterior lines. 
Section 2-54. Tourist home, hotel or motel. An establishment which is open to transient guests; and which provides customary hotel services such as a maid service, the furnishing and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, and use and upkeep of furniture, bellboy service and food service. 
Section 2-55. Trailer park, travel. Any portion or parcel of land designed to accommodate one or more travel trailers or recreation vehicles to be used for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure, or facility used by the occupants of such units on such property. 
Section 2-56. Trailer, residential (manufactured home). See Manufactured building definition. 
Section 2-57. Trailer, camping - recreation vehicle. A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses, which is identified on the unit by the manufacturer as a "camper," "travel" trailer, recreation vehicle, or motor home, and is not more than eight feet in body width. 
Section 2-58. Use. The purpose for which land or building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either is or may be occupied or maintained. 
Section 2-59. Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance, not a change in a zoning district, where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Section 2-60. Yard. An open space on the same lot with a principal building, to be kept free from structures except as permitted by this ordinance. 
Section 2-60.1. Yard, front. That area of a lot lying between the abutting street right-of-way and the principal building of the lot and extending across the width of a lot from side lot line to side lot line. A double frontage lot has two front yards. For corner lots, see section 3-14. 
Section 2-60.2. Yard, rear. That area of a lot extending across the width of a lot from side lot line to side lot line and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building on the lot. A double frontage lot has no rear yard. For corner lots, see section 3-14. 
Section 2-60.3. Yard, side. That area of a lot between the side lot line and the principal building on the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard (or between two front yards on a double frontage lot). For corner lots, see section 3-14. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2010(1)) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-1. - Interpretation and application. 
In interpreting and applying this ordinance, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of the ordinance. Except as hereinafter provided, this ordinance shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the height of buildings, or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other resolutions, rules, regulations, permits, or any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
Sec. 3-2. - Zoning affects all land and buildings. 
No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied; and, no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with this ordinance. 
Sec. 3-3. - Every use must be upon a lot. 
No building or structure may be erected or use established unless upon a lot as defined by this ordinance except, as provided in section 3-17.2 and section 9-1. 
Sec. 3-4. - Only one principal building per lot. 
Except as herein provided, (see section 6-2) there shall be no more than one principal building, structure, or use upon any lot other than lots within C-1, C-2, I-1, or I-2 districts. 
Sec. 3-5. - Open space not [to] be encroached upon. 
No open space shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and such other regulations required by this ordinance for the district in which such building is located. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and planted buffer strips shall be construed not to be encroachments of a yard to the extent not exceeding 30 inches in height. Signs shall be considered as an encroachment. 
Sec. 3-6. - Required open space may not be used by another building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building, structure, or use by this ordinance shall be considered to be part of a required yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading space for any other building, structure, or use except as provided in section 7-6. 
Sec. 3-7. - Reduction of yards or lot area. 
Except as provided in section 3-19, no lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced, divided, or changed so as to produce a tract of land which does not comply with the minimum dimension or area requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located unless said reduction or division is necessary to provide land that is needed and accepted for public use. 
Sec. 3-8. - Encroachment on public rights-of-way. 
No building, structure, service area, or required off-street parking and loading facilities, except driveways, shall be permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
Sec. 3-9. - Location of accessory buildings or uses on residential lots. 
Accessory buildings may not be erected in a front yard, and in no instance shall such a building be placed nearer to a property line than ten feet. 
In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both street frontages wherever there are any principal buildings fronting on said streets in the same block or adjacent blocks. 
Sec. 3-10. - Accessory buildings or uses on non-residential lots. 
Accessory buildings or uses on non-residential lots shall comply with front, side and rear yard requirements established for the zoning district in which such accessory buildings or uses are located. 
Sec. 3-11. - Storage of recreation vehicle, travel trailer, or camper. 
One recreation vehicle, travel trailer or camper as defined in section 2-57 may be stored on a residential lot provided it is locked and unoccupied. 
Sec. 3-12. - Mobile office. 
A manufactured building may be used as an office, provided that it shall not also be used as a dwelling, during construction for a period not exceeding one year. 
Sec. 3-13. - Every lot shall abut a street. 
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least 25 feet on a public street (except in a C-1 zone), and which is not accessible via a public drive of not less than 20 feet [in] width, exclusive of parking. 
Sec. 3-14. - Lots with multiple frontage. 
In the case of a corner lot, side yard setback requirements from the property line shall be equal to 75 percent of that required for the front yard setback for the district. On a corner lot where the main entrance into a residence is facing a side yard, it shall be permissible for purposes of this ordinance to construe the residence to be fronting on the street other than that street which said entrance faces, and side and rear yard requirements may be provided accordingly. If a building is constructed on a double frontage lot having frontage of two roads not at an intersection, a setback from each road shall be provided equal to the front yard requirement for the district in which the lot is located. 
Sec. 3-15. - Screening required. 
Wherever screening is required by this ordinance, a durable masonry wall, or fence and hedge of sufficient capacity to provide a visual blind designed to be compatible with the character of adjoining properties, shall be provided. Such fences and walls shall be at least five feet in height measured from the ground along the common lot line of the adjoining properties. Hedges or comparable natural plantings shall be of such variety that an average height of at least five feet could be expected by normal growth within no later than three years from the time of planting. 
Sec. 3-16. - Side and rear yards not required next to railroad. 
Within any non-residential district, side yards and rear yards shall not be required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. 
Sec. 3-17. - Substandard lots of record. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, which has an area or a width which is less than required by this ordinance, shall be subject to the following exceptions and modifications: 
Section 3-17.1. Adjoining lots. When two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in one ownership at any time after the adoption of this ordinance and such lots individually are less than the minimum square footage and/or have less than the minimum width required in the district in which they are located, then such group of lots shall be considered as a single lot provided, however, that when such combination of lots would create a single lot having a width and area 1¾ times or more than that width and area required by this ordinance, then such lot may be divided into two lots of equal width and equal area and said lots used as conforming lots. 
Section 3-17.2. Lot not meeting minimum lot size requirements. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, any lot of record existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance which has an area or a width which is less than that required by this ordinance may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling or other use permitted in that zone; provided, however, that the same yard, set-back, open-space, and other dimensional requirements are met that would be required for a standard lot. 
Sec. 3-18. - Intersection visibility and corner setback. 
In all zones, except on corners where a traffic light is existing and operating 24 hours daily, no solid construction, hedge, bushes, or other obstruction which extends over 30 inches in height shall exist within ten feet of the right-of-way line. Exceptions shall be made for utility poles, lighting standards, traffic and street signs and trees, the branches of which are kept trimmed to a height of eight feet above the street level. Non-conforming buildings shall be exempt from this provision. 
Sec. 3-19. - Zoning to apply when lot is divided by district boundary line. 
In the event that a district boundary line on the zoning map divides a lot of record held in one ownership on the date of passage of this ordinance, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this ordinance for the district in which each such parcel is located; except, however, that if the property owner of such a lot, other than a through lot, so desires, he may extend a use allowed on the greater portion of said lot 35 feet beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements of the district into which he is encroaching. 
Sec. 3-20. - Required buffers in C-1 and C-2 districts. 
In a C-1 or C-2 district where a lot abuts any residential district, a ten-foot wide buffer shall be provided with screening as specified in section 3-15. Off-street parking associated with such uses shall be governed by this same provision. 
Sec. 3-21. - Structures permitted by the height limits. 
The height limits of this ordinance shall not apply to a church spire, belfry, cupola, dome, or ornamental tower not intended for human occupancy, monument, water tower, observation tower, transmission tower, chimney, smoke stack, conveyor, flag pole, radio or television tower, mast or aerial, parapet wall not extending more than four feet above the roof line of the building, and necessary mechanical appurtenances including silos, storage tanks, and process structures necessary for normal operations of industries in I-2 districts. The height limits do apply to signs unless otherwise noted. 
Sec. 3-22. - Permitted encroachments of yards and setbacks. 
Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters, and fire escapes may project not more than four feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways which are or may be used for access for service and/or emergency vehicles. 
Sec. 3-23. - Modification of side yard requirements. 
When a lot of record has a width less than the frontage required in the district in which it is located and said lot cannot be increased in width as provided in section 3-17, then the zoning administrator shall be authorized to grant a variance to reduce the side yard requirements for such a lot provided, however, that there shall be not less than an eight-foot side yard. Any such decision may be appealed pursuant to the provisions of article 11. 
Sec. 3-24. - Uses prohibited. 
If either a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a district either as a matter of right, or as a special exception, then such use, class of use, or structures for such uses, shall be prohibited in such district. 
Sec. 3-25. - Swimming pool (commercial). 
A commercial swimming pool shall not be located within 20 feet of a property line. 
Sec. 3-25.1. - Swimming pool (residential). 
Same as accessory structures, section 3-9. All swimming pools shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height with child-proof locking gates. 
Sec. 3-26. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
The city shall rezone any property that is annexed into the city. The city shall complete all the procedures for a rezoning map amendment under article 12 other than the final vote prior to the adoption of the annexation resolution or ordinance but no sooner than the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to Bulloch County. The hearing shall be conducted prior to the annexation. The notice published for this rezoning shall also be published in a paper of general circulation in Bulloch County, and shall otherwise comply with section 12-2.6 [12-4]. A sign shall be placed on the property in accordance with section 12-2.7 [12-5]. The vote on the rezoning shall take place after the annexation and shall become effective on the latter of the date of the rezoning is approved or the date the annexation becomes effective pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-36-2. 
Sec. 3-27. - Right of business maintenance. 
Heavy industry plants in I-2 districts shall have the right to engage in any activity necessary to maintain and expand that industry and shall have the right to engage in any activity to comply with any mandated state or federal legislation or agency. These rights for activities and fixtures to maintain business and plant maintenance and/or to comply with state and federal regulations shall not be interpreted so as to grant these rights to activities or fixtures that are not necessary for maintenance of heavy industrial plants and shall not permit other businesses to locate in I-2 districts, solely because they engage in similar activities as an independent supplier to said heavy industries. These rights shall exist for contractors that are engaged in such activities for heavy industries on said industries' property. 
Sec. 3-28. - Design review guidelines. 
The compatible relationship of proposed development in the City of Brooklet is of critical public concern for any buildings or site improvements. The intent of the design review is not to stifle innovative architecture, but to assure respect for and reduce incompatible and adverse impacts on the visual experience of the city. Prior to the granting of a building permit, the zoning administrator shall exercise the following guidelines in reviewing such proposed development: 
Section 3-28.[1.] Proposed development shall avoid excessive or unsightly grading, indiscriminate earth moving or clearing of property, and removal of trees and vegetation which could cause disruption of natural water courses or disfigure natural land forms. 
Section 3-28.2. Proposed development shall be located and configured in a visually harmonious manner with the terrain and vegetation of the parcel and surrounding parcels. 
Section 3-28.3. Although maximum site densities and special site regulations shall be preserved, structures shall not dominate, in an incompatible manner, any general development or adjacent building which is substantially in compliance with this article. This may be accomplished by the use of proper site design, architectural features, and/or landscaping to reduce the appearance of excessive and inappropriate height or mass of the proposed structures. 
Section 3-28.4. The architectural design of structures and their materials and colors shall be visually harmonious with the overall appearance, history and cultural heritage of Brooklet and demonstrate the city character, that is, structures which are designed to be unobtrusive and set into natural land forms and existing vegetation. 
Section 3-28.5. Structures shall demonstrate the general principles of good design including but not limited to those dealing with form, mass, scale, height, texture and color. Specific consideration shall be given to compatibility with adjacent structures where such structures are substantially in compliance with this article. 
Section 3-28.6. Pitched roofs with a minimum slope of 5/12 and with wide overhangs are strongly encouraged. Shingles, metal standing seam, tile or other roof materials which are nature-blending in texture and appearance are considered appropriate to the city character. 
Section 3-28.7. Long monotonous facade designs including, but not limited to, those characterized by unrelieved repetition of shape or form or by unbroken extension of line shall be avoided. Excessive ornamentation shall be avoided to prevent visual clutter. 
Section 3-28.8. Buildings with metal surfaces must obtain a special exception in A-1, C-1, C-2, R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts. This provision shall have no applicability to the construction or placement of accessory buildings as defined in section 2.2. All fees for special exception applications for metal buildings are waived. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2002) 
Section 3-28.9. Exterior colors. 
A.  Context: Exterior colors must be selected to be harmonious with the neighborhood and blend with the natural surroundings of the site. Colors shall not be used to cause the structure to stand out from others or its background. Consideration must be given to the compatibility of colors with those existing in the vicinity. The size of the structure and the amount of shading it will receive are also a factor in the selection of colors. 
B.  Hue: The overall exterior color scheme shall be composed of harmonious tints, shades or tones that are low in intensity or brightness and are more neutral in appearance. Primary and secondary colors and highly saturated, bright tertiary colors may only be approved for very limited use where appropriate to accent a feature of the design or provide visual interest. The number of such colors shall be limited to two and must be compatible with the overall color scheme. 
C.  Contrast: Exterior color schemes must avoid placing together colors with values that are highly contrasting. Subtle levels of contrast are desirable to emphasize architectural elements or to provide visual interest. The use of black, white or off-white may be approved for very limited use where a high level of contrast is warranted. 
Section 3-28.10. To the extent that they relate to aesthetic considerations, the design and construction techniques of the proposed development shall respond to energy consumption and environmental quality considerations such as heat loss, heat gain, air emissions and runoff water quality. 
Section 3-28.11. All plans for construction of a building must be approved, as consistent with this section, by the zoning administrator and building inspector, prior to issuance of a building permit. 
Sec. 3-29. - Appeal [to] the planning commission. 
Any party aggrieved with a decision by the zoning administrator may file an appeal with the planning commission. Any such appeal must be made with 30 days of the adverse decision. 
Sec. 3-30. - Satellite dish receiving stations. 
All satellite dish signal receiving stations in excess of 24 inches in diameter are subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Such stations shall be located in the rear yard or on the rear or side of the house, as defined in this ordinance; and, 
B.  The height of the station shall not exceed 15 feet above the ground when said station is in a position perpendicular to the ground; and, the maximum diameter of any dish antenna shall not exceed 12 feet. 
Sec. 3-31. - Parking spaces. 
No dwelling house shall be erected without providing a parking space consisting of an asphalt or concrete surfaced area. Any garage shall be connected by a paved driveway of hot-mix asphalt or concrete connecting the parking space (garage) with a street and permitting ingress and egress of an automobile. Driveway and walkways must be completed prior to occupancy of the dwelling. No plumbing vent or heating vent shall be placed on the front side of the roof, nor shall any concrete block be left exposed. 
Sec. 3-32. - Nuisances/annoyances/prohibited activities in R-1, R-2, and A-1 areas. 
Section 3-32.1. Prohibited activities. No oil drilling, development, refining operations, mining, quarrying, operation of sand and gravel pits, and no borrow pit should be permitted upon or in any of the building sites in the tract described herein, nor shall oil wells, tanks, tunnels, mineral excavations, or shafts be permitted upon or in any of the building sites covered by these restrictions. 
Section 3-32.2. Inoperative motor vehicles. No motor vehicle shall be permitted to remain on the premises for more than 30 days in an inoperative condition, and no car repairs of a major nature may be carried on upon the premises. No lot or yard may be used as a parking area of heavy equipment such as excavating, grading or tractor equipment or heavy trucks such as school buses, transport trucks, and dump trucks. Pickup trucks are acceptable. 
Section 3-32.3. Playground equipment. All playground equipment shall be placed on the rear of the property. 
Section 3-32.4. Boats, trailers, and campers. All boats, boat trailers, travel trailers and campers shall be kept in a garage, carport, or the rear yard of the residence. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 4-1. - Establishment of districts. 
In order that the purposes of this ordinance as defined in article 1[I] may be accomplished, there are hereby established within the City of Brooklet, Georgia, the zoning districts identified as follows: 
Section 4-1.1. A-1 agricultural district. The purpose of these districts is to provide single-family residential areas within minimum lot sizes of three acres, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development, and also permitting rural agricultural uses. 
Section 4-1.2. R-1 single-family residential district. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes of 30,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. The building area shall not exceed 15 percent of the lot area. 
Section 4-1.3. R-2 single-family residential district. The purpose of this district is to provide single-family residential areas with minimum lot sizes [of] 15,000 square feet, said areas being protected from the depreciating effects of small lot development and excessive density and from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. The building area shall not exceed 15 percent of the lot area. 
Section 4-1.4. R-3 multi-family residential district. The purpose of this district is to provide orderly development of high density residential areas for one[-family], two[-family] and multi-family dwellings, said areas being protected from the encroachment of those uses which are incompatible to a desirable residential environment. The minimum lot size shall be 30,000 square feet. The building area shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot area. 
Section 4-1.5. R-4 manufactured home community district. The purpose of this manufactured home community district is to provide areas within the city exclusively for manufactured home residences and for buildings directly related to the operation of the manufactured home community. Manufactured home communities shall be a minimum of three acres with manufactured home spaces of at least 10,000 square feet each. See section 6-3. 
Section 4-1.6. C-1 central business district. The purpose of this district shall be to enhance and protect shopping facilities in the central business district of the city. 
Section 4-1.7. C-2 general commercial district. The purpose of the general commercial district is to provide for those business activities which are larger users of space than commercial uses serving the central commercial district and to provide for those business activities which cater to the needs of individual neighborhoods, and highway business areas. 
Section 4-1.8. I-1 light industrial district. The purpose of this district shall be to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses which do not create noise, odor, smoke, dust, and which do not possess other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to surrounding neighborhoods, or to the other uses permitted in the district. 
Section 4-1.9. I-2 Heavy industrial district. The purpose of the heavy industrial district, is to provide a location for those industrial operations and processes which are not considered nuisances but which have objectionable characteristics such as noise, odor, smoke, or dust. 
Section 4-1.10. F-H flood hazard district. The purpose of the flood hazard district is to identify areas of the city that have been defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as being subject to periodic flooding and to limit development to uses that will be least damaged by flooding. 
Sec. 4-2. - Zoning map. 
The boundaries of each district are shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of Brooklet, Georgia," which is dated the date of the adoption of this ordinance, is certified by the mayor as the "Official Zoning Map of Brooklet, Georgia," is kept in the zoning administrator's office, where it is available for public inspection, and is incorporated herein by reference. 
The original "Official Zoning Map of Brooklet, Georgia" shall be on file in the office of the zoning administrator at all times. Said map shall accurately show all map amendments made in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and the date when said amendments became effective. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to insure that the "Official Zoning Map of Brooklet, Georgia" is displayed and available for public inspection and accurately shows all amendments approved by the city council. 
Sec. 4-3. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists with respect to the location of boundaries of any zoning district as shown on the "Official Zoning Map of Brooklet, Georgia", the following rules shall apply: 
Section 4-3.1. Where district boundaries are depicted as approximately following the center-lines of streets or highways, centerlines of streams or drainage ways, street lines, or highway rights-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway rights-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
Section 4-3.2. Where district boundaries are so depicted that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lots shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
Section 4-3.3. Where district boundaries are so depicted that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways, or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. 
Section 4-3.4. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership at the time of enactment of this ordinance, the district containing the larger portion of area may be extended to the remainder without recourse to amendment procedure; provided, however, that the property owner gives notice of said use to the designated official. 
ARTICLE V. - SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 5-1. - Table of permitted uses. 
Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the zoning map, no building, structure or land shall be constructed, erected, altered, or used except, as indicated in the following schedules: 
Section 5-1.1. Uses permitted by right: Uses permitted as a matter of right are indicated on the following schedule by the letter "X" in the appropriate column. 
Section 5-1.2. Special exceptions: Uses permitted only after special review and approval of the planning commission (See article XIII) are indicated on the following schedule by the letter "O" in the appropriate column. 

 
Sec. 5-2. - Development standards. 
Within the various zoning districts as indicated on the "Zoning Map of Brooklet, Georgia" no building or structure, shall be constructed or erected except, as indicated in the following schedule: 

 
Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, no dwelling shall be constructed, erected, or located within the City of Brooklet which contains less than the minimum square footage of heated living space set forth below: 
a.  Single-family dwelling: 1,200 square feet; 
b.  Multi-family dwellings: 
1.  Each apartment (defined, section 2-6) designed for occupancy by two families living independently of one another: 1,500 square feet; 
2.  Each apartment (defined, section 2-6) designed for occupancy by three families living independently of one another: 2,250 square feet; 
3.  Each apartment (defined, section 2-6) designed for occupancy by four families living independently of one another: 3,000 square feet; 
4.  For apartments (defined, section 2-6) designed for occupancy by five or more families living independently of one another, each unit shall have at least 288 square feet. Provided further, the average square footage per unit shall be at least 576 square feet. 
c.  Manufactured homes: 320 square feet. (See section 2-38.) 
(Ord. of 5-18-2017(2) 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN USES 

Sec. 6-1. - Home occupations. 
A home occupation as defined by this ordinance shall be governed by the following: 
Section 6-1.1. Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation. 
Section 6-1.2. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the building. 
Section 6-1.3. Only one sign not exceeding two square feet in size, motionless, non-lighted, and attached to the principal building, shall be permitted. 
Section 6-1.4. The use for this purpose (including the size of any accessory building used for the home occupation) shall not exceed 25 percent of area of the principal building. 
Section 6-1.5. No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential look of the building shall be permitted. 
Section 6-1.6. The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
Section 6-1.7. Use shall be limited to two students/clients/customers at a time. 
Section 6-1.8. Vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles only shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. 
Section 6-1.9. The following and similar uses shall be considered home occupations: addressing service, art instructor, beauty shop (with no more than one operator), drafting, dressmaking, insurance agent, manufacturing agent, music teacher, notary public, photography, real estate agent, tax consultant, tutor. 
Section 6-1.10. There shall be no external display of products or storage of equipment or other externally visible evidence whatsoever of the occupation, business or profession. 
Section 6-1.11. There shall be no emission of smoke, dust, odor, fumes, glare, noise, vibration, electrical or electronic disturbance. 
Section 6-1.12. There shall be no chemical, mechanical or electrical equipment on the premises other than that normally found in a purely domestic residence. 
Sec. 6-2. - Group development projects. 
Any group of buildings devoted to the same use and intended to be operated under one management, such as a garden apartment project or medical office development, known herein as a group development project, may be permitted as a special exception by the planning commission, providing it shall meet the following requirements: 
Section 6-2.1. Minimum lot size: The minimum lot size shall be 1.5 acres. 
Section 6-2.2. Street access: Any building established as a part of a group development project which cannot properly be served by emergency or service vehicles from an abutting street shall be made accessible to such vehicles by a paved driveway having a roadbed width of not less than 20 feet, exclusive of parking spaces. 
Section 6-2.3. Separation of buildings: All buildings established as a part of a group development project shall be not less than 20 feet apart. 
Section 6-2.4. Setback requirements: All buildings and structures established as a part of a group development project shall comply with the front yard setbacks, and the exterior side and exterior rear yard requirements established for the district in which located. 
Section 6-2.5. Uses prohibited: In no case shall a use be permitted as a part of a group development project that is prohibited by this ordinance in the district in which such project is to be located. 
Sec. 6-3. - Manufactured home/building community. 
Manufactured home community parks are allowed within an R-4 district as a matter of right. 
A.  The minimum size shall be three acres; and, 
B.  The park shall have minimum side yards of 20 feet and a front yard at least 60 feet; and, 
C.  Each manufactured home shall be connected to water and sewage; and, 
D.  The minimum lot area per manufactured home shall be no less than 10,000 square feet with a minimum lot width of 60 feet; and, 
E.  The minimum distance between any two manufactured homes or between any manufactured home and any other building in the park shall be 40 feet; and, 
F.  A 20-foot drive shall serve all manufactured home stalls and be drained so as to prevent damage to adjoining property, public or private; and, 
G.  A recreation area shall be provided within the manufactured home park providing a minimum of one-half acre of land for the first one to ten manufactured home spaces and one-half acre for each one to ten additional manufactured home spaces; and, 
H.  Any property line of a manufactured home park behind the front yard setback which abuts or is within a residential zoning district shall be screened as called for in section 3-15; and, 
I.  Each manufactured home space shall have two parking spaces for vehicles. The surface of such parking spaces and any driveway shall be a smooth surface comprised of asphalt or concrete (at least 2,500 p.s.i.). 
J.  Streets shall conform to current county road construction and maintenance specifications. 
1.  Subgrade shall be compacted to 100 percent of the laboratory maximum dry density. 
2.  Graded aggregate base should meet section 310 of the Georgia D.O.T. specifications and be no less than seven inches in depth. It shall be compacted to 100 percent of the maximum dry density. 
3.  Asphalt mixtures must be an E-Mix or F-Mix and satisfy section 828 of the Georgia D.O.T. specifications. 
4.  A job mix formula for hot mix asphalt should be submitted to the city at least two weeks prior to paving. All mixtures must contain hydrated lime or anti-strip additive. Minimum thickness shall be 1½ inches. 
5.  Any pertinent laboratory testing, to verify the above items, shall be done for every 1,000 square yards of material placed. 
Sec. 6-4. - Manufactured home/building. 
A manufactured home is allowed in a manufactured home community, section 6-3, as a matter of right, and within an R-3 district as a special exception provided the following requirements are met: 
A.  No more than one manufactured home shall be allowed per lot unless within a legally existing and permitted manufactured home community park, see section 6-3, and in no case shall a manufactured home be placed on a lot occupied by any other principal building. 
B.  All manufactured homes must be connected to public water and sewage systems if available. The Bulloch County health department must approve sewage systems prior to permitting and placement of a manufactured home. 
C.  All manufactured homes shall be provided with individual safe and convenient 20-foot vehicular access from an abutting public street to each mobile home lot. See section 7-8.24. 
D.  A manufactured home shall meet the same requirements as a single-family dwelling when placed in an R-3 district as specified in section 5-2. 
E.  A manufactured home to be placed in an R-3 district must have a minimum of 1,000 square feet of floor area exclusive of additions. 
F.  Manufactured homes are to be occupied by only one family and when placed in R-3 districts owner must furnish written proof to the zoning administrator that permission has been granted by the property owner to place a mobile home on said lot. 
G.  All manufactured homes in R-3 districts must be underpinned and closed in from the floor level to the ground on all sides with a permanent type metal, vinyl or masonry material. 
Sec. 6-5. - Professional office building. 
New or remodeled buildings for use as offices for medical, dental, legal, forestry, surveying, financial, architectural, engineering, real estate or insurance professions may be permitted as a special exception and allowed in R-2 and R-3 districts by the planning committee. 
Section 6-5.1. Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided with one space for each 200 square feet of floor area plus one space for each employee. 
Section 6-5.2. Setback requirements. All professional office buildings and structures shall comply with the front yard setbacks, and the exterior side and exterior rear yard requirements established for the district in which it is to be located. 
Section 6-5.3. Point of business sign. Only one sign, not exceeding six square feet in size and motionless shall be permitted. 
Sec. 6-6. - Subdivision developments. 
See Addendum. 
Editor's note— The subdivision regulations have been removed from the addendum and set as appendix A to this Code. 
Sec. 6-7. - Standards for installation of pre-owned manufactured homes. 
Section 6-7.1. Definitions. The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this Ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section. 
(a)  Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the city limits of the City of Brooklet. 
(b)  Building Inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the municipal building official or any of his or her assistants. 
(c)  Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this Ordinance, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
(d)  Guarantee of Condition Bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a) of Section 6-7.3 of this ordinance reasonably portray or represents the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the city. 
(e)  Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
(f)  Jurisdiction means the areas within the city limits of the City of Brooklet, Georgia. 
(g)  Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq. 
(h)  Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
Section 6-7.2. Conditions. All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
Section 6-7.3. Permitting, Inspection, Certificate of Occupancy and Fees. A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(a)  Permit. To obtain a permit, Applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
(1)  An affidavit signed by the Applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this Act; 
(2)  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that home meets the minimum health and safety standards of Section 6-7.4 of this ordinance; 
(3)  A $1,000.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond or $1,000.00 refundable cash deposit; and 
(4)  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (d) of this Section. 
(b)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, Applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(c)  Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the Applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this ordinance have been met. 
(d)  Fee. A permit and inspection fee listed in fee schedule shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The Applicant shall be charged a fee listed in fee schedule for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. 
(e)  Alternative Inspection. At the request of the Applicant, the building inspector may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the city. 
Section 6-7.4. Minimum Health and Safety Standards. All pre-owned manufactured home shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(a)  HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S. c. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(b)  Interior Condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(c)  Exterior Condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(d)  Sanitary Facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checks upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(e)  Heating Systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
(g)  Hot Water Supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(h)  Egress Windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(i)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(j)  Smoke Detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(k)  Two or more manufactured homes may not be joined together and utilized as a single residence. 
(l)  The tongue, axels, transporting lights and towing apparatus shall be removed after placement on the lot and before a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(m)  No manufactured home shall be occupied prior to the installation inspection being done and approved. 
Section 6-7.5. Enforcement. 
(a)  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(c)  The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
Section 6-7.6. Requirements Cumulative. The requirements set forth in this ordinance shall be cumulative of any other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Brooklet. Without in any way limiting the generality of the foregoing, the requirements of this ordinance are in addition to and supplemental to the requirements set forth in Section 6-4 of Appendix B—Zoning of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Brooklet. 
Section 6-7.7. Penalties. Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine up to $1,000.00. Each day any violation under this ordinance continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-21-2010(2), §§ 1—8) 
ARTICLE VII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 7-1. - Scope of provisions. 
Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building improvements, or use, a plot plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. These provisions shall not apply to the C-1 and I-2 districts. 
Sec. 7-2. - Parking spaces may not be reduced. 
Off-street parking shall not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned. 
Sec. 7-3. - Drainage, construction, and maintenance. 
All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets and shall be constructed of materials which will assure a surface resistant to erosion. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof, in a clean, orderly, and dust-free condition. All plans for development with off-street parking must have a drainage plan certified by a professional engineer. 
Sec. 7-4. - Separation from walkways, sidewalks, and streets. 
All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device. 
Sec. 7-5. - Parking area design. 
Parking stalls shall have a minimum width of ten feet and length of 20 feet and shall be comprised of a smooth surface asphalt or concrete. There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. Interior driveways shall be at least 24 feet wide where used with 90-degree angle parking, at least 18 feet wide where used with 60-degree parking, at least 12 feet wide where used with 45-degree parking, and at least 12 feet wide where used with parallel parking, or where there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least ten feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least 20 feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
Sec. 7-6. - Joint parking facilities. 
Two or more neighboring uses, of the same or different types may provide joint facilities, provided that the number of off-street parking spaces are not less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
Sec. 7-7. - Pavement markings and signs. 
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
Sec. 7-8. - Number of parking spaces. 
In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this ordinance, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking space shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule. For any use or class of use not mentioned in this schedule, the requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein. Parking requirements for additions to existing uses shall be based only upon the new addition even if the existing use is deficient. These regulations shall not apply to C-1 and I-2 districts. 

 
(Ord. of 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 7-9. - Minimum number of loading spaces required. 
Industrial, wholesale, and retail operations shall provide loading space as follows: 
Section 7-9.1. Spaces appropriate to functions. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation of individual or groups of buildings and uses. 
Section 7-9.2. Design of loading spaces. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park and unpark vehicles for loading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
Section 7-9.3. Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress of street loading spaces shall conform to driveway entrance regulations of the City of Brooklet. 
Sec. 7-10. - Curb cut requirements. 
Within any district where the lowering or cutting away of curbs for purposes of ingress or egress is required, such curb cut shall be subject to the following provisions: 
Section 7-10.1. No more than two combined entrances and exits shall be allowed on any parcel of property, the frontage of which is less than 200 feet on any street. Additional entrances or exits for a parcel of property having frontage in excess of 200 feet shall be permitted after approval of the planning commission. Where frontage is 50 feet or less, only one combined entrance/exit shall be permitted. 
Section 7-10.2. At street intersections, no curb shall be located within 25 feet of the intersection of two curb lines or such lines extended, or within 15 feet of the intersection of two property lines or such lines extended, whichever is least restrictive. No fence, wall, hedge, or shrub planting which obstructs sight lines at elevations between two and six feet above the roadways shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and the line connecting them at points 25 feet from the intersection of the street lines, or in the case of a rounded property corner form [from] the intersection of the street property lines extended. The same sight-line limitations shall apply to any lot within ten feet from the intersection of a street property line with the edge of the driveway or alley pavement. No tree shall be permitted to remain within such distances of such intersections unless the foliage line is maintained at sufficient height to prevent obstruction of such sight lines. 
Section 7-10.3. The distance between any two curb cuts on the same side of the street shall be not less than ten feet. Said distance shall be measured between the points of tangency of the curb return radii and the established curb line of the abutting street. 
Section 7-10.4. All driveways shall be constructed so as to be at least five feet from any property lines, except that a curb return may become tangent to a curb line at a point where said property line extended intersects said curb line. 
Section 7-10.5. The maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 35 feet measured at the right-of-way line. 
Section 7-10.6. The maximum width of any curb cut, including curb returns, shall not exceed 50 feet. 
Section 7-10.7. The sum of the two curb return radii for any one curb cut shall not exceed 15 feet. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 4-19-2012 repealed former Art. VIII, §§ 8-1—8-16, and enacted a new Art. VIII as set out herein. The former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 7-31-2003, §§ 8-1—8-15; Ord. of 3-18-2004. 

Sec. 8-1. - Purposes. 
The City Council of Brooklet has determined that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city that a comprehensive and balanced system of control and regulation be enacted as to the placement, maintenance and removal of signs within the limits of the city, said determination having been derived from, but not limited to the following concerns: 
(1)  The safe and efficient flow of motor vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian traffic through the city which may otherwise be impeded by the indiscriminate proliferation of signage erected to attract the attention of the traveling public, and which if left unregulated, may result in hazards to travelers through the erection of increased numbers of larger, brighter or more distracting signs by owners attempting to convey competing messages; 
(2)  The protection of property values, both public and private, by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses while balancing the community's variant interests of enhancing the commercial and economic atmosphere of the city with the desire to maintain a tranquil aesthetic environment that eliminates visual clutter and blight through the management of hardscape features, including signage; 
(3)  The interference with the ability of property owners to enjoy or use their property without undue visual obstruction, distraction or hazard; 
(4)  The preservation and protection of properties and areas having historic, recreational, educational, cultural, or religious values and environments, and prominent community gateways and major thoroughfares which, through orderly design and maintenance of the built environment—including signage—provide for community pride and exhibit clear community expectations that promote investment through a predictable development pattern; 
(5)  The elimination of potential hazards arising during times of inclement weather or other natural disaster; 
(6)  The provision of some signage that has the targeted purpose of promoting public safety but is difficult to describe without referring to its incidental function, such as address numerals or subdivision or major development entrance signage, which signage is a tool for enabling the traveling public and emergency personnel to locate point of ingress and egress during visitation or emergency call response. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this article, the provisions of this article are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners; 
(7)  The control of the proliferation and placement of signs in an indiscriminate manner so as to pose a threat to the aesthetic and environmental values and qualities of life within city limits of Brooklet; and 
(8)  Increasingly vibrant and distracting signs, including those incorporating LED and similar technology, cause unique and substantial hazards to traffic caused by a higher level of distractibility, are inconsistent with the standards established for major community thoroughfares and gateways, and demand greater diligence and resources in enforcing proper use and display than those signs not incorporating such technology. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this section. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or titles are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this article. 
Aggregate sign area. The combined sign area of all permanent signs on a single lot that require a permit, including portions of any signs that are changeable copy or electronic message centers; or, where specified, all permanent permitted signs of a particular category on a single lot. For example, the aggregate sign area of all freestanding signs on a lot is the sum total of the sign areas of all freestanding signs on such lot. 
Animated sign. A sign that utilizes moving structural elements, flashing or sequential lights, lighting elements, or other automated methods to create movement, the appearance of movement, or other special effects. Signs meeting the definition of and regulations governing changeable copy signs and traffic control devices and warning signs meeting the standards of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices are not considered animated signs. 
Banner. Any sign printed or displayed on lightweight fabric or other flexible material with or without frames and that is mounted to a pole or building at more than one edge. When mounted, banners shall remain stationary and not flap or wave in a manner similar to a flag or pennant. Flags and pennants shall not be considered banners. 
Beacon . Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Billboard . See outdoor advertisement. 
Building sign. Any sign attached to any part of a building. 
Canopy or awning . A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a building and/or supported by the ground. 
Canopy sign. Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or other structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
Changeable copy sign. A sign designed to allow the changing of letters, words, logos, or symbols through manual means without altering the face or surface of the sign, or creating movement or the appearance of movement. 
City of Brooklet. As used in this article, the term "City of Brooklet" means all areas within Brooklet, Georgia. 
Electronic message center sign. A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic means. 
Flag . Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols. 
Flashing sign. A sign utilizing a pattern of changing light illumination where the sign illumination alternates suddenly between illuminated and non-illuminated for the purpose of drawing attention to the sign. 
Frame effect. The use of movement or some element thereof, to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
Freestanding sign. A sign which is attached to, or part of, a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure. Freestanding signs may take the form of either monument or stanchion signs as defined herein. 
Incidental sign. A sign of no more than two square feet that serves the purpose of guiding safe traffic movements onto, from or on property, and without which there is an increased risk of incompatible traffic movements or obstructions. Examples of incidental signs include but are not limited to "stop," "no parking," "entrance," "loading zone" and other similar traffic related directives. 
LED sign. Any sign or portion thereof that utilizes light emitting diode technology or other similar semi-conductor technology to produce an illuminated image, picture, or message of any kind whether the image, picture, or message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. For purposes of this article, a LED sign is not considered to be a form of changeable copy sign. 
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court, or a parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
Marquee . A permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, but not supported by the ground, and constructed of durable material to provide protection from the weather. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign which forms a solid structure from the ground to the top of the sign. 
Nonconforming sign. Any sign which, while legal at the time of erection, does not comply with the requirements of this article. 
Normal grade. The lower of existing grade prior to construction or the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating for the purpose of locating the sign. 
Outdoor advertising sign. A sign which conveys a commercial message directing attention to or promoting a business commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than upon the premises on which the sign is located and which has advertising space of 150 square feet or greater. Also referred to as a "billboard." 
Pennant . Any lightweight fabric or other similar material, message or no message, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
Person . Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization, singular or plural, of any kind. 
Pole sign. See stanchion sign . 
Portable sign. Any sign which because of its design or construction was originally intended to be portable, whether or not such sign has been attached or affixed to the ground or other permanent structure. The term portable sign includes but is not limited to portable changeable copy signs, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, signs converted to A- or T-frames, menu and sandwich board signs, and signs attached to or painted on vehicles or trailers parked and visible from the public right-of-way unless said vehicle or trailer is regularly used for some other significant purpose consistent with the purposes for which it was designed in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
Principal building. The main or principal building located upon a lot; the building in which the principal use of the premises is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other clearly additional uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Projecting sign. Any sign affixed to a building or wall and its leading edge extends beyond the line of such building or wall or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or wall to which it is affixed by more than 12 inches. 
Roof sign. Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained in whole or in part upon, against, or above the eave of a peaked roof or parapet line of a flat roof. 
Setback line. Building: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided. 
(1)  Building setback, front: The minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way, or an official future street right-of-way, and the front of a building or structure on a lot. The front setback distance applies to the full width of the lot and is parallel to or concentric with the street right-of-way. 
(2)  Building setback, rear: The minimum allowable distance between the rear property line of a building or structure and a lot. The rear setback applies to and extends the full width of the lot. 
(3)  Building setback, side: The minimum allowable distance between the side property line and a building or structure on a lot. The side setback applies to the full depth of a lot. 
Sign . Any fixture, placard, structure, or device illuminated or nonilluminated that uses any color, form, graphic, symbol, or writing to convey information of any kind and which is visible to the public from streets and/or public property. 
Special event sign. See temporary sign. 
Spectacular sign or device. Signs or devices, whether permanent or temporary, utilizing out of the ordinary materials, configurations or devices, including, but not limited to (i) balloons; (ii) animated animal forms; and (iii) other attention-getting devices. "Spectacular sign or device" does not include banners, flags or pennants meeting the standards of this article. 
Stanchion sign. A freestanding sign that is mounted on a pole or other vertical support such that the bottom of the sign face is elevated above ground level and there is no visual obstruction other than the vertical support between the ground and the bottom of the sign face. 
Standard informational sign. A sign with an area not greater than four and one-half square feet, with a sign face made for short term use, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections and which, when erect, stands at a height not greater than three feet and is mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half inches. 
Street . Relates to, and includes streets and avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, and other ways. See Appendix B Zoning, section 2-46. 
Street frontage. The distance for which a lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street. 
Suspended sign. Any sign which is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
Temporary sign. Any sign that by its design and construction is intended to be used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted or anchored. This definition excludes "portable signs" and "standard informational signs," which are separately defined under this article. 
Tri-vision sign. A sign designed with a series of slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show multiple different sign messages in sequence. For purposes of this article, a tri-vision sign is not a changeable copy sign. 
Wall sign. Any sign painted on or erected within 12 inches and parallel to an exterior wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only on one sign surface. 
Window sign. Any writing, pictures, symbols, or combination thereof, attached to, placed upon, or painted on the interior of a door or window or upon the window panes or glass and visible from the exterior of the window or door. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-3. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Applications . All applications for sign permits of any kind shall be submitted to the zoning administrator on an application form prescribed by the city. The applicant must be the property owner or the lessee of the lot on which the sign will be located, or an agent or representative of the property owner or lessee. 
(b)  Permit for new sign or for sign modification. An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by a detailed illustration of the dimensions, design, structure, and location of each sign in the format prescribed within the official application form. 
(c)  Fees . Fees shall be set forth in the City of Brooklet schedule of fees and charges. 
(d)  Action . Within 15 business days of the submission of an application for a sign permit, including required and accompanying materials as provided in section 8-3(b) of this article, the zoning administrator shall either: 
(1)  Issue the permit where it is found that such sign application is complete and the proposed sign adheres to the standards of this article and other applicable requirements of city ordinances and state law; or 
(2)  Deny the permit where the application is incomplete, contains false material statements or where the proposed sign would violate standards of this article or other ordinances or state laws regulating signage. Any denial of a permit shall be in writing and shall include a specification of the section(s) of the ordinance, or applicable provision of other city ordinances or state laws with which the sign is inconsistent. The denial shall be based upon and shall cite to the specific articulated standards in this article, or other law, and shall not be based upon or cited to the general concerns contained in section 8-1 herein. A denied application later resubmitted in conformity with this article shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, rather than on the date of original submission. A decision to deny a permit shall be in writing and shall be served on the permit applicant either by hand delivery or by first class mail to the address provided by the applicant no later than 15 business days after initial receipt of the application. 
(e)  Lapse of permit. If construction of a sign for which a permit has been issued has not begun within six months of the issuance of the permit, the permit shall lapse and become null and void. Thereafter, the applicant shall be required to obtain another permit prior to constructing or modifying the sign. 
(f)  Inspections . Upon substantial completion of the construction or modification of a permanent sign for which a permit has been issued, the permittee shall notify the building official and request an inspection. If the construction is substantially complete, but not in full compliance with this article and other applicable codes, the zoning administrator or his designee shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of such inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. If the permit lapses, the zoning administrator may require the owner or applicant to remove the sign or obtain another permit to correct the deficiencies. 
(g)  Appeals . In the event of denial of an application for a permit, the applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article XI, Appendix B—Zoning. 
(h)  Work without permit issuance. If any person, owner, authorized agent or contractor commences any work before securing permits required by this article, fees upon application shall be doubled. 
(i)  Revocation . In the event it is determined that a permit was issued in violation of this article or other ordinance or law regulating the sign at issue or where the sign has been erected in violation of such standards, the zoning administrator may issue the permit holder a written notice of revocation of the permit, stating the grounds for such revocation action. The zoning administrator's decision to revoke a permit may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article XI, Appendix B—Zoning. 
(j)  Multiple lots. If several lots of record which are contiguous and adjacent have been combined for a single purpose, then the lots shall be considered as a single lot in determining the size, height and use requirements as set forth by this article. 
(k)  Display of permit. The permit holder shall be responsible for maintaining the permit for every sign constructed, erected or maintained for which a permit is required by this article. Such permit shall be kept on the premises served by the sign and shall be exhibited promptly upon request of city officers and employees. 
(l)  Assignment of sign permits. A current and valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises, subject to any filing of such applications as the zoning administrator may require; no fees shall be charged for filing an assignment with the city. The assignment shall not require city approval. However, a modification of the sign by an assignee shall require a permit and payment of fee as for a new sign. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-4. - Signs exempt from permit. 
The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this article, provided that such signs or devices erected or placed are located on property of the person who erects such signs or on property whose owner has given permission for such placement, and provided further that all other standards of this article concerning the physical placement or dimensions of the sign are observed: 
(1)  Any public notice or warning required by a valid applicable law, regulation, or ordinance. 
(2)  Official traffic control signs and devices meeting the standards of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(3)  Address numerals not exceeding four inches in height on residential properties or eight inches in height on non-residential properties. 
(4)  Incidental signs and other signs on private property directing traffic, such as "Stop" or "Yield," that meet state department of transportation standards. 
(5)  Flags are limited to 24 square feet and, if attached to a flag pole, shall be flown on a pole not exceeding 25 feet in height in sign districts 1 and 3. Flags in sign district 2 shall not exceed 60 square feet in size nor be flown on poles higher than 40 feet. Two flags per property are permitted without permit. Additional flags are subject to permitting as "banners" under section 8-7 of this section. 
(6)  Window signs are allowed in all sign districts. Window signs shall cover no more than 50 percent of any window or door pane area. 
(7)  Individual businesses are allowed one non-illuminated portable sidewalk sign of an A-frame or easel construction per public street frontage during business hours. Such signs shall be located within three feet of the entrance to the business. Such signs shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic or obstruct the view of drivers entering or existing property or intersecting streets. Such signs shall further not exceed five feet in height or two feet in width and shall be removed by the owner at the end of each business day. 
(8)  Each owner and/or occupant of a lot in the city shall be allowed to erect two standard informational signs on that owner/occupant's property without first obtaining a permit. 
(9)  Political campaign signs shall be allowed in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58. 
(10)  Spectacular signs or devices are allowed in sign districts 2 and 3; provided, however, that the zoning administrator may require the removal and discontinuance of any spectacular sign or device if he determines that such spectacular sign or device is endangering the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(11)  Signs advertising garage sales, yard sales, or other similar usages; subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  No sign may be posted on public property or utility pole; and 
b.  One sign only shall be allowed on the premises of the sale, limited to the duration of the sale. 
(12)  Home occupation signs, not more than two square feet in area, provided that no more than one home occupation sign per residence shall be allowed. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-5. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts of Brooklet: 
(1)  No sign shall be constructed, erected or maintained that uses the words, "Stop," "Emergency" or "Danger," or uses emergency colors of red, blue or amber, in such a manner as to imply danger or emergency, or which is a copy or imitation of an official traffic-control sign or device. 
(2)  No signs are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way, except for traffic signs and signals, informational signs erected by a public agency, and approved signs identifying subdivisions or commercial/industrial developments. 
(3)  Signs attached to, drawn or painted on trees, rocks, or utility poles. 
(4)  Beacons; animated signs. 
(5)  Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument, except signs pertaining to that particular site or monument. 
(6)  Fluttering ribbons or pennants (excluding flags permitted under section 8-4(6) or banners permitted on a temporary basis under section 8-7). 
(7)  Roof signs, except on the facings of mansard roofs where the slope of the roof does not terminate in a unified ridge line, and when no other space is available for the mounting of signs. Supports for roof signs on such mansard roofs shall be attached to the structural supports of the roof, and shall not project above the peak of the roof. 
(8)  Illuminated signs from which direct rays of light are projected onto a lot other than on the lot where the illumination occurs. 
(9)  Signs displaying any obscene message or obscenity as defined by U.S. Supreme Court decisions. 
(10)  Portable signs, except as allowed under section 8-4(8) of this article. 
(11)  Projecting signs. 
(12)  Suspended signs. 
(13)  Billboards. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-6. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Existing nonconforming signs. Any permanent sign existing as of the date of the adoption of this article (04/19/2012), which sign was legal when erected but does not comply with all the requirements of this article, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article so long as it remains in continuous use without any renovation or modification other than routine maintenance and repair. The mere changing of the advertisement or message on an existing nonconforming sign, without any structural alteration to the sign, shall not be considered a renovation or modification that results in the loss of exempt status. 
(b)  Maintenance of nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs that are exempt from the requirements of this article must nonetheless be maintained in good condition and not allowed to become dilapidated or structurally unsafe. If the zoning administrator or his designee determines that a nonconforming sign has been allowed to deteriorate to the point that it is structurally unsafe, the sign must be removed and cannot be replaced unless it is with a sign that complies with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Conforming and nonconforming signs. No conforming sign or advertising device shall be erected on a lot if the permit holder or applicant maintains an existing nonconforming sign on the lot until the nonconforming sign has been removed. 
(d)  Incentives for removal of nonconforming signs. In the event a nonconforming sign is removed and replaced with a sign in conformance with this article, the owner of the property on which the sign is placed shall be allowed a waiver of all permit fees associated with the new conforming sign. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-7. - Temporary signs and banners. 
Permits for temporary signs or banners on private property shall be allowed upon issuance of a temporary sign permit, which shall be subject to the application procedures required by section 8-3 of this article, and the following additional requirements: 
(1)  A temporary sign permit shall be permitted for a period up to 90 days. 
(2)  No more than three permits shall be issued for a lot in any calendar year. 
(3)  The application shall specifically describe the sign and device as to construction and/or composition and location on the property. 
(4)  Permitted temporary signs or banners shall adhere to the applicable standards of this article which would otherwise apply to a sign intended to be erected on a permanent basis, including but not limited to size, height, setback, placement on a building elevation, etc. 
(5)  Permitted temporary signs or banners shall not include any illumination or any feature or characteristic which would also meet the definition of a changeable copy sign. 
(6)  Permitted temporary signs or banners shall pose no significant threat to person or property in the event of inclement weather. 
(7)  Each temporary sign and banner shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-8. - Changeable copy signs and electronic message center signs. 
Changeable copy signs and electronic message center signs are permitted as an integral part of any permanent signs which meet all other requirements of this article, and further subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  The changeable copy or electronic message center portion of the sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the overall display surface area of the sign. 
(2)  The total display area of any sign containing changeable copy panels shall not exceed the size limitations imposed elsewhere in this article. 
(3)  Changeable copy signs and electronic message center signs will only be allowed as part of the original construction and erection of a sign which complies with the specifications required by this article or as part of a significant structural alteration to an existing sign. 
(4)  Electronic message center signs may only display static images lasting for at least eight seconds before transitioning to another static image. Transitions from one static image to the next may utilize frame effects so long as animation and flashing is prohibited. 
(5)  All electronic message center signs shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology that automatically adjusts the sign's brightness in direct correlation with natural ambient light conditions. 
(6)  No electronic message center sign shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a foot candle (Lux) meter at a preset distance depending on sign area, measured as follows: 

 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-9. - Illuminated signs. 
Where internal or external illumination of signs is permitted within this article, no lighting arrangement shall impair the vision of the traveling public in any way. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-10. - Reflective surfaces. 
Sign faces shall not incorporate reflective surface materials which may obstruct, impair or interfere with the vision of the traveling public in any way. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-11. - Location, number and dimension of permitted signs. 
(a)  Sign districts. Signs of certain types, characteristics, numbers and dimensions are permitted in specific locations, and according to standards established by this section and other applicable sections of this article. For the purposes of categorizing suitable signs by location in the city, the following sign districts are established: 
(1)  Sign district 1 includes the agricultural district and any residential districts (A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4). 
(2)  Sign district 2 is the C-1, C-2, I-1, and I-2 zoning districts on state and federal highway systems. 
(3)  Sign district 3 is the C-1, C-2, I-1, and I-2 zoning districts on thoroughfares not part of the state or federal highway system. 
(b)  Exempt and prohibited signs. Certain signs are exempt from permit requirements pursuant to section 8-4 of this article, and certain signs are prohibited pursuant to section 8-5 of this article. These exempt and prohibited signs are not listed in Table 1, and any exempt signs on a lot should not be included in computing the maximum sign areas in Tables 2, 3, and 4. 
(c)  Type, number, and maximum area of signs. The type, number, and maximum area of signs shall be as set forth in Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4 as follows: 

 
1 Roof signs, where permitted, shall be subject to the provisions of section 8-5(6). 
2 Signs listed as "miscellaneous" within this table do not form part of the "aggregate sign area" for a parcel as defined in section 8-2, or Tables 2, 3, and 4 as provided within this article. 

 
1 Per the purposes of this article, "residences on an individual lot" refers to any individual lot principally serving as a single-family residential dwelling [attached, detached, townhouse, etc.] or a duplex. 
2 Per the purposes of this article, signage related to a "residential development or subdivision" includes all common entry signage into the development, and all signage related to common areas and facilities. 
3 As provided in section 8-2 and Table 1 herein, "aggregate sign area" includes the combined sign area of all permanent signs that require a permit, including portions of any signs that are changeable copy or electronic message centers. 
4 Unless incorporated into the street right-of-way as part of landscaped entryway feature—in which case only one sign structure may be located at the entrance. 
  
;hg;(NOTE: Illumination of freestanding or building signs is prohibited on any individual lot principally serving as single-family residential dwelling [attached, detached, townhouse, etc.] or a duplex. Land uses within sign district 1 which may otherwise utilize illumination shall not incorporate internal illumination.);hg;(NOTE: Illumination of freestanding or building signs is prohibited on any individual lot principally serving as single-family residential dwelling [attached, detached, townhouse, etc.] or a duplex. Land uses within sign district 1 which may otherwise utilize illumination shall not incorporate internal illumination.) 

 
1 As provided in section 8-2 and Table 1 herein, "aggregate sign area" includes the combined sign area of all permanent signs that require a permit, including portions of any signs that are changeable copy or electronic message centers. 

 
1 As provided in section 8-2 and Table 1 herein, "aggregate sign area" includes the combined sign area of all permanent signs that require a permit, including portions of any signs that are changeable copy or electronic message centers. 
(d)  Dimensional standards by sign district. Signs may be erected in those districts where the applicable sign type is allowed as provided within the Tables 2, 3, and 4 contained in this section. The following principles shall control when computing the sign area, height and other miscellaneous provisions provided in Tables 2, 3, and 4: 
(1)  Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face shall be calculated by means of the smallest shape (i.e., square, circle, rectangle) that surrounds the extreme limits of writing or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework. 
(2)  Computation of area of multifaced signs. The area of a sign with more than one face shall be calculated by totaling the areas of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two faces are identical and back-to-back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any one point at the same time, the sign shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
(3)  Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be calculated as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. 
(4)  Computation of aggregate sign area for a lot. The aggregate sign area for a lot shall be computed by adding together the area of all permanent signs on the lot that require a permit, including portions of any signs that are changeable copy or electronic message centers. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-12. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-13. - Design, construction, and maintenance. 
(a)  All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with applicable provisions of the Standard Building Code and National Electrical Code as adopted by the city. All signs must be designed to withstand winds of 100 miles per hour. 
(b)  Except as otherwise permitted in this article, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and permanently attached to the ground, building or any other structure. 
(c)  All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, aesthetically pleasing in appearance, and in compliance with all building and electrical codes. The following are some examples of deficiencies which reflect a lack of care: rust spots; loose boards; paint or lettering faded; paint chipping or peeling; lights not working or burned out; colored or transparent panels used with backlighting which are missing, broken, faded or damaged; inspection plates loose or missing; or overall sign appearance not consistent with the other signs in the general area. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-14. - Abandoned signs. 
(a)  Any signs that are located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of six months or more, or any sign which pertained to a time, event, purpose or service which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. For purposes of this provision, property will not be deemed "vacant" if the owner of the property is actively pursuing rental of the property. 
(b)  Abandoned signs are prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises. If the zoning administrator, building official, or their designee determine that a sign is abandoned, the zoning administrator, building official, or their designee shall provide written notice via certified or registered mail to the owner of the sign and the owner of the premises informing them that the sign is deemed to be abandoned, the reasons therefore, and that the abandoned sign must be removed from the property. If the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises fails to remove the sign within 60 days after such written notice was sent, the city may enter upon the premises and remove the abandoned sign with city forces, and the cost of same shall constitute a lien against the property. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-15. - Violations and enforcement; penalties and remedies. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(b)  Each day of a continuing violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense. 
(c)  Citations for violations of this article shall be prosecuted in the Municipal Court of Brooklet by the city marshal or his/her designee. 
(d)  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city may seek equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to remedy any violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 8-16. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  No liability. This article is remedial in nature and shall be construed to secure such beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which include public safety, health, and general welfare. This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the governing authority or any of its employees or agents any liability or responsibility for damages to any person or property in any way caused by or connected with any signage governed by this article. Nor shall the governing authority or any of its employees or agents be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections, denials, approvals, or permits conducted or issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Severability . If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(c)  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of the City of Brooklet Code of Ordinances, including Appendix B, the provisions of this article shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
(d)  Effective date. The ordinance from which this article was adopted shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
(Ord. of 4-19-2012) 
ARTICLE IX. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 9-1. - Nonconforming lots. 
Any lot for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Bulloch County at the time of passage of the ordinance which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may be used for any of the uses permitted a conforming use, and may have the structure improved, enlarged, or extended, provided that in either case: 
A.  Minimum requirements of the district for front, side, and rear yard, height, and floor area shall be complied with; 
B.  The lot shall be used for duplexes or multi-family dwellings when allowed within the District only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district; and, 
C.  The requirements of section 3-17 are met. 
(Ord. of 3-4-2002; § 1) 
Sec. 9-2. - Nonconforming open uses of land. 
Except as noted in section 9-8, nonconforming uses consisting of lots used for storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, and similar open uses where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the open use of the lot and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter under this ordinance in the district in which it is located, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to the other requirements in this ordinance. 
A.  When a nonconforming open use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use; 
B.  Nonconforming open uses of land shall not be changed to any but conforming uses; 
C.  A nonconforming open use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming; and, 
D.  When any nonconforming open use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
Sec. 9-3. - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
Nonconforming uses consisting of structures used at the earlier of the time of passage of this ordinance or any predecessor zoning ordinance, for purposes not permitted in the district in which they are located shall in addition to the other requirements of this ordinance be governed by the following restrictions: 
A.  An existing nonconforming use of a structure may not be changed to another nonconforming use; 
B.  A nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which at the time the use became nonconforming were already erected and arranged or designed for such nonconforming use. No structural alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use; and, 
C.  When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of one year, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that district under the provisions of this ordinance. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
Sec. 9-4. - Nonconforming signs. 
Except as noted in section 9-8. Nonconforming signs shall be allowed to continue except as provided in sections 8-2 and 8-4 and as follows: 
A.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
B.  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as repainting, electrical repairs, neon tubing repairs shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of a sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
C.  New signs related to legally established nonconforming uses may be erected provided they comply with the sign regulations applicable to the zoning district. 
Sec. 9-5. - Reconstruction of nonconforming structures. 
When a nonconforming structure containing a nonconforming use or a nonconforming sign is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind, or act of God, such structure or sign may be constructed as a nonconforming use only if reconstruction or replacement is started within six months of the occurrence of the razing or damage. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements of this ordinance shall be governed by this provision. 
Sec. 9-6. - Changes in zoning. 
Any nonconformances created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance regulations after the date of passage of this ordinance shall also be governed by the provisions of section 9-1. 
Sec. 9-7. - Not retroactive. 
The regulation prescribed herein shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any existing structure not conforming to the then existing regulations as of any predecessor zoning ordinance of the City of Brooklet or to the regulations contained herein as of the effective date of this ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the lawful construction or alteration of a building or land which was begun prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and is diligently pursued. 
(Ord. of 3-4-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 9-8. - Interpretation. 
The term "nonconforming" shall not be deemed to include violations of predecessor zoning ordinances of the City of Brooklet existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance. 
TOWN OF BROOKLET 
P. O. BOX 67 
BROOKLET, GA. 30415 
912-842-2137 
APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT 

 

 
Building Fee Schedule 
1.  Single family dwelling; (builder to present set of plans) 
$350.00 minimum. 
2.  Multiple unit dwelling; (builder to present set of plans) 
$350.00 minimum per unit. 
3.  Commercial; (builder to present set of plans) 
$0.10 per square foot plus $50.00 per inspection trip. 
4.  Warehouse (builder to present set of plans) 
$0.10 per square foot 0 to 5,000 square foot 
$0.07 per square foot 5,000 square foot or greater 
5.  Dwelling/commercial addition or renovation; 
$50.00 per inspection as determined by building inspector 
6.  Moving of manufactured home: 
$75.00 covers permit and one trip plumbing and electric inspection. 
7.  Education, government and religious sanctuaries: 
$0.10 per square foot plus $50.00 per inspection trip. 
Re-inspection fee is $35.00. 
Failure to obtain permit prior to beginning construction, fee will be doubled. 
Editor's note— Fees are now established in a fee schedule on file with the city clerk. 
ARTICLE X. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES 
The intent of this article is to provide for suitable and proper administration and enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance; to designate the enforcing officer and to outline the proper steps to be taken by parties interested in constructing, erecting, or modifying a structure or other land use; and, to set forth the penalties for violating the provisions of this ordinance. 

Sec. 10-1. - Zoning administrator. 
It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to administer and to enforce this ordinance. The zoning administrator shall keep records of all and any permits, the certificates of occupancy issued, and all submitted subdivision plats, with notations of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be made as a public record. The zoning administrator has the authority to take final action on applications or matters involving variances, nonconforming uses, or special exceptions that these regulations have not reserved for public hearings, either with the planning committee or city council. The zoning administrator shall return and not accept any incomplete application for a zoning amendment, variance, or special exception. 
Sec. 10-2. - Building permit required. 
A building permit, or a sign permit in [the] case of a sign, is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving, or alteration of any building or structure or sign. No building permit or sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance; however, a building permit issued before the adoption of this ordinance shall remain valid with the same qualifications as issued under this ordinance. No building permit shall be issued until utility and drainage plans have been prepared and approved by a licensed professional engineer, if in the opinion of the zoning administrator or the building inspector utility and/or drainage may be a problem. 
Sec. 10-3. - Application for building permit. 
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat or plan in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the size of the building to be erected; the location of the building on the lot; the size and location of the lot; the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; the setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots and such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. Any building permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six months after the date of issuance of the permit, or if the work or development authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the work or development commenced; provided that extensions of time for periods not exceeding six months each may be allowed in writing by the zoning administrator. 
The applicant for a building permit shall submit a certificate with his application which certifies that the lot he proposes to develop is a lot of record. When the lot in question does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements of this ordinance, then the applicant shall certify that such lot was a lot of record prior to the adoption of this ordinance or is a lot which has been created through governmental taking of property. 
Building permits shall be issued by the city clerk only after approval by the zoning administrator and building inspector. The building permit will identify buildings by assigning a street identification number. House street numbers of residential, commercial, and industrial buildings will display street identification numbers of at least three inches in height, that are visible from the facing street. (See article VIII.) 
Sec. 10-4. - Sign permits. 
The zoning administrator shall receive applications for the construction of signs, as required by this ordinance. Such applications shall follow the same forms as required for building permits, and shall contain information required by this ordinance in article VIII. The zoning administrator shall process such sign applications. The city clerk shall issue sign permits and sign permit numbers for proposed signs which comply with the requirements of this ordinance upon approval by the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 10-5. - Certificate of occupancy. 
Certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building inspector upon approval by the zoning administrator in accordance with the following provisions: 
Section 10-5.1. Certificate of occupancy. Certificate of occupancy is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
A.  A building hereafter erected. 
B.  A building hereafter altered so as to affect height, or the side, front or rear yard. 
C.  Any building or premises where a change in the type of occupancy or use will occur. 
Section 10-5.2. Issuance of certificate of occupancy. Upon payment of any required fees, the building inspector shall sign and issue a certificate if the proposed use of land or building as stated on the certificate of occupancy is signed thereto by the owner or his appointed agent and is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance, and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan submitted and approved for the building permit. One copy of all certificates of occupancy issued which contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property, floor loads, and other pertinent information, signed by the owner or his agent shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Section 10-5.3. Denial of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance, and the structure conforms with the applicable provisions of the building code and complies with the sketches or plans submitted for obtaining the building permit. 
Sec. 10-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
The zoning administrator shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may reasonably be necessary to assure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of this zoning ordinance. For this purpose, the administrator may enter at reasonable times upon any property for the purpose of investigation and inspection. 
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction by the municipal court of the City of Brooklet, Georgia, may be fined not more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 10-7. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the zoning administrator or any other appropriate authority, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the violation in the case of such buildings, structure, or land. 
Sec. 10-8. - Hearing dates. 
The zoning administrator will provide to the city clerk on or before January 15 of each year a schedule of deadlines for submission of applications for zoning map amendments, text amendments, variances and special exceptions each month and the corresponding planning commission hearing and city council hearing dates. 
ARTICLE XI. - APPEAL PROCEDURE 
This article is established to identify the procedure whereby any aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator. 

Sec. 11-1. - Who may appeal. 
Any party aggrieved because of the alleged error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator may appeal such action to the planning commission. Such appeal shall be filed no later than 45 days after the date of the decision appealed by filing with the zoning administrator and with the planning commission, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the planning commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
Sec. 11-2. - Decision by planning commission. 
The planning commission may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator. 
Sec. 11-3. - Appeal of decision by planning commission. 
Any party aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission, including members of the planning commission or city council, may seek review of such decision by filing an appeal within 30 days of the decision with the clerk to the city council. The city council should review the record submitted to the planning commission and the zoning administrator, and make its decision on those grounds. The decision of the city council to affirm or reverse may be appealed to superior court by seeking the writ of mandamus within 30 days of its decision, otherwise it is final. 
ARTICLE XII. - AMENDMENT 

Sec. 12-1. - General conditions. 
These regulations, including the zoning map, may be amended by the city council (1) on its own motion; (2) on petition; or (3) on recommendation of the planning commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. A public hearing shall be held on any such amendment before becoming effective. 
Sec. 12-2. - Application procedure. 
Section 12-2.1. General. Applications for amendments of this ordinance shall be in the form of proposals for amendment of the text of this ordinance or proposals for amendment of the zoning map. Application for amendment shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and shall include the appropriate fee. Any property for which a zoning amendment is denied cannot be reconsidered, for a zoning amendment, for at least six months after the date of the denial. 
Section 12-2.2. Signature of applicant required. Applications shall be made by the owner of the subject property, the authorized agent of the subject property, the planning commission, or the mayor and city council. All applications, other than those initiated by the planning commission or the mayor and city council, shall be signed by the applicant, and shall state his name and address. Any such applicant wishing to request a zoning amendment must have at least 51 percent ownership of the subject property. If the applicant is not the owner, the applicant shall state his relation to the owner and affirm his authority to make application. If the applicant is the planning commission, the application shall be signed by the zoning administrator. If the applicant is the mayor and city council, the application shall be signed by the mayor. 
Section 12-2.3. Application for zoning map amendment. An application for a zoning map amendment shall include the information listed in subparagraphs (A) through (M) below. An incomplete application shall not be considered and shall be returned to the applicant for completion. 
The application shall show: 
A.  The area in which the lot proposed to be reclassified is located and the street number, if any, or if none, the location with respect to the nearby public streets in common use; 
B.  A plat of the lot in question, or a description by metes and bounds, bearings, and distances of the lot, or if the boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within a subdivision for which the plat is recorded in the land records of the county, then the lot, block, and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference; 
C.  The present zoning classification and the classification proposed for such lot; 
D.  The type and size of structure(s) to be constructed and the specific use of the structure; 
E.  The name and address of the owners of the land; 
F.  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified stated in square feet if less than one acre, and in acres if one or more; 
G.  The application number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole part of the land proposed to be reclassified; 
H.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
I.  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
J.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
K.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
L.  If the local government has an adopted land use plan, whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; and, 
M.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
Sec. 12-3. - Referral to planning commission. 
After acceptance of any application for amendment, the zoning administrator shall transmit a copy to each member of the planning commission for their review and recommendation. Further, the zoning administrator will provide a copy of the application to each city council member and the mayor. The planning commission shall have a 60-day period subsequent to the receipt of the application by the zoning administrator within which to make its recommendation to the city council. Before taking action on a proposed amendment, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation which shall state the time, date and place of the hearing, and shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. A notice of the date, time and place of hearing shall be sent by the zoning administrator via certified mail to the applicant and adjacent property owners. The planning commission shall investigate and make a written recommendation with respect to each of the factors itemized in subsection 12-2.3. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation within such 60-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the requested change or departure. 
Sec. 12-4. - City council hearing procedure. 
A.  Hearing called. Upon receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, and before taking action on proposed amendment, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation which shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. If a zoning map amendment is initiated by a party other than the mayor and city council, then the notice, in addition to the above requirements of this subsection, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
B.  Notice to interested parties. A notice of the date, time and place of hearing shall be sent by the zoning administrator via certified mail to the applicant and adjacent property owners. All application files shall be placed in the custody of the zoning administrator, and shall be open to the public for inspection during regular office hours. 
C.  Policies and procedures. The public hearing shall be conducted by the city council. No one may speak until recognized by the presiding official, and then each speaker must state his name and address. Those who intend to speak shall sign up with the clerk prior to the meeting. The applicant shall speak first, and present the application and any evidence, opinions or witnesses. The opponents to the proposed change shall present their opposition, evidence, opinions and witnesses. The applicant may have an opportunity for rebuttal. A minimum time period of ten minutes per side for presentation of data, evidence and opinions for each shall be provided. Additional time may be allowed by majority vote of the council, but an equal amount of additional time must be awarded to each side if any is awarded. 
D.  Public notice of policies and procedures. The policies and procedures listed in subparagraph (C) above shall be available to the public as a printed handout at every public hearing. 
Sec. 12-5. - Posting of property. 
A.  Erection of sign. Within 15 days prior to the public hearings held by both the planning commission and the city council, a sign provided by the city shall be erected by the zoning administrator, which sign shall read as follows: 
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC 
ZONING/SPECIAL EXCEPTION/VARIANCE NOTICE 
The following change for a zoning amendment/special exception/variance in the Town of Brooklet has been requested (date) by (applicant) (property address) (application request & acreage) (present zoning) (proposed amendment/special exception/variance). A public hearing conducted by the Planning Commission will be held at Brooklet City Hall, 202 East Lee Street [now 104 Church Street] at (time) on (date). A public hearing before the City Council will be held at the same location at (time) on (date). The public is invited. For more information, call the zoning office at (912) 489-1356 or the City Clerk at (912) 842-2137. 
Sec. 12-6. - City council decision. 
In taking action on an application, the city council may approve the application, approve the application with zoning conditions if for a zoning map amendment, approve the application for less property than requested, approve a zoning classification other than that requested by the applicant if for a zoning map amendment, table a decision on the application for a period not exceeding 45 days, or deny the application, whichever is in the public interest pursuant to the standards set forth in section 12-2.3 (H) through (M). The city council may allow the application to be withdrawn if so requested by the applicant, in which case it may be resubmitted within six months. 
Sec. 12-7. - Appeal. 
The granting or denial of an amendment may be appealed by any aggrieved party, including members of the planning commission or city council, by filing an appeal. The decision of the city council may be appealed to superior court by seeking a writ of mandamus within 30 days of the decision, otherwise it is final. 
ARTICLE XIII. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 13-1. - General conditions. 
A variance is a relaxation of the development standards of the zoning ordinance, not a change in a zoning district, where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Sec. 13-2. - Application procedure. 
An application for a variance shall be submitted to the zoning administrator along with the appropriate fee. The applicant shall provide such information as the planning commission shall require. A variance application that is denied may not be resubmitted for a period of six months. 
Sec. 13-3. - Public hearing. 
After acceptance of any application for a variance, the zoning administrator shall transmit a copy to each member of the planning commission for their review and recommendation. Further, the zoning administrator will provide a copy of the application to each city council member and the mayor. Before taking action on a proposed variance, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation which shall state the time, date and place of the hearing. The planning commission shall have a 60-day period subsequent to the receipt of the application by the zoning administrator within which to make its decision. If the planning commission fails to make a decision within 60 days, it shall be deemed to have approved the requested change or departure. 
Sec. 13-4. - Hearing procedure. 
A.  Notice to interested parties. A notice of the date, time and place of the planning commission hearing shall be sent by the zoning administrator via certified mail to the applicant and adjacent property owners. All application files shall be placed in the custody of the zoning administrator, and shall be open to the public for inspection during regular office hours. 
B.  Policies and procedures. The public hearing shall be conducted by the planning commission. No one may speak until recognized by the presiding official, and then each speaker must state his name and address. Those who intend to speak shall sign up with the zoning administrator prior to the meeting. 
C.  Public notice of policies and procedures. The policies and procedures listed in subparagraph (B) above shall be available to the public as a printed handout at every public hearing. 
Sec. 13-5. - Posting of property. 
A.  Erection of sign. Within 15 days prior to the public hearing held by the planning commission, a sign provided by the city shall be erected by the zoning administrator, which sign shall read as follows: 
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC 
ZONING/SPECIAL EXCEPTION/VARIANCE NOTICE 
The following change for a zoning amendment/special exception/variance in the Town of Brooklet has been requested (date) by (applicant) (property address) (application request & acreage) (present zoning) (proposed amendment/special exception/variance). A public hearing conducted by the Planning Commission will be held at Brooklet City Hall, 202 East Lee Street [now 104 Church Street] at (time) on (date). A public hearing before the City Council will be held at the same location at (time) on (date). The public is invited. For more information, call the zoning office at (912) 489-1356 or the City Clerk at (912) 842-2137. 
Sec. 13-6. - Standards for approval. 
The planning commission shall grant variances only upon a finding of hardship, as follows: 
A.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; or 
B.  The application of the zoning ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; or 
C.  There are conditions that are peculiar to the property involved which adversely affect its reasonable use or usability as currently zoned; or 
D.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose or intent of the zoning ordinance. In no event shall a variance be granted for a use of land or structure that is prohibited in a given district by this ordinance. 
Sec. 13-7. - Appeal. 
The grant or denial of a variance may be appealed by any aggrieved party, including members of the planning commission or city council, by filing an appeal within 30 days of the decision with the clerk to the city council. The city council should review the record submitted to the planning commission and make its decision on those grounds. The decision of the city council may be appealed to superior court by seeking a writ of mandamus within 30 days of the decision, otherwise it is final. 
Sec. 13-8. - Prohibited variances. 
In no case shall a variance be granted for any of the following: 
A.  A reduction of minimum lot size. 
B.  A change in a zoning condition imposed by the city council. 
ARTICLE XIV. - SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 14-1. - General conditions. 
A special exception is a use, which within certain districts specified by this ordinance is not permitted as a matter of right but may be permitted within these districts. The decision to grant or deny a special exception is a decision reserved solely to city council as any amendment to zoning. 
Sec. 14-2. - Application procedure. 
Section 14-2.1. General. Applications for special exception of this ordinance shall be in the form of proposals for special exception. Application for a special exception shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and shall include the appropriate fee. Any property for which a special exception is denied cannot be reconsidered, for a special exception, for at least six months after the date of the denial. 
Section 14-2.2. Signature of applicant required. Applications shall be made by the owner of subject property, the authorized agent of the subject property, the planning commission, or the mayor and city council. All applications, other than those initiated by the planning commission or the mayor and city council, shall be signed by the applicant, and shall state his name and address. Any such applicant wishing to request a special exception must have at least 51 percent ownership of the subject property. If the applicant is not the owner, the applicant shall state his relation to the owner and affirm his authority to make application. 
Section 14-2.3. Application for special exception. An application for a special exception shall include the information listed in subparagraphs (A) through (M) below. An incomplete application shall not be considered and shall be returned to the applicant for completion. 
The application shall show: 
A.  The area in which the lot proposed to be reclassified is located and the street number, if any, or if none, the location with respect to the nearby public streets in common use; 
B.  A plat of the lot in question, or a description by metes and bounds, bearings, and distances of the lot, or if the boundaries conform to the lot boundaries within a subdivision for which the plat is recorded in the land records of the county, then the lot, block, and subdivision designations with appropriate plat reference; 
C.  The present zoning classification and the special exception proposed for such lot; 
D.  The type and size of structure(s) to be constructed and the specific use of the structure; 
E.  The name and address of the owners of the land; 
F.  The area of the land proposed to be included in the special exception stated in square feet if less than one acre, and in acres if one or more; 
G.  The application number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the special exception request of the whole part of the land proposed to be reclassified; 
H.  Whether the special exception request will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
I.  Whether the special exception request will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
J.  Whether the property to the affected by the special exception request has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
K.  Whether the special exception request will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
L.  If the local government has an adopted land use plan, whether the special exception request is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; and, 
M.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the special exception request. 
Sec. 14-3. - Referral to planning commission. 
After acceptance of any application for special exception, the zoning administrator shall transmit a copy to each member of the planning commission for their review and recommendation. Further, the zoning administrator will provide a copy of the application to each city council member and the mayor. The planning commission shall have a 60-day period subsequent to the receipt of the application by the zoning administrator within which to make its decision. Before taking action on a proposed special exception request, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation which shall state the time, date and place of the hearing, and shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property and the proposed special exception request for the property. The planning commission shall investigate and make a written recommendation with respect to the factors itemized in subsection 14-2.3. If the planning commission fails to submit the recommendation within such 60-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the requested special exception. 
Sec. 14-4. - City council hearing procedure. 
A.  Hearing called. Upon receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, and before taking action on proposed special exception, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation which shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. The notice, in addition to the above requirements of this subsection, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed special exception request of the property. 
B.  Notice to interested parties. A notice of the date, time and place of hearing shall be sent by the zoning administrator via certified mail to the applicant and adjacent property owners. All application files shall be placed in the custody of the zoning administrator, and shall be open to the public for inspection during regular office hours. 
C.  Policies and procedures. The public hearing shall be conducted by the city council. No one may speak until recognized by the presiding official, and then each speaker must state his name and address. Those who intend to speak shall sign up with the clerk prior to the meeting. The applicant shall speak first, and present the application and any evidence, opinions or witnesses. The opponents to the proposed change shall present their opposition, evidence, opinions and witnesses. The applicant may have an opportunity for rebuttal. A minimum time period of ten minutes per side for presentation of data, evidence and opinions for each zoning decision shall be provided. Additional time may be allowed by majority vote of the council, but an equal amount of additional time must be awarded to each side if any is awarded. 
D.  Public notice of policies and procedures. The policies and procedures listed in subparagraph (C) above shall be available to the public as a printed handout at every public hearing. 
Sec. 14-5. - Posting of property. 
Erection of sign. Within 15 days prior to the public hearing held by both the planning commission and city council, a sign provided by the city shall be erected by the zoning administrator, which sign shall read as follows: 
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC 
ZONING/SPECIAL EXCEPTION/VARIANCE NOTICE 
The following change for a zoning amendment/special exception/variance in the Town of Brooklet has been requested (date) by (applicant) (property address) (application request & acreage) (present zoning) (proposed amendment/special exception/variance). A public hearing conducted by the Planning Commission will be held at Brooklet City Hall, 202 East Lee Street [now 104 Church Street] at (time) on (date). A public hearing before the City Council will be held at the same location at (time) on (date). The public is invited. For more information, call the zoning office at (912) 489-1356 or the City Clerk at (912) 842-2137. 
Sec. 14-6. - City council decision. 
In taking action on an application, the city council may approve the application, approve the application with conditions, approve the application for less property than requested, table the decision on the application for a period not exceeding 45 days, or deny the application, whichever is in the public interest. The city council may allow the application to be withdrawn, if so requested by the applicant, in which case it may be resubmitted within six months. The grant or denial of a special exception is within the discretion of the city council. The city council should consider the following criteria in evaluating a special exception: 
A.  Whether the proposed special exception will be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity or diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood; 
B.  Whether the proposed special exception will cause an undue burden on public services, facilities or infrastructure; 
C.  Whether the establishment of the proposed special exception will impede the normal and orderly development of surrounding property for uses predominant in the area; 
D.  Whether the location and character of the proposed special exception is considered to be consistent with Bulloch County's Comprehensive Land Use Plan; and, 
E.  Whether the proposed special exception would be a threat to public health, safety, morality or welfare in the particular circumstances of the application. 
Sec. 14-7. - Appeal. 
The granting or denial of a special exception may be appealed by any aggrieved party, including members of the planning commission, by filing an appeal. The decision of the city council may be appealed to superior court by seeking a writ of mandamus within 30 days of the decision, otherwise it is final. 
ARTICLE XV. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 15-1. - Creation of planning commission and duties. 
The Brooklet Planning Commission, (alternatively the "planning commission") hereby established in accordance with the authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, shall consist of five voting members, one of which shall be the commission chairman, and one zoning administrator, which shall be a non-voting position. All members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. Members shall serve for overlapping terms of two years. Members may be appointed to succeed themselves, and for terms of two years. 
Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms. A vacancy in a term of office shall occur whenever the mayor and council finds that a member has resigned, or when the mayor and council shall have dismissed a member, with or without cause. Cause is defined, inter alia, to be the repeated failure to attend meetings of the board or any other action evidencing a negligence of duties. 
The City Clerk shall be the secretary of the planning commission, but shall have no vote. The commission shall meet on the second Tuesday of each month. The zoning administrator shall designate the time and place of its meetings. The planning commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings in accordance with state statutes and these regulations. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular meeting after their appointment. 
Three members of the planning commission, including the chairman shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The members of the planning commission (excepting the zoning administrator) shall serve without compensation except for reimbursement for authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. of 6-9-2005) 
Sec. 15-2. - Duties and powers of the planning commission. 
The City Council of Brooklet, Georgia, hereby authorizes the planning commission to have the power and exercise of duty to undertake, hear and decide the types of appeals, applications and activities outlined below, and shall have the necessary authority to ensure continuing compliance with its decisions. 
Power and duties of Brooklet Planning Commission: 
1.  Annually assess the city's adopted zoning ordinance and comprehensive plan with regard to changing conditions, rezoning approvals and other data as appropriate. 
2.  Recommend to the city council for approval of any changes or amendments to the zoning ordinances and comprehensive plan. 
3.  Hear and recommend to the city council for approval, disapproval or other actions on all requests for zoning changes and special exception permits. 
4.  Review and approve/disapprove of all planned unit developments. 
5.  Hear, decide or take other action on all variances from the terms of this ordinance. 
6.  Hear and make determinations concerning unclassified/unlisted uses. 
7.  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination or refusal made by the building inspector or other administrative official in carrying out or enforcement of this ordinance. 
Sec. 15-3. - Schedule of fees. 
A schedule of fees for text amendments, zoning map amendment, appeals variances applications, special exceptions, subdivision, sign, etc. shall be published at city hall and shall be established by separate ordinance. Any amendments to the schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the city clerk and may be altered or amended only by the city council. Until all applicable fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
Sec. 15-4. - Reporting to city council. 
The planning commission shall prepare and submit to city council a written report on every application brought before it outlining the request made, concern(s) raised by any resident, citizen, or government entity and the recommended course of action. 
ARTICLE XVI. - TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS 

Sec. 16-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be: 
A.  To provide for the appropriate location and development of towers and wireless telecommunication facilities in such locations as will promote the public safety and general welfare; 
B.  To minimize, through proper siting, screening, and design, the potential for visual incompatibility and proliferation of towers; 
C.  To promote and maximize the shared-use/co-location of new and existing towers and the use of alternative tower structures; 
D.  To accommodate the increased demand for the development of towers and wireless telecommunication facilities; and 
E.  To encourage the location of towers in non-residentially developed and zoned areas. 
Sec. 16-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings given in this section: 
A.  Alternative tower structures: shall include, but are not limited to, man-made structures such as clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, water towers, light poles, warehouses, factories, commercial buildings, multi-family buildings, and publicly-used structures such as police and fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, and other structures that can be used for the mounting of antennas or serving the function of a tower. 
B.  Antenna: shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
C.  Co-location/shared use: shall mean the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower. 
D.  FAA: shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
E.  FCC: shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
F.  Guy tower: shall mean the tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
G.  Height: shall mean the vertical distance of any tower as measured from the bottom of the base of the tower at ground level to the highest point of such tower, not including any antennas or other attachments. 
H.  Lattice tower: shall mean a tower that has open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
I.  Monopole tower: shall mean a telecommunications tower constructed of a single pole, without guy wires or ground anchors. 
J.  Tower: shall mean a vertical structure on which is or can be located one or more antennas, including but not necessarily limited to guy towers, lattice towers, and monopole towers. 
Sec. 16-3. - Co-location or location on alternative tower structure required; exception. 
No new towers shall be permitted unless the applicant adequately demonstrates that neither an existing tower suitable for co-location nor a suitable alternative tower structure is available. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or other structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
A.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
B.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's requirements. 
C.  Existing tower or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
D.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
E.  The fees or costs required to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower developments are presumed unreasonable. 
F.  Property owners or owners of existing towers or structures are unwilling to accommodate reasonably the applicant's needs. 
G.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
Sec. 16-4. - Development standards. 
A.  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size requirements for zoning districts shall not apply to towers. However, the site or parcel on which the tower is located shall be of sufficient size to meet the minimum setback requirements in this article. 
B.  Minimum setback requirements. Towers shall be set back a minimum of a distance equal to the height of the tower from all habitable buildings or structures, public rights-of-way, and property lines of any adjacent property. Monopole towers shall not be located any closer than the height of the tower to any residence. Guy towers and lattice towers shall not be located any closer than 500 feet or three times the height of the tower, whichever is greater, to any residence. These setback requirements shall not apply to any building related to the operation or maintenance of the tower. 
C.  Structural design. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is designed, constructed, and maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association (EIA), as amended from time to time. A tower must have the structural capacity to accommodate at least two other users comparable to the initial user. 
D.  Maximum height. The maximum height of towers in all residential districts shall be 180 feet. In all zoning districts in which towers are permitted as conditional use, the height of all towers may be limited in granting the conditional use permit. If at any time it is determined by the FAA or any successor agency that a tower or antenna is interfering with the operation of the Statesboro Municipal Airport or with the Statesboro Municipal Airport's ability to upgrade its status (such as to an instrument landing system facility), such tower or antenna shall immediately be modified to eliminate such interference. If the tower or antenna cannot be modified to eliminate the interference, then the tower or antenna shall immediately be removed by the owner. If the owner fails to remove such tower or antenna, then the governing authority may remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense and the cost of removal shall constitute a lien upon the property on which the tower or antenna was located. 
E.  Illumination. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the zoning administrator, planning and zoning commission, or board of commissioners may review the available lighting alternatives approved by the FAA or any successor agency and require the alternative that would cause the least disturbance to surrounding property: This may include the requirement of a dual lighting system, vertical aiming, or such other FAA-approved measures as may be feasible to reduce the negative impact on the surrounding property. Additional expense shall not be a factor in determining feasibility. 
F.  Color and markings. Unless otherwise required by the FAA or other applicable authority, all towers shall be unmarked and shall have either a galvanized finished or be painted a dull blue, gray, or black finish. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the zoning administrator may require the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances to be of a neutral color that is compatible with the color of the supporting structures so as to make the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances as visually unobtrusive as possible. Camouflaged towers designed to look like trees shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
G.  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate. For guy towers, each guy anchor shall also be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height with the fence line set back at least ten feet from the guy anchor. 
H.  Landscaping. The visual impact of towers shall be mitigated through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower and ancillary structures as follows: 
(1)  A landscaped buffer area a minimum of ten feet in width shall be maintained around the exterior of the security fencing. 
(2)  The landscaped buffer area shall consist of materials of the evergreen variety sufficient to provide screening that will minimize the visual impact of the tower. 
(3)  All required landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure good health and vitality. 
(4)  The use of existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be credited as appropriate toward meeting landscaping requirements. 
(5)  Camouflaged towers designed to look like trees shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(6)  Applicants may submit for approval alternative landscaping plans that meet the purposes of this subsection to limit the visual impact of towers. In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether. 
(7)  The zoning administrator is authorized to grant any approvals and/or waivers contemplated by this subsection in zoning districts where towers are a permitted use. 
I.  No advertising. Neither the tower nor the tower site shall be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signs for the purpose of advertising. Name plates for the purpose of self-identification shall not be considered advertising. 
J.  Federal and state requirements. All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal or state governments with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal or state agency. 
K.  Pre-existing towers/non-conforming uses. All towers operative on the effective date of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a non-conforming use or structure. Additional antennas and related equipment or appurtenances may be co-located on or around pre-existing towers, provided that a permit for such co-location is obtained in accordance with this article. 
Sec. 16-5. - Application procedures. 
A.  Building permits. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity who has not made application for and obtained a building permit in accordance with this article to: 
(1)  Erect, construct in place, re-erect, or replace, any tower; 
(2)  Locate or co-locate any telecommunications facilities on or around a pre-existing tower for which a permit has not been obtained in accordance with this article; 
(3)  Locate any telecommunications facilities on an alternative tower structure. 
No permit or informational submittals shall be required for the repair, replacement, or addition of antenna(s) to a tower or alternative tower structure that does not involve the installation of equipment or appurtenances other than the antenna(s) not exceeding 20 feet in height. No additional permit shall be required for the co-location of an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances on or around a tower for which a permit has already been issued in accordance with this article; provided, however, that the co-locating person or entity shall make information submittals as hereinafter required. Applications for building permits and information submittals under this article shall be submitted to the zoning administrator or his designee and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
B.  Submittals. A complete application shall contain the following: 
(1)  A site plan or plans to scale specifying the proposed location and dimensions of the tower, the proposed lighting system (if any) and alternative lighting systems that would meet FAA approval, size of accessory buildings or uses, access, parking, fences, landscaping plans, existing and adjacent land uses, proposed distance of the tower from existing structures, buildings, overhead utility lines, public rights-of-way, and adjacent property lines, and utilities inventory indicating the locations of all drainage, power lines and any other items as impacting the proposed tower site. 
(2)  Photo simulations or renderings of the proposed tower illustrating the potential visual impact. 
(3)  A report from a licensed professional engineer, documenting the following: 
(a)  Tower height and design, including structural and technical engineering, and other pertinent factors governing the proposed tower design. A cross-section of the tower structure shall be included. 
(b)  Total anticipated structural capacity of the tower, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated. 
(c)  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower. 
(d)  Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration of the site, setbacks and separation from other uses are of adequate size or distance. 
(e)  If the application is for an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances to be located or co-located on a pre-existing tower or located on an alternative tower structure, the engineer's report shall document that the pre-existing tower or alternative tower structure has the structural capacity to support the additional antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances. 
(f)  Certification that the tower and/or antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
(4)  Written documentation from the FAA that the FAA has determined that the tower and/or antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances is not identified as an obstruction and would not be a hazard to air navigation. 
(5)  If the application is for a new tower or towers, the applicant must reasonably demonstrate that no existing tower or alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances. Such evidence may consist of any of the following: 
(a)  No existing towers or alternative tower structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(b)  Existing towers or alternative tower structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(c)  Existing towers or alternative tower structures do not have sufficient structural capacity to support applicant's proposed antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances. 
(d)  The applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the existing tower or alternative tower structures, or the antenna(s) on the existing towers or alternative tower structures would cause electromagnetic interference with the applicant's proposed antenna(s). 
(e)  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to utilize an existing tower or alternative tower structure or to adapt an existing tower or alternative tower structure for utilization are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(f)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and alternative tower structures infeasible. 
(6)  If the application is for a new tower, the applicant must submit a letter of intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use. 
(7)  The applicant shall submit an inventory of its existing tower sites that are either within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The zoning administrator may share this information with other applicants seeking permits for towers or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however that the zoning administrator is under no obligation to share such information and is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
C.  Informational submittals. Any person or entity co-locating an antenna or antennas and related equipment or appurtenances on or around a tower for which a permit has already been issued shall submit the following for information only: 
(1)  The name of the person or entity co-locating on the tower. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the tower. 
(3)  The tower's permit number. 
(4)  The location of the tower. 
(5)  The remaining structural capacity of the tower. 
(6)  Certification that the antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
D.  Independent expert review. If, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, an independent expert review of an application is warranted, the zoning administrator may engage a licensed professional engineer as an independent expert to review any of the materials submitted by an applicant and render an opinion regarding such concerns as structural integrity and feasibility of alternative sites or co-location. Provided, however, that prior to seeking the review of an independent expert, the zoning administrator shall convey his concerns to the applicant in writing and allow the applicant a reasonable opportunity to address those concerns. If the applicant is unable to satisfactorily address the zoning administrator's concerns, the applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed 30 days, in which to modify the application altogether. If any applicant fails to so modify or withdraw the application within the required time, the zoning administrator may proceed to engage a licensed professional engineer to conduct the independent expert review and the expert's fees will be paid by the applicant. The expert's opinion shall not necessarily be determinative, but shall be a significant factor to be considered in granting or denying the application. 
E.  Forms. The zoning administrator is authorized to develop application forms to assist in providing the required information and facilitate the application process. 
F.  Action on applications. See sections 14-3 through 14-7. 
Sec. 16-6. - Public safety telecommunications. 
A.  Towers erected by governmental entity for police, fire, EMS, 911 or other similar public safety telecommunications shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
B.  Commercial telecommunications providers shall give priority to and make reasonable efforts to accommodate requests by governmental entities for tower space needed for public safety telecommunications. If such a request is denied, the commercial telecommunications provider shall reasonably demonstrate why it is not feasible to grant the request. 
C.  If at any time it is determined that a tower or antenna owned or operated by a commercial wireless telecommunications provider is interfering with public emergency telecommunications, such tower or antenna shall immediately be modified to eliminate such interference. If the interference cannot be eliminated through modification, then the commercial provider shall discontinue the use of and remove the tower or antenna. 
Sec. 16-7. - Abandoned towers. 
A.  Any tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of the tower. The owner of an abandoned tower and the owner of the property where the abandoned tower is located shall be under a duty to remove such tower. If such tower is not removed within a reasonable time, not to exceed three months, after receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned towers are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. 
B.  If the owner of an abandoned tower wishes to use such abandoned tower, the owner must first apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower were a new tower. 
Sec. 16-8. - Penalties for violation. 
A.  Warnings and citations. All owners shall furnish to the city clerk a report prepared by a registered professional engineer attesting to the structural integrity. If, upon inspection, a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 60 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. The zoning administrator, building inspector, or their designees may issue a warning citation for a violation of this article. A warning citation shall be sent via certified or registered mail to the person or entity who is responsible for the violation. Upon receipt of the warning citation, the person or entity shall have 60 days to correct or remove such violation, unless the citing official determines that the violation is an imminent hazard to the public, in which case the citing official may shorten the period of time in which the violation must be corrected or removed. If the violation is not corrected or removed within the required time period, then the person or entity shall be issued a citation for violation of this article. Further, if the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said 60 days, the city council may remove such tower at the owner's expense. 
B.  Fines. Any violation of this article resulting in a citation shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. In no event shall the fine imposed for a violation of this article be less than $500.00. 
C.  Continuing violation. Each day any violation of this article continues may be considered a separate offense punishable by a separate fine. 
Sec. 16-9. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  No liability. This article is remedial in nature and shall be construed to secure such beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare. This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any of its employees or agents any liability or responsibility for damages to any person or property in any way caused by or connected with a tower, antenna, or telecommunications facility governed by this article. Nor shall the city or any of its employees or agents be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections, grants, denials, approvals, or permits conducted or issued pursuant to this article. 
B.  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
C.  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of the Brooklet city ordinances, the provisions of this article shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
D.  Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon adoption. 
Sec. 16-10. - Applicability. 
A.  Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This ordinance shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 40 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
ARTICLE XVII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
This article is established to present the legal status of this ordinance and to resolve differences and conflicts between this ordinance and other ordinances. 

Sec. 17-1. - Separability. 
If any portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair the remaining portions unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 17-2. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this ordinance require a greater width or size of yards, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such statute shall govern. The "zoning ordinances" of the City of Brooklet, Georgia, previously adopted, and codified at chapter 18 of the ordinances of the City of Brooklet, are hereby repealed in their entirety, it being the intent of the city to adopt these zoning ordinances to replace the zoning ordinances previously adopted, except that any conditions of zoning imposed by the former zoning ordinances or rights of enforcement of the prior zoning ordinance which accrued prior to repeal shall remain in full force and effect. Furthermore, all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 17-3. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
1986 CODE 
This table gives the location within the new Code of those sections of the 1986 Code that are included herein. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances included herein. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 