THE CODE OF FAYETTE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2014 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

Steve Brown, Chairman 
Charles Oddo, Vice-Chairman 
David Barlow 
J. Allen McCarty 
Randy Ognio 
County Commissioners 
____________ 
Steve Rapson, County Administrator 
Floyd L. Jones, County Clerk 
Tameca P. White, Deputy County Clerk 
Dennis Davenport, County Attorney 
Patrick Stough, Assistant County Attorney 
County Officials 
____________ 
Pete Frisina, Director of Community Services 
Dennis Dutton, Zoning Administrator 
Kathy Hobbs, Code Enforcement Officer 
Planning and Zoning Officials 
  
  
  
  
Albert Gilbert, Chairman 
James "Jim" Graw, Vice-Chairman 
Brian Haren 
Doug Powell 
Bob Simmons 
Planning Commission 
  
  
  
____________ 
  
  
  
Vic Bolton, Chairman 
Larry Blanks, Vice-Chairman 
Bill Beckwith 
Tom Mahon 
Tom Waller 
Zoning Board of Appeals 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Fayette County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1992 Code, as amended through January 23, 2014, and ordinances adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1992 Code, as amended, and any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Nicole C. Fluitt, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to the county attorney's office and county staff for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a code of ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Fayette County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Fayette County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Fayette County, Georgia. 2014. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2014-07 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS FOR FAYETTE COUNTY, GEORGIA AND IT IS HEREBY ENACTED PURSUANT TO THE AUTHORITY OF THE SAME: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Fayette County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 110, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 23, 2014, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. Except as otherwise provided: (1) With respect to violations of the Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense; and (2) With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 23, 2014, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its adoption by the Board of Commissioners for Fayette County, Georgia. 
SO ENACTED this 24th day of April 2014. 

Attest: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - SPECIAL ACTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1. - Other acts listed (editorially supplied list). 
In addition to the act in article II of this part, the following local acts apply to the county: 
1.  1978 Ga. Laws, page 3119, as amended. Coroner. 
2.  1965 Ga. Laws, page 2585, as amended. Sheriff. 
3.  1985 Ga. Laws, page 3992. Tax exemption for elderly and disabled. 
4.  1956 Ga. Laws, page 2022, as amended. Tax commissioner. 
5.  1978 Ga. Laws, page 3377. Fayette County Public Facilities Authority. 
6.  1984 Ga. Laws, page 4026. Fayette County Water Authority. 
7.  1994 Ga. Laws, page 3712. Board of Elections. 
8.  1994 Ga. Laws, page 4980, as amended. State court. 
9.  1996 Ga. Laws, page 4453. Exemption from county and school district taxes for elderly residents. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 
An Act to create a Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues for Fayette County; to provide for commissioner districts; to provide for the election, terms of office, compensation, hours, jurisdiction, duties, bonds and oath of the commissioners; to provide for a clerk and other county employees; to provide for a superintendent of roads; to provide for filling vacancies; to provide for meetings; to provide for purchases; to provide for a quorum; to provide qualifications; to provide an effective date of this Act; to provide for a special election to make this Act effective; to prescribe the procedure connection with the foregoing; to provide for specific repeals; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is from 1959 Ga. Laws (Act No. 149), page 2431. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— County governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Created. 
There shall be a Board of Commissioners of Fayette County, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as the board, to be composed of five members. 
(1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1134), page 3398, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Districts. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of Fayette County shall consist of five members. For the purpose [of] electing such members, Fayette County shall be divided into five commissioner districts. Districts 1, 2, 3, and 4 shall be and correspond to those four numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as 'Plan: FayCCSB-11_6_Mediation-2016 Plan Type: Local Administrator: Fayette User: Gina', and District 5 shall be coterminous with the boundaries of Fayette County. 
(b)  (1)  For the purposes of such plan: 
a.  The term 'VTD' shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a 'VTD' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Any part of Fayette County which is not included in any district described in subsection (a) of this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Any part of Fayette County which is described in subsection (a) of this section as being included in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(c)  There shall be one member of the board from each commissioner district. A commissioner shall reside in the commissioner district such person represents. A candidate shall designate the district from which such candidate offers for election. Beginning with the general election in 2016 and continuing in subsequent elections, members of the board shall be elected by the electors of their respective districts. The election of members of the board shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code.' 
(d)  The members of the board who were elected at the general election in November 2012 shall continue in office for the terms to which they were elected and until successors are elected and qualified as provided in this Act. The members of the board who were elected at the general election in November 2014 shall continue in office for the terms to which they were elected and until successors are elected and qualified as provided in this Act. 
(e)  The first members of the reconstituted board of commissioners of Fayette County from Commissioner Districts 1, 2, and 5 shall be elected at the general election in November 2016. Such members shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(f)  The first members of the reconstituted board of commissioners of Fayette County from Commissioner Districts 3 and 4 shall be elected at the general election in November 2018. Such members shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(g)  Successors to members elected under subsections (e) and (f) of this section shall be elected at the November general election next preceding the expiration of such terms of office and shall take office on January 1 following their election for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(h)  Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 as they existed on January 1, 2016, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and, on and after the effective date of this Act, such members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this section. More specifically, the member of the board serving from Commissioner District 3, as it existed on January 1, 2016, shall be deemed to represent Commissioner District 3, as newly described under this Act on and after the effective date of this Act, until the end of said member's current term, and the member of the board serving from Commissioner District 5, as it existed on January 1, 2016, shall be deemed to represent Commissioner District 4, as newly described under this Act on and after the effective date of this Act, until the end of said member's current term. 
(1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 409), page 3105, § 1; 1967 Ga. Laws (Act No. 289), page 2773, § 1; 1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1134), page 3398, § 2; 1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 684), page 4264, § 1; 1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 873), page 3399, § 1; 2016 Ga. Laws (Act No. 314, page 3399, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3. - Qualifications. 
Any person to be eligible to serve as a member of the board must be at least twenty-five years of age on the date of the election; must have resided in Fayette County at least two years immediately preceding the date of the election; must be a resident of the road district from which he offers for election; and must be qualified and registered to vote for members of the General Assembly. 
Sec. 4. - Oath. 
Before entering upon his duties each member of the board shall take an oath to faithfully perform his duties under this Act and the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, such oath to be administered by the Ordinary of Fayette County, Georgia. 
Sec. 5. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the discharge of his duties, each member of the board, the clerk and the superintendent of roads, as hereinafter provided, shall each give bond in the sum of $10,000.00 with a surety company authorized to do business in Georgia as surety, payable to the order of Fayette County, Georgia, and conditioned for the faithful performance by each of the board members, the clerk and the superintendent of roads of the duties of their respective offices and for a true accounting of all monies and effects of said county coming under his custody, possession or control. Such bond shall be filed in the office of the ordinary and shall be recorded upon his minutes. The premium on such bond shall be paid from the funds of Fayette County. 
Sec. 6. - Vacancies. 
In the event a vacancy occurs on the board for any reason other than the expiration of the member's term of office, it shall be filled by special election to be called by the ordinary of Fayette County within fifteen days after the vacancy occurs. Members elected in any such election to fill a vacancy shall be elected by the voters of the entire county, but any person offering as a candidate to represent a road district in which a vacancy exists must reside within the territorial limits of such road district. Such election shall be held on a day not less than ten nor more than fifteen days from the date of the issuance of the call. The ordinary shall conduct such election and the person so elected shall serve for the unexpired term. 
(1967 Ga. Laws (Act No. 289), page 2773, § 1) 
Sec. 7. - Compensation. 
The chairperson of the Board of Commissioners of Fayette County shall be compensated annually in an amount equal to 21 percent of the base state salary of a superior court judge as set forth in Code Section 45-7-4 of the O.C.G.A., as amended [O.C.G.A. § 45-7-4], payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Fayette County. The other four members of the board shall be compensated annually in an amount equal to 16.5 percent of the base state salary of a superior court judge as set forth in Code Section 45-7-4 of the O.C.G.A., as amended, payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Fayette County. 
(1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 409), page 3105, § 2; 1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 684), page 4264, § 1; 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 264), page 4409, §§ 1, 2; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 971), page 6221, § 1; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 268), page 4920, § 1) 
State Law reference— Compensation of members of county governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-24 et seq. 
Sec. 7A. - Repealed. 
(1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 870), page 3393, § 1; 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 264), page 4409, § 2; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 971), page 6221, § 1) 
Sec. 8. - Quorum, chair, vice-chair. 
Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum and no action shall be taken by the board without the concurring vote of at least three members of the board. At the first meeting in each year the board shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson to serve for that year. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the board and shall serve as the executive officer of the board. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall preside. 
(1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1134), page 3398, § 3) 
Sec. 9. - Clerk. 
The board is hereby authorized to employ a clerk to be compensated in an amount to be determined by the board, to be paid from the funds of Fayette County. It shall be the duty of the clerk to keep the minutes and records for all proceedings of the board and to discharge such other duties as the board may prescribe. 
Sec. 10. - Superintendent of roads. 
The board is hereby authorized to employ a superintendent of roads and shall be compensated in an amount to be determined by the board. He shall perform such duties as the board may direct. 
Sec. 11. - Meetings, minutes, oaths, audits. 
Said board shall hold a regular court for the transaction of the public business of the county connected with county matters in the courthouse in Fayetteville in said County of Fayette on the first Monday in each month, or at such other time as the board may fix and determine by a proper order passed and entered on the minutes. It shall keep, or have kept, accurate minutes of all county matters transacted by it, and shall keep or have kept proper and correct books of accounts of all public monies received and expended under its direction, showing sources from which all such monies are received, and for what purposes expended. Such books shall at all times be subject to inspection by any citizen as other public books and records. It shall publish monthly in a newspaper generally circulated in said county a synopsis of the proceedings of each meeting of the board, showing plainly the business transacted at each meeting, paying for the same out of the county treasury. The board shall have the power to administer oaths and hear testimony as to all matters over which it has jurisdiction and when sitting as a court shall have power to punish for contempt under the same rules and regulations as are provided for other courts. 
(1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 409), page 3105, § 3) 
Sec. 12. - Costs. 
The cost for all sums, warrants and other papers necessary for and to the carrying on of the business of said board when sitting as a court shall be the same as are now provided by law regulating costs in justice courts of this state. 
Sec. 13. - Powers. 
(a)  The Board shall have and exercise all the powers which were vested by law in the judges of the inferior courts and the ordinary when sitting for county purposes and the sole commissioner of roads and revenues of Fayette County, Georgia. The Board is hereby given complete power, authority and control relative to county matters of Fayette County. 
(b)  The Board is hereby authorized to employ the necessary personnel and fix their compensation to assist in the performance of the duties imposed by this act. 
The Board shall make all purchases for Fayette County and shall make all purchases over $5,000.00 on a competitive bid basis. The Board shall not expend any funds of Fayette County in payment of purchase made in violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-10-1984; 1984 Ga. Laws, page 5308) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of county governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1. 
Sec. 14. - Audits. 
The board shall, on or before April 1st, annually, employ a certified public accountant of the State of Georgia, who shall audit the books and accounts of all officers and offices. The accountant so employed shall be paid out of county funds, shall perform a complete audit of the financial records of the county for the preceding year, shall point out any irregularities found to exist, and shall report the results of such audit to the board. The board shall cause a summary of the audit to be published in the official organ of Fayette County within fifteen days after received of the audit by the board. The cost of publishing the summary of the audit shall be paid out of the county treasury as other expenses of county are paid. 
(1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 409), page 3105, § 4) 
Sec. 15. - Repealed. 
(1965 Ga. Laws (Act No. 409), page 3105, § 5) 
Sec. 16. - Prior acts repealed. 
An Act creating a Board of Commissions of Roads and Revenue in the County of Fayette, approved August 23, 1872 (Ga. L. 1872, p. 418), is hereby repealed in its entirety and the following Acts, which are amendatory of said Act, are likewise repealed in their entirety: An Act approved December 12, 1901 (Ga. L. 1901, p. 241) and an Act approved April 13, 1904 (Ga. L. 1904, p. 267). Any and all other Acts amendatory of the aforesaid Act of 1872 which have not been listed herein are likewise repealed in their entirety, and any and all relating to a Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue in the County of Fayette are likewise repealed in their entirety. The effective date of the repeal of the aforesaid Act and its amendatory Acts shall be December 31, 1960. The present Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue shall continue to perform their duties under the powers and authority of the Act of 1872 until December 31, 1960. The Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenues created under this Act shall be authorized to be elected at the same time that the county officers for Fayette County are elected in the general election to be held in the Fall of 1960. 
Sec. 17. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE - ACTS 
This table shows the location in Part I of special acts. Article II is derived from 1959 Ga. Laws (Act No. 149), page 2431, as amended. 

 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location in Part I of ordinances. 

 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Contents and citation to Code of Ordinances. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Fayette County, Georgia," and may be so cited. The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
(Code 1983, § 1-1; Code 1992, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
Board of commissioners. The term "board of commissioners" means the board of commissioners of Fayette County, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Fayette County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1, consisting of subparts A and B. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either …," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Fayette County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an officer of the county to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or to make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Following . The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. Terms of one gender include all other genders. 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all terms, except terms of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include the person, as hereinafter defined, whether acting in person or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provision s. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number includes the other. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be interchangeable. 
O.C.G.A., state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. A reference to a state act, whether by year and act number; year, act number and page; year and page; or short title is a reference to such act, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies . Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the county. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or a land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or a tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such a building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, organizations, societies, firms, companies, partnerships, receivers, trustees, and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, street, as hereinafter defined, or any area available and/or accessible to the public. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a railway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies a whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms using the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Written or in writing. The terms "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1983, §§ 1-2, 5-41; Code 1992, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3; Code 1992, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4; Code 1992, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to the Code; new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections or subsections of any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number in the following language: "that section ____________ of the Fayette County Code, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "that part of the Fayette County Code, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:…. The new section may then be set out in full as desired. All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number as the case may be. 
(Code 1983, § 1-6; Code 1992, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the county. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change section or other numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Penalties for violation of Code of Ordinances. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(4)  The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of Code on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1992, § 1-8; Ord. No. 88-07, § 1-8, 6-23-1988; Ord. No. 97-02, 2-12-1997) 
State Law reference— Violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 et seq., 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any such phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5; Code 1992, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any the following ordinances or portions of ordinances not in this Code, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any road, street, sidewalk or alley. 
(9)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(10)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(11)  Rezoning property. 
(12)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(13)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(14)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County government, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; emergency interim successors to officials, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Power to cite for violations. 
Each of the following persons is hereby empowered by the board of commissioners to issue citations for violations of county laws and ordinances to be heard in the county magistrate court: 
(1)  County marshal. 
(2)  Zoning administrator. 
(3)  Building official. 
(4)  Animal control officers. 
(5)  Officers of the bureau of fire prevention. 
(6)  County engineer. 
(7)  Director of public works. 
(8)  County clerk. 
(9)  Magistrate court constables. 
(10)  County sheriff and deputies. 
(11)  Code enforcement officers. 
(Code 1983, § 2-9; Code 1992, § 2-1; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 2, 6-27-2013) 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; prosecution upon citation, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62, 15-10-63. 
Sec. 2-2. - Attendance at meetings. 
Any member of an authority, commission, committee or board appointed by the board of commissioners who is absent for any three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings shall be dismissed from such authority, commission, committee or board by the board of commissioners. This shall not include absences for medical or emergency reasons. Any member of such authority, commission, committee or board failing to maintain an 80 percent attendance record at all regular and called meetings for the previous 12 months shall be subject to such dismissal by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 2-2; Ord. No. 89-08, 6-22-1989) 
Sec. 2-3. - Records retention schedule; officer responsible. 
(a)  The records retention scheduled is adopted by the board of commissioners of the county, this 25th day of August, 2016. The records retention schedule is adopted to ensure that all public records of the county are adequately maintained in such a way as to reduce costs and improve efficiency in record keeping. 
(b)  The county clerk shall be the officer to coordinate and perform all responsibilities required under state law in the management of the public records for the county. 
(c)  The county clerk shall recommend a records retention schedule. This schedule shall include an inventory of the type of records maintained and the length of time each type of record shall be maintained in the office or in a record-holding area. These retention periods shall be based on the legal, fiscal, administrative, and historical needs for the record. The recommendation from the county clerk for the records retention schedule for the county is attached as exhibit "A" hereto, with said exhibit "A" being incorporated into this article by this reference. 
(d)  Upon approval by the board of commissioners of the county, such recommended records retention schedule shall become the records retention schedule of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 8-25-2016) 
Secs. 2-4—2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— "County governing authority" defined, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(7); county governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-23—2-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-48. - Open meetings. 
All meetings of the board of commissioners shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Code 1992, § 2-36; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-49. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  Closed meetings. As provided below or in accordance with state law, the board may close a portion of a meeting to the public to discuss certain topics that are exempted from the Open Meetings Law, O.C.G.A. title 50, ch. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.). Such meetings shall be referred to as executive sessions. Any portion of the meeting not subject to any exemptions authorized by law shall be open to the public. 
(b)  Executive sessions. Executive sessions of the board may be held for the purpose of discussing topics exempted from public access requirements by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Pending or potential litigation. The board may close an open meeting to discuss topics subject to the attorney client privilege to the extent the commissioners consult and meet with the county attorney or other legal counsel to discuss pending or potential litigation, settlement, claims, administrative proceedings or other judicial actions brought by or against the county, a county official or employee. The county attorney or other attorney representing the county must be present in the executive session. In order to close a meeting because of potential litigation, there must be a real and tangible threat of legal action indicated by a formal demand letter or other writing presenting a claim or a sincere intention to sue, previous or pre-existing litigation between the county and the other party, or the hiring of an attorney by the threatening party. 
(2)  Personnel matters. The board may close an open meeting to discuss or deliberate on the appointment, employment, compensation, hiring, disciplinary action, dismissal or evaluation of a county official or employee except that the commissioners must receive evidence or hear arguments on proposed disciplinary action or dismissal of a county official or employee in an open meeting. Any votes by the board must be taken in an open meeting and be entered in the minutes of the open meeting. 
(3)  Records that could compromise public security. The board may close an open meeting to review or discuss records that, if made public, would endanger life, safety or public property by compromising security against sabotage, criminal acts or terrorist acts. Such records include, but are not limited to, security plans, vulnerability assessments for public buildings or facilities, anti-terrorist plans, plans or blueprints that reveal security devices, or otherwise compromise security and contingency plans for meetings. 
(c)  Procedure for entering into executive sessions. An executive session shall not be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the board members present taken in an open meeting. The minutes of the open meeting shall reflect the names of the commissioners present, those voting for the executive session, and the specific reasons for the executive session. 
(d)  Who can attend executive sessions. Board members and only individuals necessary to conduct an executive session may be present. The clerk of the board of commissioners and the county administrator shall be included in any executive session approved by the board of commissioners unless expressly barred by majority vote of the board members present prior to or during the course of an executive session. The county attorney or other attorney representing the board must be included in any executive session pertaining to litigation or claims against the county. Other individuals may be invited to participate in an executive session by majority vote of the board members present prior to or during the course of the executive session but only if the presence of such individuals is consistent with the applicable exception authorizing the executive session. No other individuals shall be permitted in the executive session. 
(e)  Nonexempt topics. If a commissioner or any other person in an executive session attempts to discuss a non-exempt topic during an executive session, the chair shall immediately rule that commissioner or person out of order and such discussion shall cease. If the commissioner or other person persists in discussing the non-exempt topic, the chair shall either cause the person or commissioner to be removed from the executive session or adjourn the meeting immediately. 
(f)  Executive session minutes. Minutes of executive sessions shall also be recorded but shall not be open to the public. Such minutes shall specify each issue discussed in executive session by the agency or committee. In the case of executive sessions where matters subject to the attorney-client privilege are discussed, the fact that an attorney-client discussion occurred and its subject shall be identified, but the substance of the discussion need not be recorded and shall not be identified in the minutes. Such minutes shall be kept and preserved for in camera inspection by an appropriate court should a dispute arise as to the propriety of any executive session. 
(g)  Chair or presiding officer affidavit. The chair or other presiding officer shall execute an affidavit stating, under oath, that the executive session was devoted to topics exempt from the public access requirements. The affidavit shall include the specific exemption to the Open Meetings Law. The affidavit shall be notarized and filed with the minutes of the open meeting. 
(h)  Discussion of executive session business. Commissioners, officials, employees and other individuals who attend executive sessions are prohibited from discussing or in any other way disclosing confidential information, legal advice and/or legal strategy discussed in the executive session unless: 
(1)  The disclosure is required by law; 
(2)  The disclosure is part of a judicial or administrative proceeding; or 
(3)  Three members of the board authorize the disclosure. 
In no way shall this subsection prevent a county attorney or other attorney representing the board from discussing any matters discussed in executive session relative to settlement or negotiation of a lawsuit or other claim against the county. Any commissioner that divulges has previously divulged or has threatened to divulge confidential information, legal advice or strategy discussion may be excluded from participation in an executive session by affirmative vote of three commissioners. A commissioner that divulges confidential information, legal advice, or strategy discussions may be publicly sanctioned by a majority affirmative vote of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 2-37; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-50. - Visual and sound recordings. 
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all open meetings. 
(Code 1992, § 2-38; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-51. - Quorum. 
(a)  A quorum of the members of the board of commissioners must be present for conducting meetings of the board. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum and no action shall be taken by the board without the concurring vote of at least three members of the board. It is the duty of the chair to enforce this rule. 
(b)  Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the chair if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner or commissioners leave and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting may not continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting may be rescheduled by the chair with the approval of a majority of the commissioners present. 
(c)  The chairperson shall be entitled to the same voting rights as other members of the board on questions considered by the commission. 
(Code 1992, § 2-38; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-52. - Chair. 
(a)  The chair shall be appointed at the first meeting of each year. The county attorney shall call the first meeting to order and call for nominations for the chair as the first order of business. After receiving nominations, the county attorney shall ask for a motion to appoint the chair. The motion to appoint the chair requires a second prior to a vote. If a motion to appoint the chair fails, the county attorney shall call for additional motions until a chair is selected. 
(b)  The chair of the board of commissioners, as presiding officer, is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meeting. In order to fulfill this duty, the chair shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the board of commissioners. The chair shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The chair may introduce motions or second motions. 
(Code 1992, § 2-49; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-53. - Vice-chair. 
The board shall select a vice-chair from the board members at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-chair shall fulfill the duties of the chair if the chair is not in attendance. The motion to appoint the vice-chair requires a second prior to a vote. 
(Code 1992, § 2-41; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-54. - Presiding officer. 
If the chair and the vice-chair are absent or otherwise unable to serve as presiding officer at a meeting and a quorum of commissioners is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as presiding officer of the meeting until either the chair or vice-chair is present at the meeting. 
(Code 1992, § 2-42; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-55. - Parliamentarian. 
The county attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for board meetings. 
(Code 1992, § 2-43; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-56. - Rules of order. 
(a)  Call to order. If, at the time of a meeting, the chair determines that all commissioners have been notified or an attempt has been made to notify all commissioners and that a quorum of board members is present, he shall have the authority to call the meeting to order. The call to order shall not require any preceding action but may be issued solely by the authority of the chair. 
(b)  Motions; general requirement. The board of commissioners can take action only when a motion to take such action is made and passed by the board. 
(1)  Procedure. 
a.  Before a motion can be discussed or voted upon by the board of commissioners, it must be presented to the board by a member of the board. The presentment is made by merely stating the motion. 
b.  Immediately after the motion is presented to the board, the chairperson shall ask for a commissioner to second the motion. If the motion is not seconded, it shall fail for lack of a second and cannot be remade until the next meeting of the board, except as otherwise provided herein. 
c.  If the motion is seconded, the chair shall immediately ask for discussion of the motion. Discussion of the motion shall be limited to the board of commissioners and shall relate solely to the motion on hand; however, any commissioner may question a member of the audience or staff provided such question shall pertain strictly to the motion on hand. 
d.  Upon the conclusion of discussion, the chair shall cause the motion to be restated and shall then call the question. 
(2)  Amendment. 
a.  An amendment may be suggested by any member of the board. The amendment shall be suggested only during the discussion of the original motion. 
b.  A motion can be amended only with the consent of the commissioner making the motion. If the commissioner who seconded the original motion disagrees with the amendment, he shall be allowed to withdraw his second. When a second is withdrawn, the chair shall immediately request a new second to the amended motion. 
c.  After a motion is amended and seconded, the chair shall call for discussion and proceed with the consideration of the motion in the manner provided above. 
(3)  Withdrawal. 
a.  Any motion may be withdrawn at the discretion of the commissioner making the motion. 
b.  Motions may be withdrawn at any time prior to but not during nor after the restating of the motion by the chairperson. 
(4)  Tabling. 
a.  During the discussion of a motion, the motion may be tabled for further discussion by the board upon the motion of any commissioner other than the commissioner who made the original motion. 
b.  The motion to table shall specify the time and place for the continued discussion. 
c.  Discussion of the original motion shall immediately cease when a motion to table is made. 
d.  A motion to table shall not require a second but shall require discussion, restating the motion and a call of the question. 
(5)  Reconsideration. 
a.  A motion, which has been passed or defeated, or which fails for lack of a second, may be reconsidered by the board of commissioners during the same meeting provided the board pass a motion for reconsideration. Otherwise, the original motion may not be presented to the board again until its next meeting. 
b.  A motion for reconsideration can only be made by a commissioner who voted against the original motion, if defeated, or in favor of the original motion, if passed. Otherwise, any commissioner may make a motion for reconsideration. 
(6)  Vote. 
a.  A commissioner in favor of a motion shall say "aye" while holding up his right hand. 
b.  A commissioner against a motion shall say "nay" while holding up his right hand. 
c.  A commissioner present but refusing to vote shall be recorded as abstaining. 
d.  A unanimous passing vote shall mean a vote in which all members of the board of commissioners present vote in favor of the motion. 
(c)  Ordinances. The passage of all ordinances must be accomplished by motion. 
(d)  Special motions. Call the question. 
(1)  During the discussion of any motion, any commissioner may move to call the question in order to end discussion and have the vote on the pending motion. 
(2)  When a commissioner has moved to call the question, discussion of the original motion shall cease and the chairperson shall immediately restate the motion and then proceed with a vote on whether to call the question. A second of a motion to call the question shall not be necessary. 
(3)  If the vote is in favor of the motion to call the question, the chair shall immediately call the question on the original motion. 
(4)  If the vote is against the motion to call the question, discussion of the original motion shall continue. 
(e)  Point of order. 
(1)  Whenever a commissioner has a question as to the procedure being followed by the chairperson, he may raise a point of order. A point of order requires no second. 
(2)  Upon the raising of a point of order, the chairperson shall stop the meeting and the commissioner shall state his question. The meeting shall continue after a determination of the question has been rendered by a majority vote of the members in attendance at the meeting. 
(f)  Out of order. 
(1)  The chair shall have the authority to cite any individual out of order when that individual, in the opinion of the chairperson, violates these rules of procedure. 
(2)  No other action shall be required in citing an individual out of order. 
(3)  When an individual has been cited as out of order, the chairperson shall state the reasons therefor and shall give the individual directions regarding compliance with these rules. 
(4)  If a commissioner believes that the chair has inappropriately cited an individual as out of order, the commissioner may raise a point of order. 
(g)  Adjournment. 
(1)  Adjournment of the meeting must be by motion. 
(2)  A motion to adjourn does not require a second but does require discussion. 
(3)  When a motion to adjourn is passed, the board of commissioners can no longer act until another meeting is called to order. 
(h)  Public discussion. 
(1)  Whenever public discussion of a matter before the board of commissioners is allowed, any member of the public shall have the right to discuss the matter at hand prior to the presentment of the motion. 
(2)  The right of a member of the public to discuss a matter before the board shall be limited to three minutes per topic, unless as otherwise granted by special permission of the chair. 
(3)  All discussion shall relate solely to the matter at hand. 
(i)  Vice-chair references. All references in this division to chair shall also include the vice-chair when the vice-chair is conducting the meeting. 
(j)  Action chart. Actions shall be taken on motions as follows: 

 
(Code 1992, § 2-44; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-57. - Suspending the rules of order. 
Rules of order (section 2-56) may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable, and requires three votes of the board. Rules governing quorums, voting methods and requirements, notification to commissioners of meetings and rules necessary for compliance with state law may not be suspended; provided, however, that, in the event that a state of emergency is declared by the governor or other authorized state official, the board may waive time-consuming procedures and formalities imposed by state law. 
(Code 1992, § 2-45; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-58. - Regular meetings. 
The board of commissioners shall establish a schedule for regular meetings at its first meeting of each year. The schedule shall state the time and place for each meeting. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at the regular meeting place of the board. 
(Code 1992, § 2-46; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-59. - Meetings other than regular meetings. 
(a)  The board may meet at times and locations other than those regularly scheduled meetings. 
(b)  Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings. A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the county site by the chair for any reason. Other special meetings may be scheduled by the chair or at the request of at least two commissioners. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the regular meeting place. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the county or a newspaper having general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ, as well as to each member of the county governing authority. 
(c)  Meetings with less than 24 hours notice. When emergency circumstances occur, the board may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the county or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the county governing authority as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(d)  Meetings during a state of emergency. When it is imprudent, inexpedient or impossible to hold board meetings at the regular meeting place due to emergency or disaster resulting from manmade or natural causes, as declared by the governor or other authorized state official, the board may meet anywhere within or outside of the county. Such a meeting may be called by the chair or by any two commissioners. At the meeting, the commissioners shall establish and designate emergency temporary meeting locations where public business may be transacted during the emergency. Any action taken in such meetings shall have the same effect as if performed at the regular meeting site. 
(Code 1992, § 2-47; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-60. - Order of business. 
All regular board meetings shall substantially follow an established order of business. The order shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Invocation and pledge to the flag. 
(3)  Acceptance of agenda. 
(4)  Recognitions, proclamations, and awards. 
(5)  Public hearings. 
(6)  Public comment. 
(7)  Consent agenda. 
(8)  Old business. 
(9)  New business. 
(10)  Reports (administrator, attorney, departments, board members). 
(11)  Executive session. 
(12)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1992, § 2-48; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-61. - Agenda. 
The agenda shall be prepared in accordance with the county policies and procedures manual. 
(Code 1992, § 2-49; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-62. - Consent agenda. 
A consent agenda may be prepared by the county administrator for the board to unanimously adopt on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval without debate may be placed on a consent agenda. If a commissioner objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the chair shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. The chair may ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda shall be approved by a vote of three members of the board. 
(Code 1992, § 2-50; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-63. - Decorum. 
The chair shall enforce the rules of decorum. The purpose of meetings of the board of commissioners is to conduct the county's business. Meetings shall be conducted in an orderly and respectful fashion. They are not a forum to belittle, ridicule or embarrass county commissioners, other county officials, county employees, or others. 
(1)  Conduct of members of the board of commissioners. 
a.  Commissioners should arrive on time for a meeting and be prepared. 
b.  Commissioners should attend the entire meeting. 
c.  Cell phones or other communications devices shall be turned off or in silent mode. 
d.  Commissioners should not take phone calls or check emails, social networking sites, chat rooms or other internet sites during a meeting. 
e.  Commissioners shall conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. 
f.  Commissioners desiring to speak must first be recognized by the chair. 
g.  Commissioners may only address the motion that is being discussed. 
h.  Commissioners shall direct their remarks to the chair and not to individual commissioners, staff, or citizens in attendance. 
i.  Only one commissioner at a time is permitted to speak. Commissioners shall not interrupt any other person who has the floor. 
j.  Personal attacks and inappropriate remarks shall be ruled out of order by the chair. Commissioners may not use commission meetings to make derogatory comments about particular employees or to air their personal grievances with other commissioners. 
k.  There shall be no use of profanity during the meeting. 
l.  Remarks may not address the character of the person involved. 
m.  Commissioners shall not confront other board members, department heads, employees or other officials in an accusatory manner. 
n.  Commissioners may raise a point of order if a rule is believed to have been broken. Commissioners violating any rule of the board may be ruled out of order by the chair or on a point of order made by a commissioner other than the chair. Any point of order raised by a commissioner other than the chair shall be ruled on by a majority vote of the board. 
o.  While commissioners may not agree with all decisions of the board, all commissioners shall recognize the validity of any lawful action approved by the board. Commissioners shall not refuse to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract or other document because he did not vote for the action taken. 
p.  Commissioners should keep an open mind on all issues coming before the board. 
(2)  Conduct of the chair or presiding officer. In addition to rules of decorum applicable to commissioners generally, the following rules shall apply to the chair or presiding officer: 
a.  The chair or presiding officer shall recognize any commissioner who has the right to speak. 
b.  The chair or presiding officer shall rule out of order any discussion on topics other than the motion being discussed. 
c.  The chair or presiding officer shall only permit one commissioner at a time to speak. 
d.  Personal attacks, breaches of the rules of decorum and inappropriate remarks shall be ruled out of order by the vice-chair or presiding officer. 
e.  The chair or presiding officer shall not confront other board members, department heads, employees or other officials in an accusatory manner. 
f.  While the chair or presiding officer may not agree with all decisions of the board, he shall recognize the validity of any action approved by the board. 
g.  The chair or presiding officer shall not refuse to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract or other document because he did not vote for the action taken. 
h.  The chair or presiding officer shall keep an open mind on all issues coming before the board. 
(3)  Conduct of members of the public in meetings generally. 
a.  All cell phones and other communication devices shall be turned off or in silent mode; provided, however, that a cell phone or device may be used to make a video or audio recording of the meeting. 
b.  All meeting attendees must be silent during the meeting while business is conducted. 
c.  Anyone wishing to speak must first be recognized by the chair. 
d.  All comments must be directed to the chair and not to individual commissioners, staff or others. 
e.  All meeting attendees must conduct themselves in a respectful manner. 
f.  Personal attacks and derogatory or inappropriate remarks are not permitted. 
g.  There shall be no use of profanity during the meeting. 
(Code 1992, § 2-51; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-64. - Abstentions. 
A commissioner shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest preventing him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Code 1992, § 2-53; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-65. - Public participation. 
Public participation in meetings of the board of commissioners shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public hearings. Advertised hearings on zoning matters, including zoning map and ordinance text amendments shall be governed in accordance with the zoning policies and procedures adopted by the board of commissioners. However, if an individual wishes to oppose a rezoning action and has contributed more than $250.00 to the campaign of a commissioner within two years immediately preceding the filing of the rezoning action being opposed, the individual shall also file a campaign disclosure form as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-3 at least five calendar days prior to the first hearing by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Public comment. All members of the public wishing to address the board under the public comment portion of the agenda shall submit their name to the county clerk prior the beginning of the meeting. Individuals may be allotted five minutes to make their comments. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the board members present. 
(3)  Decorum. Members of the public are expected to comply with the rules of decorum established in this article. Individuals violating any rules of the board may be ruled out of order by the chair or on a point of order made by a commissioner other than the chair. Any point of order raised by a commissioner other than the chair shall be ruled on by a majority vote of the board. An individual violating the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chair. 
(Code 1992, § 2-54; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-66. - Meeting summary. 
The county clerk shall prepare a written summary of the subjects acted upon in a meeting and the names of the commissioners present at a meeting within two business days following the meeting. The meeting summary shall be made available to the public for inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 2-55; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-67. - Minutes. 
(a)  The clerk of the board shall promptly record the minutes for each board meeting. The minutes shall specify the names of commissioners present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the name of the commissioner who proposed each motion, the name of the commissioner who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. It shall be presumed that a commissioner has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the board. 
(b)  The board shall approve the minutes before they may be considered as an official record of the board. The minutes shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the board but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the board. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the commissioners at least three business days before the following meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected, if necessary, and approved by the board at the beginning of each meeting. A vote of three commissioners is required for approval. Conflicts regarding the content of the minutes shall be decided by a vote of three commissioners. Upon being approved, the minutes shall be signed by the chair and attested to by the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 2-56; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-68. - Maintenance of minutes and other documents. 
Minutes shall be maintained in the offices of the county clerk. Copies of contracts, maps or similar documents related to actions by the commissioners during a meeting may be included in or attached to the minutes or incorporated by reference to an alternative location. 
(Code 1992, § 2-57; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Sec. 2-69. - Committees. 
The chair, with the concurrence of the board, may create committees of members of the board to study any issue before the board. Any such committees may make recommendations to the board of commissioners but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to board members, committees may include other county officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any limitation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places, and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chair with the concurrence of the board. 
(Code 1992, § 2-58; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 8-25-2011) 
Secs. 2-70—2-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CODE ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2-99. - Established. 
There is hereby created the position of code enforcement officer, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20, pertaining to the power of the governing authority of the county to enact ordinances for governing and policing of the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Sec. 2-100. - Responsibility. 
The duties of the position of code enforcement officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  The enforcement of all ordinances contained within the Code for the county. 
(2)  The issuance of citations for violations of said Code, in order to ensure compliance with said Code. Any such citations issued by a code enforcement officer shall contain a summons and shall be prosecuted as set forth in said Code through the county state court. 
(3)  Each code enforcement officer shall further perform such other administrative and enforcement duties as may be assigned by the city administrator or his designee. 
Sec. 2-101. - Enforcement of ordinances. 
(a)  The position of code enforcement officer shall have the authority to enforce all county ordinances, including those ordinances that expressly give enforcement power to the county marshal's department. Any reference to the county marshal or the county marshal's department with respect to the enforcement of county ordinances in this Code shall also be read to include the position of code enforcement officer. 
(b)  Each and every officer or official of the county authorized to issue citations by section 2-1 or by any other applicable portion of this Code shall retain their individual authority to cite persons for violations of the Code for the county, and nothing contained herein shall in any manner delete or remove any authority given to any other officer or official pursuant to the Code for the county. Further, the position of code enforcement officer and the authority to cite person for violations of this Code is created in order to provide an additional source by which persons found to be in violation of any part or parts of the code shall be compelled to comply with the same. 
Sec. 2-102. - Oath. 
Before assuming the position of code enforcement officer, an individual shall take the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as code enforcement officer for Fayette County." 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 6-27-2013) 
Secs. 2-103—2-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-133—2-162. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY 

Sec. 2-163. - Purpose. 
The board of commissioners of the county finds that the manufacture, distribution, sale, use, or possession of controlled substances, marijuana, and other dangerous drugs in an unlawful manner is a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. The board of commissioners further finds that the use of alcohol during or prior to working hours is prohibited where alcohol can be measured at the level of 0.02 grams during working hours, said level being presumptively adverse to the safety of the workplace. It is declared to be a primary purpose and goal of this county, and of all of its public officials and employees to take all reasonable steps possible to eradicate the unlawful manufacture, distribution, sale, use, and possession of controlled substances, marijuana, and other dangerous drugs; and further to take all reasonable steps to eradicate the use of alcohol where a level of 0.02 grams exists, such level adversely affecting the safety of the workplace. With this purpose in mind, the board of commissioners declares that its work force must be absolutely free of any person who would knowingly manufacture, distribute, sell, use, or possess a controlled substance, marijuana, or a dangerous drug in an unlawful manner; and from any person whose use of alcohol results in a level of 0.02 grams during working hours. For this reason, and pursuant to the Drug-Free Public Work Force Act of 1990 (O.C.G.A. § 45-23-1 et seq.), the board of commissioners of the county enacts this article. 
(Code 1992, § 2-196; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 2-164. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Controlled substance means any drug, substance, or immediate precursor included in schedules I through V of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-25 through 16-13-29 and schedules I through V of 21 CFR part 1308. 
Convicted or conviction refers to a final conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction or the acceptance of a plea of guilty. 
County employee means any person employed by the county. 
Criminal drug statute means any criminal statute involving the manufacture, sale, distribution, dispensation, use, or possession of any controlled substance or marijuana. 
Dangerous drug means any drug or substance defined as such under O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21. 
High risk means those duties where inattention will have the potential for significant risk of harm to the employee, other employees, or the general public. 
Marijuana means all parts of the plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin; but shall not include samples as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-25(3)(P) and shall not include the completely defoliated mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil, or cake, or the completely sterilized samples of seeds of the plant which are incapable of germination. 
Medical review officer means an official of the certified laboratory designated by the county to conduct substance abuse testing. 
Under the influence of drugs/alcohol means testing positive for the presence of illegal or not properly prescribed drugs or a blood alcohol test result of 0.02 grams or more. 
(Code 1992, § 2-197; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 2-165. - Violation. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this policy for any county employee to be under the influence of a controlled substance (not properly prescribed for that employee's use by a licensed physician, etc.) or prescribed medication used in an amount which exceeds the physician's instructions, or alcohol while on the work premises or elsewhere as a result of job requirements during working hours while the employee is at work. 
(b)  Any county employee in possession of, selling, distributing, trafficking or manufacturing any controlled substance shall be in violation of this policy. 
(Code 1992, § 2-198; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 2-166. - Prescription drugs. 
Any county employee or applicant under his doctor's orders to take prescription medication, and who is requested to undergo drug testing, shall notify the appropriate personnel at the drug testing facility, prior to the testing, if that employee or applicant is currently taking the prescribed medication. 
(Code 1992, § 2-199; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 2-167. - Required testing. 
(a)  The abuse of alcohol and the use of illegal substances and the abuse of prescribed medications are known to cause physical and mental impairment creating an unsafe work environment, and safety concerns for other employees, as well as the public. In order to minimize such safety and health concerns, testing of individuals for the presence of illegal substances or prescribed medications in excessive amounts or alcohol within their breath, blood or urine, under certain circumstances as set forth herein will be required. Refusal to test shall be assumed to be a positive test. 
(b)  Testing of individuals will be required as follows: 
(1)  Pre-employment testing. All applicants considered for employment will be tested. Any applicant testing positive shall be removed from further consideration for employment. 
(2)  Physical fitness testing. All employees are required to be tested as a part of any required annual physical fitness examination. 
(3)  Random testing. Employees whose job duties are considered "high risk" and could adversely affect or injure the public or other employees shall be placed on an eligible list by the county administrator, for random testing. 
(4)  Reasonable suspicion testing. Employees demonstrating abnormal or erratic behavior or impaired ability to perform work related tasks sufficient to convince a supervisor that possible use of an illegal substance or alcohol abuse or abuse of prescription medication is involved shall be tested. 
(5)  Post-accident testing. Employees involved in an accident shall be tested in the event one of the following occurs: 
a.  Personal injury to anyone; 
b.  Property damage of a serious nature in the judgment of a supervisor occurred. 
(6)  Voluntary admission testing. An employee who notifies the county prior to request to test or an arrest that the employee illegally uses a controlled substance, marijuana, or a dangerous drug or abuses alcohol or prescription medication shall be tested upon such notification. 
(7)  Return to duty testing. All employees testing positive in any required alcohol or substance abuse test must pass a return to duty test prior to returning to the workplace. 
All employees who have tested positive in any required test or are employed while under the last chance policy, may be tested at any time. 
(Code 1992, § 2-200; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 2-168. - Testing agency. 
All required substance or alcohol abuse tests shall be administered by the county marshal's office or a qualified testing agency selected by the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 2-201; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 2-169. - Suspension or termination of county employee testing positive for illegal substances or alcohol. 
(a)  An employee testing positive to a degree that he is under the influence will not return to the workplace and will be placed on leave without pay, until terminated or until such time as a return to duty test indicates that the employee is no longer under the influence. The period of absence shall be considered leave without pay. No accrued annual leave, sick leave or compensatory time may be used during this period of leave. A return to duty test shall not be administered in less than five days nor more than ten days from the date of the positive test, excluding holidays and weekends. If instructed, the employee will report to the human resources department for referral to an employee assistance program professional before the return to duty test is administered. 
(b)  Any county employee who tests positive for a second time (including return to duty test) shall be terminated from his employment. 
(Code 1992, § 2-202; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 2-170. - Confidential information. 
Information concerning suspected controlled substance use and testing results shall be placed in locked files separate from the routine personnel files. Such information shall be communicated only to those individuals who need to know the information in order to perform their job functions or authorized by state or federal law. 
(Code 1992, § 2-203; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 2-171. - Suspension or termination of county employee convicted of drug offense. 
(a)  Any county employee who is convicted for the first time, under the laws of this state, the United States, or any other state, of any criminal offense involving the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of a controlled substance, marijuana, or a dangerous drug shall be subject to disciplinary action, ranging from a minimum ten day suspension from work without pay up to and including termination. Any such employee not terminated shall be required to complete a drug abuse treatment and education program licensed under O.C.G.A. title 26, ch. 5. 
(b)  Any county employee who is convicted for a second or subsequent time, under the laws of this state, the United States, or any other state, of any criminal offense involving the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of a controlled substance, marijuana, or a dangerous drug shall be terminated from his employment. 
(c)  Employees must notify the county of any conviction of a criminal drug offense no later than five days after conviction. 
(Code 1992, § 2-204; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 2-172. - Ineligibility for county employment of person convicted of drug offense. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted for the first time, under the laws of this state, the United States, or any other state, of any criminal offense involving the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of a controlled substance, marijuana, or a dangerous drug shall be ineligible for any county employment for a period of 12 months from the date of conviction. 
(b)  Any person who has been convicted two or more times, under the laws of this state, the United States, or any other state, of any criminal offense involving the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of a controlled substance, marijuana, or a dangerous drug shall be ineligible from any county employment for a period of five years from the most recent date of conviction. 
(Code 1992, § 2-205; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 2-173. - Last chance policy. 
(a)  If, prior to a request to test or an arrest for an offense involving a controlled substance, marijuana, or a dangerous drug or abuse of alcohol or prescription medication, a county employee notifies the county that the employee illegally uses a controlled substance, marijuana, or a dangerous drug or abuses alcohol or prescription medication and is receiving or agrees to receive treatment under a drug abuse treatment and education program licensed under O.C.G.A. title 26, ch. 5, and approved by the county, the employee shall be entitled to maintain county employment for up to 90 days as long as the employee submits to required testing and follows the treatment plan. During this period, the county employee shall not be separated from county employment solely on the basis of the employee's drug dependence, but the employee's job classification may be changed if practicable to protect persons or property. 
(b)  No statement made by an employee to a supervisor of the county employee or other person in order to comply with this section shall be admissible in any civil, administrative, or criminal proceeding as evidence against the county employee. The rights granted by this Code section shall be available to a county employee only once during a five-year period and shall not apply to any county employee who has refused to be tested or who has tested positive for a controlled substance, marijuana, or a dangerous drug. 
(Code 1992, § 2-206; Ord. No. 2006-17, § 1, 11-1-2006) 
Secs. 2-174—2-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CODE OF ETHICS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, adopted Feb. 25, 2016, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 2-200—2-207, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1992, §§ 2-207—2-215; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 9-24-2015. 
State Law reference— Ethics in government, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-200. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in conduct by the county officials ("county officials"); 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all county officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of Fayette County (the "county"); 
(3)  Maintain public trust through transparency by requiring disclosure by county officials of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the county or in matters that affect their ability to act in the best interests of the county; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who do not comply with its terms. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 2-25-2016) 
Sec. 2-201. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all county officials. Further, the county purchasing director shall develop procedures for individuals, corporations and other entities seeking to do business with the county to disclose financial, familial or other relationships with any person who comes within the scope of this code of ethics and who is also required to disclose such relationships. Such disclosures must be made prior to presenting a recommendation of award to the Fayette County Board of Commissioners (the "board of commissioners") or, if board of commissioners approval is not required, prior to execution of a contract in excess of $10,000. The obligation for an individual, corporation or other entity seeking to do business with the county to disclose the aforementioned relationships is ongoing and shall be enforced as a prerequisite to any action by a county official or other person covered by this code of ethics to renew, extend or otherwise modify a contract after award. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 2-25-2016) 
Sec. 2-202. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this code of ethics shall, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, have the meanings as follows: 
County means Fayette County, Georgia. 
County administrator means the individual who serves as county administrator of Fayette County. 
County official includes county employees, members of the board of commissioners, the county administrator, the county clerk and the county attorney. County official also includes all individuals appointed by the county administrator and the board of commissioners to county authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies. 
Gift means the transfer of anything of economic value, regardless of form, without adequate and lawful consideration. "Gift" also means a subscription, membership, loan, forgiveness of debt, advance or deposit of money or anything of value, conveyed or transferred. 
Ethics. The discipline dealing with what is good and bad and with moral duty and obligation — Merriam Webster 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any county official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Person means an individual, a business entity, or other similar type organization. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 2-25-2016) 
Sec. 2-203. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No county official shall use or secure confidential information for any purpose other than his/her official duties. 
(b)  No county official may participate or vote on any matter before the board of commissioners or other county body where such county official has a substantial interest in the outcome of such matter. For purposes of this code of ethics, a substantial interest is found where the county official receives a pecuniary interest due to the outcome of the vote. 
(c)  No county official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the board of commissioners or other county body. 
(d)  No county official shall enter into any contract with the county except as authorized by state law. 
(e)  No county official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a county official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such county official's judgment or performance of county duties. 
(f)  No county official shall disseminate confidential information to someone other than another county official, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(g)  No county official shall solicit or accept gifts, loans, gratuities, discounts, favors, hospitality, or services from any person for himself/herself, or any member of his/her immediate family, under circumstances from which it could reasonably be inferred that a major purpose of the donor is to influence the performance of the county official's duties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 2-25-2016) 
Sec. 2-204. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  No county official may participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the county official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A county official who has a relationship with any entity which receives funding from the county shall disclose such relationship prior to participating in any action for such funding. 
(c)  A county official shall never discriminate by the dispensing of special favors or privileges to anyone, whether or not for remuneration. 
(d)  No county official shall engage in any business with the county, or allow any member of his/her immediate family to engage in any business with the county which is inconsistent with the conscientious performance of his/her governmental duties. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, a county official shall disclose, prior to discussing or taking any action on any matter involving the donor, any gift or campaign contribution (cash or in kind) received by him/her, or any member of his/her immediate family, greater than $100.00. Receipt of gifts and campaign contributions within the current election cycle valued at $250.00 or more by a county official, or member of his/her immediate family, will prohibit the county official from participating or taking action on any matter involving the donor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 2-25-2016) 
Sec. 2-205. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)  All allegations of violations of the code of ethics must be filed with the county clerk, in writing, signed by the complainant, no later than 45 days after the alleged act occurred unless the complainant, by exercising reasonable diligence, failed to discover the alleged violation of the code of ethics within such 45-day period. In such case, a complainant must file an ethics complaint with the county clerk no later than 45 days after the complainant discovered the alleged violation. 
(b)  In no event shall an ethics complaint be filed with the county clerk more than six months from the date of the alleged violation of the code of ethics. 
(c)  The complainant may withdraw the ethics complaint at any time in writing. 
(d)  Within 30 days of receipt of an ethics complaint the board of commissioners will review the ethics complaint to determine whether same is on its face unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke disciplinary jurisdiction. A majority of the full board of commissioners must agree that a sufficient basis has been given to warrant a public hearing. Certain violations alleged against county officials who are employees may be referred through the proper channels consistent with the employee handbook's disciplinary procedures. A majority of the full board of commissioners shall make the determination of whether or not a review board should be impaneled. 
(e)  If a complaint is received by the clerk which alleges a violation of the code of ethics by a member of the board of commissioners, a determination of sufficiency of the complaint will not be forwarded to the board of commissioners. The county attorney of any county within the Griffin Judicial Circuit, or any circuit abutting the Griffin Judicial Circuit, other than the county attorney for the county, shall make the determination of whether or not a review board should be impaneled. 
(f)  If a review board is needed, three county attorneys, other than the county attorney for Fayette County, within reasonably close geographic proximity of the county will be requested to conduct a public hearing based upon the complaint. A majority vote based upon clear and convincing evidence will determine the existence of the violation or lack thereof. Should the review board find a violation has occurred, the review board will assess the commensurate penalty for the violation. A written decision shall be issued within 15 days of the conclusion of the public hearing. County officials are subject to the following penalties and action for violations of the code of ethics: 
(1)  Written reprimand or public censure; 
(2)  Recovery of value transferred from or received by the county; 
(3)  Cancellation of the contract or rejection of the bid or offer; 
(4)  A monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and 
(5)  Demotion or termination. 
(g)  Any county official adversely affected by any final decision of the board of ethics may appeal as provided in this subsection. 
(h)  An appeal by certiorari may be commenced in the superior court of the county within 30 days after the decision becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 2-25-2016) 
Secs. 2-206—2-239. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-240. - Position created. 
There is hereby created the position of county administrator. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1; Code 1992, § 2-66) 
Sec. 2-241. - Responsibility. 
The county administrator shall devote his full-time attention to the affairs of the county, and shall be responsible to the board of commissioners for the efficient administration of all affairs of the county over which he has jurisdiction. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2; Code 1992, § 2-67) 
Sec. 2-242. - Powers; duties. 
Subject to the control, direction and supervision of the board of commissioners, the county administrator shall be empowered and it shall be his duty: 
(1)  To see that all county laws, ordinances and provisions are enforced. 
(2)  To see that the business and affairs of the county are efficiently organized and handled. 
(3)  To exercise administrative control over all regular departments and divisions of the county; provided the county administrator shall not have or exercise any control over the planning commission, board of zoning appeals or other special boards, commissions, committees, authorities, or bodies set up under any general law or any ordinance or agreement of the board of commissioners. 
(4)  To be the personnel director and have the power to appoint, discipline and/or remove all employees, including department and/or division heads, in their respective offices and departments except the county attorneys; provided, however, that he shall be guided in his actions by the county personnel management system and position classification plan. Nothing herein shall prevent the board of commissioners from creating, abolishing, consolidating, altering or modifying departments. 
(5)  To attend the meetings of the board of commissioners, with the right to take part in all discussions, but have no vote. 
(6)  To recommend to the board of commissioners for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(7)  To have prepared and submitted to the board of commissioners an annual budget. 
(8)  To keep the board of commissioners fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the county on the basis of submission of a monthly financial report. 
(9)  To make and execute all lawful contracts on behalf of the county as to matters within his jurisdiction, except such as may be otherwise provided by law or by ordinance or resolution by the board of commissioners; provided, no contract, purchase or obligation involving more than $10,000.00 shall be valid or binding until approved by the board of commissioners. 
(10)  To submit to the board of commissioners such reports as he may deem necessary or as may be required of him by the board of commissioners. 
(11)  To perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1983, § 2-3; Code 1992, § 2-68; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 6-6-2001) 
Secs. 2-243—2-262. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COUNTY MARSHAL 

Sec. 2-263. - Position created. 
There is hereby created, pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 35, ch. 8 (O.C.G.A. § 36-8-1 et seq.), the position of county marshal. 
(Code 1983, § 2-4; Code 1992, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-264. - Responsibility. 
The county marshal is responsible for enforcing all county ordinances, including zoning ordinances, environmental ordinances and business license ordinances. He will further perform such other administrative and enforcement duties as may be assigned. An employee of this class will be responsible for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the county, including but not limited to the zoning, environmental and business license laws through the citation of violators. Work also involves patrol of the county. Work is performed under the supervision of the county administrator or his designee. Work assignments are normally of a verbal nature and usually arise out of complaints from citizens or actual observation of violations. An employee of this class must exercise tact and courtesy in dealing with the public. 
(Code 1983, § 2-5; Code 1992, § 2-87) 
State Law reference— Powers of county police generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-5. 
Sec. 2-265. - Powers; duties. 
The powers and duties of the county marshal shall be as provided in the position description approved by the county administrator and included in the county uniform personnel management system. 
(Code 1983, § 2-7; Code 1992, § 2-88) 
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules and regulations for conduct, management and control of county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-7. 
Secs. 2-266—2-293. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASES; SALES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— County property, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-1 et seq.; public works contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-10-1 et seq.; preference for in-state products, O.C.G.A. § 36-84-1; local political subdivision purchases through the state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; contract for acquisition or lease of property of United States, O.C.G.A. § 50-16-81. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-294—2-319. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-320. - Department created. 
There is hereby created the department of purchasing. 
(Code 1983, § 2-10; Code 1992, § 2-116) 
Sec. 2-321. - Supervision of department. 
The board of commissioners, by and through the county administrator, shall have general supervision of the department of purchasing and shall appoint a director of purchasing. 
(Code 1983, § 2-11; Code 1992, § 2-117) 
Sec. 2-322. - Duties generally. 
The director of purchasing shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To secure prices for materials, supplies and services of every kind and character required by the various departments of the county. 
(2)  To inspect materials and supplies purchased by the county to determine that the materials and supplies are what they have been represented to be. 
(3)  To determine that the prices paid for materials and supplies purchased by the county are the best that can be obtained in the local market or elsewhere. 
(4)  Those duties prescribed in this article. 
(5)  Such other duties as the board of commissioners may from time to time prescribe and as contained in the employee's job description and the county uniform personnel management system. 
(Code 1983, § 2-12; Code 1992, § 2-118) 
Sec. 2-323. - Purchasing authority. 
(a)  General purchases. The director of purchasing shall have the authority to make purchases of materials, supplies and services on the open market where the purchase price does not exceed $20,000.00; where the purchase price exceeds exceed $20,000.00, the purchase may be made by the director of purchasing only after the prospective purchase has been approved by the board of commissioners on a competitive sealed bid basis. 
(b)  Fuel purchases. Subsection (a) of this section notwithstanding, the director of purchasing shall have the authority to make purchases of fuel on the open market where the purchase price does not exceed $30,000.00; where the purchase price exceeds $30,000.00, the purchase may be made by the director of purchasing only after the prospective purchase has been approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1983, § 2-13; Code 1992, § 2-119; Ord. No. 2011-04, § 1, 5-23-2011) 
Sec. 2-324. - Inventory of county property. 
The finance department shall maintain a permanent inventory of all personal property of the county having the value of $5,000.00 or more and charged to the various county departments. 
(Code 1983, § 2-14; Code 1992, § 2-120; Ord. No. 93-10, § 1, 12-15-1993; Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1, 6-27-2002) 
State Law reference— Rights and remedies of county relating to property ownership, O.C.G.A. § 50-16-17; inventories of property owned by the state and certain public corporations, O.C.G.A. § 50-16-120 et seq.; inventory required of county officers, O.C.G.A. § 50-16-141. 
Sec. 2-325. - Inspection and testing. 
The director of purchasing shall inspect, or supervise the inspection of, all deliveries of materials, supplies or contractual services to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the pertinent purchase order or contract. The director of purchasing may require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries, which examinations are necessary to determine the samples' quality and conformance with specifications. 
(Code 1983, § 2-15; Code 1992, § 2-121) 
Sec. 2-326. - Purchasing analysis. 
The director of purchasing shall keep himself informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products. The director of purchasing shall secure for the county the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies, trade associations having national recognition and by private businesses and organizations. 
(Code 1983, § 2-16; Code 1992, § 2-122) 
Sec. 2-327. - File on vendors. 
The director of purchasing shall maintain a file of all qualified vendors who desire to do business with the county, which file shall be maintained according to the nature of goods and materials offered and shall contain a description of the vendors' commodities. 
(Code 1983, § 2-17; Code 1992, § 2-123) 
Sec. 2-328. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The director of purchasing shall have the authority to join with other governmental units in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interest of the county shall be served thereby. 
(Code 1983, § 2-18; Code 1992, § 2-124) 
State Constitution reference— Intergovernmental contracts, Art. IX, § III, ¶ I. 
Sec. 2-329. - Materials, supplies and services defined. 
As used in this division, the term "materials, supplies and services" shall mean and include such items as are normally used or consumed during the course of a year and for which a general appropriation has been made; the term shall include the purchase of automotive equipment, machinery, construction contracts or other purchases of materials of a permanent or semi-permanent nature. It shall also include the provision of maintenance and repair. 
(Code 1983, § 2-19; Code 1992, § 2-125) 
Secs. 2-330—2-346. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-347. - Purchases only to be made through the director; exception. 
No officer or employee of the county shall make any purchase for or on behalf of the county of any materials, goods, wares, supplies or services of any kind whatsoever except through the director of purchasing. It shall be a breach of duty on the part of any officer or employee of the county to make any purchase, or to aid or abet the making of any purchase, in any manner other than through the director of purchasing. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency purchases provided for in this division. 
(Code 1983, § 2-20; Code 1992, § 2-136) 
Sec. 2-348. - Purchase orders required; exception. 
No officer or employee of the county shall request a vendor to deliver goods, merchandise, materials or supplies to the county except upon a regular purchase order issued by the director of purchasing; however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency purchases provided for in this division. 
(Code 1983, § 2-21; Code 1992, § 2-137) 
Sec. 2-349. - Emergency purchases. 
In the event that an emergency should arise after office hours, which emergency requires immediate action on the part of the county department involved for the protection of the best interest of the county, or should such a situation arise on a Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday, and where it is not possible or convenient to reach the director of purchasing, any necessary purchase shall be made by the county department for which the purchase is necessary. The purchase shall be reported to the director of purchasing on the next working day. 
(Code 1983, § 2-22; Code 1992, § 2-138) 
Sec. 2-350. - Preparation of specifications. 
The director of purchasing shall prepare written specifications that will best serve the interests of the using county departments and of the county. All specifications shall be definite, certain and shall permit free and open competition. 
(Code 1983, § 2-23; Code 1992, § 2-139) 
Sec. 2-351. - Time for making purchases; call for bids. 
In the purchase of all materials and supplies pursuant to this division, except for emergency purchases, the purchase shall be made within ten days from the time the requisition is given to the director of purchasing. During the period within which the purchase is to be made, the director of purchasing shall give competing vendors an opportunity to bid. Calls for bids shall be made by the director of purchasing in such a manner as will, in his discretion, enable free and open competition in bidding. In the event calls for bids are advertised in a newspaper, the advertisement shall run two times, unless otherwise provided, in the official newspaper of the county. 
(Code 1983, § 2-24; Code 1992, § 2-140) 
Sec. 2-352. - When competitive bids required. 
It shall be the duty of the director of purchasing to make all purchases on competitive bids, except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 2-25; Code 1992, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-353. - Filing of bids; public inspection. 
All bids submitted for goods and materials to be sold to the county under the provisions of this division shall be kept on file in the department of purchasing. After an award has been made, the bids shall be subject to inspection at any time by any citizen of the county. 
(Code 1983, § 2-26; Code 1992, § 2-142) 
Sec. 2-354. - Disqualification of bidders. 
The director of purchasing shall have the authority to declare a vendor who defaults on his quotations to be an irresponsible bidder and to disqualify him from receiving any business from the county for a specified period of time. 
(Code 1983, § 2-27; Code 1992, § 2-143) 
Sec. 2-355. - Discretion in purchasing where quality, price and services are involved. 
In all purchases where quality as well as price and service is involved, the director of purchasing shall exercise discretion in making a purchase so that the best interests of the county are served. 
(Code 1983, § 2-28; Code 1992, § 2-144) 
Sec. 2-356. - Substitution of brand name items. 
In all cases where brand name items are requisitioned by the department of purchasing, the director of purchasing has the authority to determine whether similar products of equal quality offered for sale to the county at a lower price shall be ordered in lieu of the requisitioned brand name items. 
(Code 1983, § 2-29; Code 1992, § 2-145) 
Secs. 2-357—2-385. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SALES OF COUNTY PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-386. - Sales of personal property. 
(a)  When it is deemed advisable to dispose of any personal property owned by the county and used by the various departments thereof, or to dispose of personal property under the supervision of the board of commissioners, the sale of the property shall be made by the director of purchasing. The director of purchasing shall confer with the head of the department desiring to sell the property, with the object of getting the best possible price in making the sale. 
(b)  This section shall not authorize the sale of county personal property without authorization therefor by an action of the board of commissioners as conveyed by the county administrator, but where the action has authorized the sale of county personal property, the sale shall be made by the director of purchasing in conformity with subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 2-30; Code 1992, § 2-161) 
Sec. 2-387. - Disposal of unserviceable property. 
(a)  When any personal property owned by the county has become worn out, useless, or has been used to such an extent that it is advisable to dispose of the property, the head of the department in charge of the property shall identify said property, assess a remaining value of said property, and certify to the director of purchasing that property in the custody of the department is no longer useful in the service of the county. Upon such certification, the director of purchasing, with permission of the board of commissioners, shall, at public sale, in his discretion, sell the unserviceable property deemed to have value and remit the proceeds from the sale to the county's general fund. After each public sale, the director of purchasing will submit to the finance department a list identifying the disposed property along with the sales price so that it may be removed from the appropriate inventory records. For any property for which the department head in charge of said property has assessed a value no greater than $50.00, certified to the finance department that said property is no longer useful in the service of the county, and certified that disposal of said property is in the county's best interest, the finance department shall coordinate with the buildings and grounds department head for disposal of the property and remove said property from the appropriate inventory records. 
(b)  No sales of unserviceable county personal property shall be made by the director of purchasing under this section where other provisions of law provide for such sales, but this section shall apply to the sale of unserviceable county personal property where no other provision of law is made, However, the director of purchasing shall have the authority to dispose of unserviceable property accumulated by the various departments of the county to the best advantage of the county by selling or trading the unserviceable property or transferring the unserviceable property to another department, whichever, In the discretion of the director of purchasing, will be most advantageous to the county. 
(Code 1983, § 2-31; Code 1992, § 2-162; Ord. No. 93-10, § 2, 12-15-1993; Ord. No. 2008-10, § 1, 12-3-2008) 
Sec. 2-388. - Notice of transfer or disposal of property. 
All transfers of personal property from one department of the county to another and all property disposed of shall be reported to the department of purchasing immediately. 
(Code 1983, § 2-32; Code 1992, § 2-163; Ord. No. 2008-10, § 1, 12-3-2008) 
Secs. 2-389—2-394. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PURCHASING CARDS AND/OR CREDIT CARDS 

Sec. 2-395. - Intent and scope 
This policy is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county-issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, § 1, 12-10-2015) 
Sec. 2-396. - Definitions. 
Authorized elected official shall mean an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county-issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Card administrator shall mean the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the board of commissioners. 
County shall mean Fayette county and/or the Fayette county board of commissioners. 
County purchasing card, county p-card or county credit card shall mean a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase goods, services, and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
Financial transaction card shall mean an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
User agreement shall mean the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, § 1, 12-10-2015) 
Sec. 2-397. - Designated elected officials. 
The board of commissioners, in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card or credit card unless he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this policy or for any purchases that are not authorized by this policy. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, § 1, 12-10-2015) 
Sec. 2-398. - Card administrator. 
The board of commissioners shall designate a county purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator include: 
(1)  Manage county-issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this policy, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(7)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(8)  Audit and reconcile transactions per bi-weekly billing cycle. 
(9)  Maintain records for at least five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, § 1, 12-10-2015) 
Sec. 2-399. - Use of cards. 
(a)  Authorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this policy, the county's purchasing card program policy, 210.01, and the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
Only authorized elected officials may use a county purchasing card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferable to employees. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
Unless otherwise approved by the board of commissioners or established in the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 
Per transaction: $ 500.00 
Per bi-weekly billing cycle: $5,000.00 
(b)  Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement and the County's Purchasing Card Program Policy, 210.01. 
(c)  Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and submitted by the authorized county elected official to finance along with the bi-weekly transaction log. Receipts will be maintained by finance for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(d)  Public records. All receipts and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, § 1, 12-10-2015) 
Sec. 2-400. - Review of purchases and audit. 
Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection of misuse or abuse of county issued purchasing cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(1)  Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: Purchasing card transaction logs are to be completed by the elected official, accompanied by sales receipts and submitted to finance within 15 days of the bi-weekly billing cycle. The amounts listed on the transaction log and sales receipts will be reconciled to the bi-weekly billing statement and verified no GA sales tax was charged (exception-meals). All transactions made by elected officials will be reviewed relative to the established guidelines and compliance with the County's Purchasing Card Policy. 
(2)  Audits. The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, § 1, 12-10-2015) 
Sec. 2-401. - Violations. 
(a)  An elected official shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county-issued purchasing card or credit card in violation of this policy or the user agreement. 
(b)  In the discretion of the board of commissioners, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this policy may result in: 
(1)  A warning; 
(2)  Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a county purchasing card or credit card; or 
(3)  Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a county purchasing card or credit card. 
(c)  Nothing in this policy shall preclude the board of commissioners from referring misuse of a purchasing card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15, § 1, 12-10-2015) 
Secs. 2-402—2-419. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-420—2-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - 911 COMMUNICATIONS BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 9-1-1 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 2-451. - Created. 
There is hereby created a 911 communications board, hereinafter referred to as the "board," to formulate the policies and to oversee the operations of the consolidated 911 communications center, exclusive of personnel matters. The board is empowered with sufficient authority to ensure the efficient operations of the consolidated 911 communications center. The board shall be organized and empowered as set out in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 2-181; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-12-1995) 
Sec. 2-452. - Organization. 
(a)  Membership. The board shall consist of eight members. The membership shall be comprised of the chiefs, or their designee(s), of: the fire department and police department of Peachtree City; the fire department and police department of Fayetteville; the police department of Tyrone; and the department of fire and emergency services for the county. The final two members of the board shall be the head of the county marshal's department and the sheriff of the county, or their designee(s). 
(b)  Terms. The terms of all members shall begin on the first day of the month following the month in which the board is activated and shall terminate upon dissolution of the board. 
(c)  Vacancies. A vacancy in membership shall be filled by the governing authority of the public safety entity from which there is a vacancy. A vacancy in membership occurs when there is a change in personnel with respect to the chiefs, or the sheriff or marshal. The board position allocated to the respective chief, sheriff or marshal shall be filled by the person assuming the position of chief, sheriff or marshal, or his designee. Where a member of the board is a designee of a chief, sheriff or marshal, such member's departure from the board, for whatever reason, does not create a vacancy. The chief, sheriff or marshal that designated the person originally, shall fill the position with either himself or his designee. 
(d)  Compensation. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties if such expenses are approved by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(e)  Quorum. Five members of the board shall constitute a quorum. A vacancy on the board shall not impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all of the duties of the board. A minimum of five affirmative votes is necessary before any motion can be passed. 
(Code 1992, § 2-182; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-12-1995) 
Sec. 2-453. - Election of chairperson. 
At its initial organizational meeting the board shall elect a chairperson from among its members and shall further establish a fair and equitable method for rotating the chairpersonship annually among each member of the board. The term of the chairperson shall be for one year and shall rotate annually and subsequently to each board member in the manner prescribed during the original organizational meeting. 
(Code 1992, § 2-183; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-12-1995) 
Sec. 2-454. - Purpose. 
The board is created specifically for the purpose of overseeing the operations of the consolidated 911 center, exclusive of personnel matters. This article in no way is to be construed as creating a communications authority. 
(Code 1992, § 2-184; Ord. No. 95-01, 1-12-1995) 
Secs. 2-455—2-475. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FAYETTE COUNTY TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-03, §§ 1—4, adopted Jan. 28, 2016, amended Div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, §§ 2-476—2-478, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2015-16, §§ 1—4, 12-10-2015. 

Sec. 2-476. - Created; purpose and intent. 
In order to make recommendations to the board of commissioners of the county as to the formulation of current and long-range plans for transportation issues within the county, including, but not limited to, traffic congestion, road conditions, etc., the county transportation committee is hereby created and established. The county transportation committee shall be organized and empowered as set out in this division. The county transportation committee shall be created for the following purposes: 
(1)  To identify traffic problems in the county, e.g., safety, congestion, alternatives (multiuse paths), and other issues; 
(2)  To provide recommendations for short- and long-term priorities; 
(3)  To provide input, including recommendations and suggestions, on project alignments and alternatives; 
(4)  To assist with identification of funding sources, solicitation of federal funds, grants, etc.; 
(5)  To assist with coordination of projects between the county and the municipalities; 
(6)  To provide appropriate focus on projects to ensure accountability of staff and consultants: 
(7)  To provide recommendations for long-term goals (capacity, paths, senior services, etc.); 
(8)  To identify and support safety initiatives; and 
(9)  To assemble information and to facilitate communication of the county's views and concerns to GDOT and the Atlanta regional commission upon approval of the board of commissioners of the county. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that the county transportation committee shall fully explore traffic issues and provide information and recommendations to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, § 2, 1-28-2016) 
Sec. 2-477. - Organization. 
(a)  Membership. The county transportation committee shall consist of 11 members who shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  Two members shall be selected by the board of commissioners from county staff; 
(2)  Two members shall be current members of the board of commissioners, or their designees: 
(3)  Five members shall come from the municipalities within the county (one each); 
(4)  One member shall come from the county sheriff's office; and 
(5)  One member shall be a county citizen with technical expertise which is consistent with the committee's purposes. 
(6)  Terms. 
a.  The terms of the members shall be for three years, except that, in the appointment of the first county transportation committee under the terms of this section, five members (the two members from the board of commissioners, the two members from the county staff, the member from the sheriff's office) shall be appointed for a term of three years; five members (the five members from the municipalities) shall be appointed for a term of two years, and one member (the county citizen with technical expertise) shall be appointed for one year. 
b.  The board of commissioners of the county, within 60 days of the passage of this division, shall appoint the following members: Two members from the board of commissioners; two county staff members; and one county citizen with technical expertise. The terms of all members shall begin on the first day of the month following the month in which the county transportation committee is activated. 
c.  Except as otherwise provided herein, all members of the county transportation committee shall, if necessary, hold over until their successors are appointed and qualified. The successors shall be appointed in the same manner as the initial members in the month immediately preceding the expiration of the members' respective terms of office. Any member of the county transportation committee may be re-selected and re-appointed to serve a succeeding term. All elected officials are eligible to serve so long as they remain in office. Should any elected official no longer hold his/her elected office, his/her seat shall be deemed vacant upon the end of the term of the elected office. The occurrence of any vacancy due to an elected official no longer being in office shall be filled by the municipality where the vacancy occurred in the same manner as the original appointment was made for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(7)  Oath of office. All persons who serve as a member of the county transportation committee shall first execute and file with the county clerk an oath obligating himself/herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his/her office with such oath to be administered by the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(8)  Vacancies; removal. A vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner in which the person creating the vacancy was appointed. The board of commissioners shall have the power to remove any member of the county transportation committee who was appointed by the board of commissioners, for cause, by a majority vote of the members of board of commissioners. 
(9)  Compensation. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties if such expenses are approved by the county administrator. 
(10)  Quorum. Six members of the county transportation committee shall constitute a quorum. A vacancy shall not impair the right of the quorum to exercise all rights and perform all the duties of the county transportation committee. 
(11)  Meetings. The county transportation committee shall meet on a regular basis with the meetings to occur at least monthly. The minutes of each meeting shall be forwarded to the board of commissioners of the county on a regular basis. The board of commissioners of the county shall provide a meeting room for the county transportation committee. 
(12)  Disqualification. Any member who announces or qualifies for an elected office shall be deemed disqualified to serve as a member of the county transportation committee upon the occurrence of such announcement or qualifying. Such disqualification shall take effect immediately and the seat shall be deemed vacant. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, § 3, 1-28-2016) 
Sec. 2-478. - Election of chairman; bylaws; miscellaneous. 
The county transportation committee shall elect a chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be for one year. The committee shall appoint a secretary. The committee shall devise its own bylaws, which shall be supplied to the county administrator and approved by the board of commissioners. The committee shall be a recommending body and will provide its recommendations to the board of commissioners through its chairman. Any incidental expenditures of the committee shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purpose by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03, § 4, 1-28-2016) 
Secs. 2-479—2-500. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FAYETTE COUNTY PUBLIC ARTS COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-501. - Created; purpose and intent. 
In order to make recommendations to the board of commissioners of the county as to find ways to use art to enhance the county's reputation, to contribute to the civic environment, and to enrich the lives of citizens and visitors through the involvement of amateur and professional artists to integrate public arts throughout the county. The county public arts committee is hereby created and established and aims to acquire, cultivate, and perform responsible stewardship of public arts to enhance the dignity of the county through the commitment to artists and their disciplines as integral elements of economic vitality and development. The county public arts committee offers opportunities and support to citizens, emerging students, amateur and professional artists, arts education resources, and public beautification arts projects. Its mission is to change the way our community approaches arts and culture. The goal of the county public arts committee is to become a leader in the arts through conceptualizing, implementing, organizing, and executing art projects and programs for our citizens. The first order of business for the members of the public arts committee is to formulate the vision and long-range goal(s) of the public arts committee and to forward same to the board of commissioners within 60 days of the effective date creating the public arts committee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, § 2, 3-10-2016) 
Sec. 2-502. - Organization. 
(a)  Membership . The Fayette County Public Arts Committee shall consist of seven members appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Fayette County. To be eligible for appointment a candidate must be a Fayette County citizen. 
(b)  Terms . The terms of the members of the Fayette County Public Arts Committee shall be for two years, except that upon adoption of this ordinance, four members of the committee shall have terms expiring May 31, 2018; three members shall be appointed for a term of two years with terms ending in 2019. (Exhibit A attached hereto sets forth the current and future committee membership to Table 1 and Table 2 respectively.) All successive terms shall be for two years. The seven members shall be selected by the Board of Commissioners of Fayette County. The terms of all members shall begin on the first day of the month following the month in which the public arts committee is activated. All members of the Fayette County Public Arts Committee shall, if necessary, hold over until their successors are appointed and qualified. The successors shall be appointed in the same manner as the initial members in the month immediately preceding the expiration of the members' respective terms of office. Any member of the Fayette County Public Arts Committee may be re-selected and re-appointed to serve a succeeding term. 
(c)  Oath of office. All persons who serve as a member of the county public arts committee shall first execute and file with the county clerk an oath obligating himself/herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his/her office with such oath to be administered by the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Vacancies; removal. A vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the members being replaced were selected. The board of commissioners shall also have the power to remove any member of the county public arts committee for cause by a majority vote of the members of board of commissioners. 
(e)  Compensation. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties if such expenses are approved by the county administrator. 
(f)  Quorum . Four members of the Fayette County Public Arts Committee shall constitute a quorum. A vacancy on the Fayette County Public Arts Committee shall not impair the right of the quorum to exercise all rights and perform all the duties of the Fayette County Public Arts Committee. 
(g)  Meetings. The county public arts committee shall meet on a regular basis with the meetings occurring the third Monday of each month. The board of commissioners shall provide a meeting room for the county public arts committee. 
(h)  Project concept. The county public arts committee shall request approval from the board of commissioners for a project concept that provides a general description, location, and scope of the proposed project during a board of commissioners meeting. On any project concerning a call for artists or a permanent art feature, the board of commissioners shall give final approval on the winning artist's proposal prior to awarding the project and funding. 
(i)  Project recommendations. The county public arts committee shall fill out and complete a "Project Request Form" (exhibit A), based upon the approved project concept, for the board of commissioners' final consideration and approval. 
(j)  Public arts committee minutes. The county public arts committee shall provide approved meeting minutes of each public arts committee meeting to the county clerk. 
(k)  Any other committee in existence for the same purpose as the public arts committee shall cease to exist on the first day of the calendar month subsequent to the effective date of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, § 3, 3-10-2016; Ord. No. 2017-10, §§ 1—3, 6-6-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-10, adopted June 6, 2017, contains an Exhibit A which sets forth the current and future Committee membership in Table 1 and Table 2. Exhibit A is attacted to the ordinance and is on file in the offices of the county. 
Sec. 2-503. - Election of chairman and vice chairman; bylaws; miscellaneous. 
The county public arts committee shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from among its members who are not elected officials. Any chairman or vice chairman who announces or qualifies for an elected office shall be deemed disqualified to serve as chairman or vice chairman of the public arts committee. The terms of the chairman and vice chairman shall be for one year. The county public arts committee shall appoint a secretary. The secretary does not have to be a member of the Fayette county public arts committee. The county public arts committee shall devise its own bylaws, which shall be supplied to the county administrator and approved by the board of commissioners. The county public arts committee shall be a recommending body and will provide its recommendations to the board of commissioners through its chairman. Any incidental expenditures of the county public arts committee shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purpose by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, § 4, 3-10-2016) 
Secs. 2-504—2-525. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FAYETTE COUNTY WATER COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-526. - Created; purpose and intent. 
In order to make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Fayette County as to the formulation of current and long-range water plans for Fayette County, the Fayette County Water Committee is hereby reaffirmed and re-established. The Fayette County Water Committee shall be organized and empowered as set out in this division. The Fayette County Water Committee shall be created for the following purposes: 
(1)  To fully explore water issues concerning Fayette County citizens; 
(2)  To provide recommendations for short- and long-term priorities; 
(3)  To advise the board of commissioners on the water needs of citizens in the county; 
(4)  To assist with identification of funding sources, solicitation of federal funds, grants, etc.; 
(5)  To assist with coordination between the county and the municipalities; 
(6)  To provide recommendations for long-term goals; 
(7)  To work with the county administrator and staff; 
(8)  To provide education in this community about water resources; and 
(9)  To provide a forum for citizens to express concerns. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that the Fayette County Water Committee shall fully explore issues concerning water needs and resources and provide information and recommendations to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 2, 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 2-527. - Organization. 
(a)  Membership . The Fayette County Water Committee shall consist of seven members, each of whom shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  The Board of Commissioners of Fayette County shall appoint the members of the Fayette County Water Committee. Each member, other than the members who serve by virtue of their position with Fayette County, shall be Fayette County residents and customers of the Fayette County Water System. 
(2)  Terms . 
a.  The terms of the members shall be for four years, except that in the appointment of the first Fayette County Water Committee under the terms of this section, one member shall be appointed for a term of greater than one (1) year, but less than two years, and two members shall be appointed for a term of greater than three years, but less than four years. All successive terms shall be for four years, unless otherwise provided herein. 
b.  The Board of Commissioners of Fayette County has determined that the makeup of the Fayette County Water Committee shall be as follows: The Chairman of the Fayette County Board of Commissioners, or his/her designee; the county administrator, or his/her designee; the Director of the Fayette County Water System; the director of planning and zoning; and three citizen members. The terms of all members shall begin immediately upon the approval of this ordinance with the term of one citizen member expiring on December 31, 2019. The terms of the remaining citizen members shall expire on December 31, 2021. The members, or their designees, as applicable, who serve by virtue of their position with Fayette County shall serve on the water committee for so long as they hold their respective positions. Additionally, the Engineer of Record for the Fayette County Water System and the County Attorney for Fayette County shall be non-voting members of the water committee. Each shall serve during their respective appointments. 
c.  Except as otherwise provided herein, all members of the Fayette County Water Committee shall, if necessary, hold over until their successors are appointed and qualified. The successors shall be appointed in the same manner as the initial members in the month immediately preceding the expiration of the members' respective terms of office. Any member of the Fayette County Water Committee may be re-selected and re-appointed to serve a succeeding term. 
(3)  Oath of office. All persons who serve as a member of the Fayette County Water Committee shall first execute and file with the county clerk an oath obligating himself/herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his/her office with such oath to be administered by the chairman of the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Vacancies; removal. A vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner in which the person creating the vacancy was appointed. The board of commissioners shall have the power to remove any member of the Fayette County Water Committee, for cause, by a majority vote of the members of the board of commissioners. 
(5)  Compensation . All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties if such expenses are approved by the county administrator. 
(6)  Quorum . Four members of the Fayette County Water Committee, other than non-voting members, shall constitute a quorum. A vacancy shall not impair the right of the quorum to exercise all rights and perform all the duties of the Fayette County Water Committee. 
(7)  Meetings . The Fayette County Water Committee shall meet on a regular basis with the meetings to occur at least monthly. The minutes of each meeting shall be forwarded to the Board of Commissioners of Fayette County on a regular basis. The Board of Commissioners of Fayette County shall provide a meeting room for the Fayette County Water Committee. 
(8)  Disqualification . Any member who announces or qualifies for an elected office, other than the chairman of the board of commissioners, shall be deemed disqualified to serve as a member of the Fayette County Water Committee upon the occurrence of such announcement or qualifying. Such disqualification shall take effect immediately and the seat shall be deemed vacant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 3, 4-24-2018) 
Sec. 2-528. - Election of officers; bylaws; miscellaneous. 
The Fayette County Water Committee shall elect a chairman from among its members. The Fayette County Water Committee shall elect a vice-chairman from among its members. The water committee shall appoint a secretary. The secretary need not be a member of the Fayette County Water Committee. Upon approval of this ordinance, the existing officers shall serve in their respective positions until December 31, 2018. Thereafter, all terms for the above officers shall be for a period of one (1) year. The water committee shall devise its own bylaws which shall be supplied to the county administrator and approved by the board of commissioners. The water committee shall be a recommending body and will provide its recommendations to the board of commissioners through its chairman. Any incidental expenditures of the water committee shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purpose by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08, § 4, 4-24-2018) 
Secs. 2-529—2-550. - Reserved. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. title 3; local alcoholic beverage licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 et seq.; local regulation of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; local regulation of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local regulation of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Authority to regulate alcoholic beverages in county. 
The provisions of this chapter are ordained under and by virtue of the authority granted by: 
(1)  O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90, authorizing each such county to issue licenses, through ordinance, to sell distilled spirits for beverage purposes by the drink, the sales to be for consumption only on the premises; 
(2)  O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110, granting such county the full power to adopt all reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of any such licensee, including but not limited to the regulation of hours of business, types of employees, and other matters which may fall within the police powers of such county; 
(3)  O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40, authorizing county licenses for the business of manufacturing, distributing and selling malt beverages at wholesale and retail; and 
(4)  O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40, authorizing county licenses for the manufacturing, distributing and selling wine at wholesale and retail. 
(Code 1992, § 3-1; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Brewpub means a fully licensed restaurant where beer or malt beverages are manufactured and sold on the premises as an accessory use. Limited retail sales for on-premises consumption in draft form and wholesale distribution are permitted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36. 
Brownbag establishment means any restaurant, private club or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
Brownbagging means the act of patrons entering any restaurant, private club, or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business and bringing in and consuming the patron's own alcoholic beverage. 
Caterer means any person who prepares food and furnishes beverages, but not alcoholic beverages, for consumption off the premises of a food service facility or restaurant for a special event. 
Child care facility means an agency, organization, or individual providing care for four or more children not related by blood or marriage or not the legal wards of the attendant adult. 
Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
Close corporation means a domestic corporation which does not have: 
(1)  More than five stockholders; 
(2)  A corporation as a shareholder; or 
(3)  More than one class of stock. 
Convicted or conviction means conviction, plea of nolo contendere, first offender, or plea of guilty. 
County means Fayette County, Georgia. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including but not limited to all fortified wines. 
Family means any person related to a licensee within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined by state law, and any persons residing in the same household as the licensee. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off-premises. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
General manager means the chief officer and agent for licensee at the licensed premises, whose business and management responsibilities are performed predominantly at the licensed premises, who serves as the highest ranking supervisor at the licensed premises and who has supervisory authority over employees of licensee responsible for the selling, servicing, dispensing or taking orders for alcoholic beverages at the licensed premises, and who has authority to act for licensee in matters within the scope of licensee's ordinary business. 
Golf course means a large tract of land laid out with a minimum of 18 holes over a distance of at least 5,500 yards, and used exclusively for playing golf. 
Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 40, where meals are regularly served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge or restaurant, or both, on their premises; and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder. If more than one franchise is granted, such franchise will be considered an additional licensee under this chapter. 
Individual means a natural person. 
Interest in license means an individual's having an interest in a license if he: 
(1)  Is the owner of the license. 
(2)  Is a co-owner of the license. 
(3)  Is a partner in any partnership that owns an interest in a license. 
(4)  Is a stockholder in any corporation which owns an interest in a license. 
(5)  Shares in any income or corpus of any trust fund having any interest in a license to sell at retail. 
License representative means, if a license representative is required, a resident of the state and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis. 
Licensed alcohol beverage caterer means any retail alcohol dealer who is a food caterer and has been licensed pursuant to the county code of ordinances and O.C.G.A. § 3-11-2. 
Licensed premises means a building or segregated part of a building, completely enclosed in which a valid and current license to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption or sell malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages for consumption off the premises has been issued by the county and shall include any premises which are required by law to be so licensed. 
Licensee means a person holding a license, or having an interest in a license. For all businesses, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The licensee shall be at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the licensee shall be that individual. 
(3)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the licensee shall be an individual who is a partner; or, if all partners are non-individuals, then the licensee shall be an individual who is an officer of any corporation which is a partner, or an individual who is an officer, manager or agent of any unincorporated entity which is a partner. 
(4)  If the business is to be operated by a close corporation, corporation or similar business entity, the licensee shall be either an officer of the corporation or the registered agent of the corporation. 
(5)  If the licensee is a resident of the state and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis, the licensee may also be the license representative of the business. If not, a license representative shall be named in accordance with this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with, a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant, or located in a hotel, as defined herein with all booths, stools, and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall have a seating capacity of at least 40. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including but not limited to ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, malt liquor, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Microbrewery means a manufacturer of malt beverages for wholesale sales only, and producing less than 15,000 barrels annually. Microbreweries may conduct promotional tours and offer free samples of malt beverages in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-5-38. 
Minor means any person under the age of 21 years. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Permitted location means a building, premises or location for which a permit is required pursuant to this chapter and shall include a premises and a licensed premises as defined herein. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business, trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public, or any entity. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether a room or shop within a building, or a whole building. For the purposes of this article only, the term "premises" shall also mean all real property upon which a golf course is constructed. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of the state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Private residence means any house, dwelling, condominium, duplex, boardinghouse or roominghouse, apartment building, within or without the limits of the county; or any property, within or without the limits of the county, zoned for residential use. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where food is regularly served, and having no sleeping accommodations. Such place shall be provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least 40 people, and shall have employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served for each day the premises are open, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating. The serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto; provided, however, at least 60 percent of the annual gross income must be derived from the sale of such meals served for consumption on the premises. Such receipts shall be certified by the owner of the premises and reported to code enforcement on a quarterly basis. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail. 
Retail package dealer means any person who sells malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages for consumption off the premises at retail. 
Special event or private function means any organized activity for profit or non-profit having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival, party, reception, celebration or assembly which occurs or takes place on private or public property. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail package dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, grapes, or other natural products by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes but is not limited to all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, sake, natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Code 1992, § 3-2; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 4-3. - Construction of definitions. 
Words and terms not explicitly defined in these regulations or in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. 
(Code 1992, § 3-3; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-4. - Adoption of state and federal laws. 
All laws of the state and the United States of America, including the rules and regulations of any agency thereof, applicable to licensee and pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages are hereby adopted, and shall be complied with by licensee. The failure to comply therewith shall be a violation of this chapter and grounds for denial of a license or revocation thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 3-4; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-5. - Penalty for violations. 
Any violation of any requirement of this chapter shall subject the offender up to the maximum fine and/or the maximum term of imprisonment as authorized by the county's Charter. Notwithstanding any criminal prosecution, which may result from a violation of this chapter, any licensee employing any officer, agent or employee who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter while acting on behalf of the licensee, shall be subject to the administrative penalties and remedies of this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 3-5; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-6. - Emergency suspension of sale. 
In an emergency situation when it is determined that the public safety and welfare so require, the county administrator or his designee may temporarily suspend the sale of alcoholic beverages for a period not exceeding five days. 
(Code 1992, § 3-6; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-7. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter is enacted in furtherance of the police powers of the county to promote the health and general welfare of its citizens; to regulate and control the licensing and sale by the package and by the drink of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits; to establish reasonable regulations and ascertainable standards for licensees which will ensure the public peace; to protect schools, churches, child care facilities, and residential areas from the negative secondary effects attributable to establishments that sell malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits; and to ensure that only qualified persons obtain licenses for the sale, manufacture or distribution of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits. 
(Code 1992, § 3-7; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Secs. 4-8—4-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-33. - License required to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued by the code enforcement office at an annual license fee to be established by board of commissioners by resolution as needed for the following: 
(1)  Retail consumption dealer (distilled spirits, malt beverages, and/or wine at a restaurant, brewpub, hotel and/or private club as applicable); 
(2)  Retail package dealer (malt beverages and/or wine); 
(3)  Wholesale dealer (distilled spirits, malt beverages, and/or wine); 
(4)  Special event permit; and 
(5)  Alcohol beverage caterer (distilled spirits, malt beverages, and/or wine). 
(b)  Wholesale dealers are not required to pay a license fee pursuant to this section unless the wholesaler or his agent delivers alcoholic beverages at the time the order is taken or unless the wholesaler's business is located within the unincorporated county limits. 
(c)  All licenses issued in this article shall constitute a mere grant of a privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and related laws, applicable provisions of this Code, and other ordinances and resolutions of the county relating to such business. 
(d)  Both the licensee and the license representative shall be the authorized and duly constituted agent for service of all notices and processes required to be served on or given under this article for any action or proceeding or uses of any nature whatsoever permitted under the provisions of this chapter or under any other provisions of this Code. 
(e)  Establishments meeting the definition of brewpub which sell alcohol for retail on-premises consumption and which desire to engage in wholesale distribution of beer and malt beverages that are manufactured on the premises must obtain both a retail consumption dealer license and a wholesale dealer license. No such establishment shall be permitted to make retail package sales of alcohol. 
(Code 1992, § 3-10; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-34. - Contents of application for license and applicant requirements. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall apply to the code enforcement office upon forms to be prepared and provided by code enforcement. Such applications shall state: 
(1)  That the applicant and each individual applying licensee is a citizen or legal resident of the United States; 
(2)  The location of the proposed business; 
(3)  The nature and character of the proposed business; 
(4)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the name and address of that individual; 
(5)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the names and addresses of all general partners, as well as the names and addresses of the licensee, and the license representative; 
(6)  If the business is to be operated by a close corporation, the names and addresses of all officers, directors, and stockholders, as well as the names and addresses of the licensee and the license representative; 
(7)  If the business is to be operated by a corporation, other than a close corporation, the name of the corporation, the address of the corporate office, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process for the corporation, and the names and addresses of the licensee and license representative; 
(8)  Whether the applicant and/or licensee has ever had its license to sell alcoholic beverage suspended two or more times during the past five years or revoked by any state or political subdivision hereof; and 
(9)  Such other appropriate information as may be required by the governing body or code enforcement. 
(b)  The truth of the contents of an application for a license shall be sworn to by the licensee and the license representative. 
(c)  Complete sets of fingerprints for the applicant(s) above shall be taken by the county sheriff office to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which shall search for any instances of criminal activity during the two years immediately preceding the application. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation may also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. Record will then be returned to code enforcement. A separate fee may be added by the board of commissioners to recover cost. 
(d)  The application, when filed with the code enforcement office, shall be accompanied by a processing fee determined by a fee schedule adopted by resolution from the board of commissioners as needed. This processing fee is separate from and shall not be credited to the license fee. If an applicant for licensee or license representative has an unsatisfactory background as determined by code enforcement and an application is submitted for a different licensee or license representative, an additional processing fee must be paid. The processing fee will not be refunded if the requested license is not granted. 
(e)  When the license is approved, the license fee must be paid within 30 days and prior to the issuance of the license. 
(f)  If the person applying fails to receive a license from the state, only the license fees paid to the county shall be refunded. The application fee is nonrefundable. 
(g)  Only one application form and accompanying documents must be filed for each business premises. 
(h)  No applicant and/or licensee may apply for a license to sell malt beverages or wine off-premises for catered functions, unless the applicant and/or licensee qualifies as a licensed alcohol beverage caterer as defined. 
(i)  The applicant and each individual potential applying licensee shall be and shall continue to be a resident of the state. Corporations must either be incorporated in the state or must have registered to do business in this state, and only the applying general manager or applying corporate officer must meet the residency requirements. 
(Code 1992, § 3-11; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-35. - Supporting documents to be filed with application. 
(a)  Those applying for a license under this article shall submit in support of the application for license the following documents: 
(1)  A certificate from a registered land surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises and the distance measured according to the method described in section 4-36(6) from the premises to the nearest church building, child care facility, school building, educational building, school grounds, college campus, alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government, any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 3, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1 et seq.), the state "Housing Authorities Law," or private residence located within a radius of one-half mile of the premises. (See also section 4-36.) 
(2)  The affidavit of each person whose name appears on an application for a license, pursuant to subsection swearing that such person has not, within five years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of nor entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony or misdemeanor relating to the sale or use of alcoholic beverages, crimes of moral turpitude, gambling, sexual offenses, assault, battery, family violence, or illegal drugs. 
(3)  A copy of a deed showing the applicant to be the owner of the premises for which the license is sought or a copy of a lease showing any interest the owner of the premises has in the business for which the license is sought. 
(4)  A background check by code enforcement certifying that each person named in an application has been investigated and found not to have been convicted of nor to have entered a plea of nolo contendere or first offender to any felony or a misdemeanor relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, crimes of moral turpitude, gambling, sexual offenses, assault, battery, family violence, or illegal drugs within five years prior to the date of the application for a license. 
(5)  If the same person is serving as the licensee and the license representative, he shall submit an affidavit certifying that he is at least 21 years of age, a resident of the state and a manager of the business. 
(6)  If the licensee is not the license representative, an affidavit from the license representative certifying that he is at least 21 years of age, a resident of the state and a manager of the business. 
(7)  Misleading, omitted or obsolete information. 
(b)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original or renewal application for an alcoholic beverage license shall be cause sufficient for the denial thereof. 
(c)  Any information provided in the current application, which changes or otherwise becomes obsolete, shall be reported to the license department immediately, but in no case more than 30 days from the change or obsolescence. 
(d)  When any license is issued on the basis of an application containing misleading or untrue information or omitted or unreported changed material, such circumstances shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(e)  Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for false swearing under the law of the state and shall constitute a violation of this chapter, may be prosecuted as an offense against the county punishable as provided. Other appropriate information may be required as determined by code enforcement. 
(Code 1992, § 3-12; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-36. - Prohibited distances; sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools, or other sites. 
No license shall be issued pursuant to this article for the sale of: 
(1)  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building, or child care facility, or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(2)  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any church building, child care facility, school building, school grounds, or college campus. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. This subsection shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 3, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1 et seq.), the state "Housing Authorities Law." This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(5)  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within 100 yards of any private residence. For the purpose of this section only, a "private residence" is defined as a house, dwelling, condominium or duplex wherein not less than one nor more than two families reside and shall not include a mobile home court, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, nor a boardinghouse or roominghouse where there are five or more boarders or roomers. Any building occupied as a residence located within an area zoned for commercial purposes shall not be construed as a "private residence." 
(6)  For the purposes of this section, distances shall be measured in the manner described below. Where the term "route of travel" is used, said term shall mean any means of travel on a paved or otherwise improved surface for public vehicular traffic. 
a.  To a school, school building, educational building, school grounds, child care facility, college campus, or any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 3, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1 et seq.), the state "Housing Authorities Law" distance shall be measured as follows: 
1.  From the main public entrance of the structure from which any alcoholic beverage is sold or offered for sale; 
2.  In a straight line to the nearest public route of travel; 
3.  Along such public route of travel by the nearest route; 
4.  To the nearest portion of the grounds of the school building, educational building, child care facility, college campus, or any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 3, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 8-3-1 et seq.), the state "Housing Authorities Law." 
b.  To an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein, private residence, or church building, distance shall be measured as follows: 
1.  From the main public entrance of the structure from which any alcoholic beverage is sold or offered for sale; 
2.  In a straight line to the nearest public route of travel; 
3.  Along such public route of travel by the nearest route; 
4.  To the nearest entrance of the alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein, private residence, or church building. 
(7)  No license in effect on the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be revoked before its date of expiration by reason of the method of measurement set out in this subsection if the license was granted in reliance on another method of measurement. No application for a license or for a renewal shall be denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this subsection if the application is for premises for which a license was granted prior to effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, in reliance on another method of measurement. 
(Code 1992, § 3-13; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
State Law reference— Location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-37. - Notice of application advertisement. 
Upon receiving an application for the sale of alcoholic beverages, the licensee shall place a legal notice in the legal organ at least 15 days prior to the commission meeting at which the application will be considered. The application shall be in the following form: 
Notice of Application for Retail License to Sell Alcoholic Beverages 
An application has been submitted to the Fayette County board of commissioners for a retail license to sell alcoholic beverages at the following location: ____________ . The business name is ____________ . ____________ has requested to be appointed as the licensee. ____________ has requested to be the license representative. The board of commissioners will consider the proposed application at the time, and place designated for its regular meetings. 
(Code 1992, § 3-14; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013; Ord. No. 2017-09, § 1, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 4-38. - Issuance of license by code enforcement. 
(a)  Upon approval of the application for license by the board of commissioner and the timely payment of the license fee, the code enforcement shall issue the appropriate license for the year in which approval was granted. 
(b)  If issued to a corporation, the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation, the licensee and the license representative. 
(c)  If issued to a partnership, the license shall be issued in the name of all the general partners, the licensee and the license representative. 
(d)  If issued to an individual, the license shall be issued to that individual as licensee and license representative. 
(Code 1992, § 3-15; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-39. - Annual renewal of licenses: fee schedule. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses are annual licenses that run from January 1 to December 31 of each year. Holders of existing licenses in good standing shall apply to the code enforcement for renewal for the next calendar year between September 15 and October 1 by filing a renewal application in proper form and tendering the required fees. Annual license fees are due on or before December 31 of each year and shall be past due if not paid by that date. After January 1 there shall be imposed a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the license fee, which together with the license fee shall be paid before a new license is issued. The state department of revenue shall be promptly notified of all licenses which were not renewed on or before January 1, and all privilege to carry on and conduct a business governed by this chapter shall be immediately suspended due to license expiration. 
(b)  For any new license granted under this article prior to July 1, the licensee shall pay the full annual license fee. 
(c)  For any new license granted under this article subsequent to July 1, the license fee shall be reduced by one-half. 
(Code 1992, § 3-16; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-40. - Time limit for commencement of business in licensed establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this article must within six months after the issuance of the license open the establishment referred to in the license if the license holder fails to open the licensed establishment within the six-month period the license shall be canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(b)  Any holder of a license who, after beginning operation, ceases to operate the business for a three-month period automatically forfeits his license; and the license shall be automatically canceled. 
(Code 1992, § 3-17; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-41. - Wholesale licensees authorized to sell to retail licensees. 
(a)  Wholesale licenses shall be issued only to those persons who are licensed by the state to sell and distribute alcoholic beverages at wholesale. 
(b)  Upon payment of the required fee, code enforcement shall issue wholesale licenses if the person applying proves to the code enforcement satisfaction that he is licensed to sell at wholesale by the state. 
(c)  Licensed wholesalers of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine under the provisions of this section may sell at wholesale to any person licensed as provided in this article. Persons licensed under this article may purchase from a licensed wholesaler at wholesale in accordance with their license. 
(Code 1992, § 3-18; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-42. - Excise tax; report; penalty for failure to file; payment. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail license fee required for the sale of alcoholic beverages, there is levied an excise tax computed as follows: 
(1)  For distilled spirits, the maximum allowed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; 
(2)  For foreign and domestic wines, the maximum allowed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 except as exempt in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-70; and 
(3)  For malt beverages the maximum allowed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 except as exempt in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-90. 
(b)  The excise tax levied under subsection (a)(1), (2) and (3) of this section shall be paid and collected in the following manner: The taxes shall be paid by the wholesale dealer on or before the 20th day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the county by the wholesale dealer. The wholesale dealer shall also file a report itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of alcoholic beverages by size and type of container, sold during the month within the county. The wholesale dealer shall file the report and pay the tax at the finance office. 
(c)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render the defaulting licensee liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of 25 percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed or paid. 
(d)  The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the dealer making the report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report, and shall also constitute grounds for probation, suspension or revocation of such license, and shall also constitute a violation of the ordinances of the county for which the offender may be convicted in the state court as provided. 
(Code 1992, § 3-19; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-43. - License transfers prohibited; change licensee, or license representative of business. 
(a)  Retail alcoholic beverage licenses shall not be transferred from one owner to another. In the event a licensed business is transferred from one owner to another, the new owner shall obtain a new retail alcoholic beverage license. 
(b)  All requests for a change in licensee or license representative, provided that said change does not involve a change in the owner of the licensed business, must be approved by the board of commissioners and shall provide all appropriate information or supporting documents required under as outlined in an approved form to be supplied by code enforcement for that purpose. 
(c)  All business relocations, provided that said relocation does not involve a change in the owner of the licensed business, must be approved by the board of commissioners, and the licensee and license representative shall provide all appropriate information and supporting documents as required. Requirements relating to advertising must be met. 
(d)  Any violation of this section shall constitute due cause for probation, suspension or revocation of the license or licenses granted by the board of commissioners. A transfer of a licensed business from one owner to another shall result in immediate revocation of the retail alcoholic beverage license associated with said business. Such business shall not be permitted to engage in retail alcohol sales until a new license is obtained. 
(Code 1992, § 3-20; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013; Ord. No. 2016-18, § 1, 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 4-44. - Standards to be applied by the board of commissioners in granting licenses. 
The standards to be applied by the board of commissioners acting in its judicial capacity to grant or deny a license shall include whether, in the best judgment of the commissioners, the applicant, based on all information obtained in the application process, possesses the qualities of sound judgment and discretion necessary for one who dispenses alcoholic beverages to the public generally. No person shall be granted a license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners that such person is of good moral character as defined by moral turpitude. In addition, no person shall be granted a license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail if any of the following are true: 
(1)  The applicant, licensee and/or license representative has ever had its license to sell alcoholic beverage suspended two or more times during the past five years or revoked by any state or political subdivision hereof; or 
(2)  The applicant, licensee and/or license representative has, within five years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony or misdemeanor relating to the sale or use of alcoholic beverages, crimes of moral turpitude, gambling, sexual offenses, assault, battery, family violence, or illegal drugs. 
(Code 1992, § 3-21; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-45. - Applicants meeting standards will be granted license; reason for denial to be given in writing. 
All applicants for a license meeting the ascertainable standards of this chapter will be granted the license or licenses requested, upon the hearing; and the board of commissioners in applying the facts to the licensing criteria will act in a judicial capacity. Whenever an application for license is denied by the council, the reasons for such denial shall be stated in writing and entered upon the minutes. 
(Code 1992, § 3-22; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-46. - State alcohol licenses required. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this article must obtain the appropriate state alcohol licenses within 60 days from the date the county license is granted. Written proof must be provided to code enforcement within 60 days. Failure to obtain the required state licenses will result in a forfeiture of the county license on the first business day following the 60 days granted above. If the state declines to approve the request for an alcohol license, the county will return license fees paid with the exception of the application fee. 
(b)  All holders of county licenses must keep their state license in good standing. Any failure to keep the state license in effect will result in an immediate forfeiture and loss of the county license. 
(Code 1992, § 3-23; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-47. - Permitted location for special events at which alcoholic beverages are served. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, dispensed, distributed, poured or served at any location, premises, or building in the county except as set out in this chapter unless otherwise provided for under this chapter. 
(b)  The owner or lessee of a location at which alcoholic beverages are to be furnished and served at a private function or special event by a person at a location not otherwise required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter shall first obtain a qualifying location permit designating such location as a "permitted location." Such qualifying location permit shall be good for the calendar year in which it is issued and may be renewed annually as set forth in this chapter. Thereafter, the person organizing the private function or special event to be held at a permitted location must apply for and obtain a "special event permit." The cost of such permits shall be as set forth by the board of commissioners. The requirements shall be met by an applicant for a permitted location license. 
(c)  To qualify as a "permitted location," the location, premises or building shall not be located nearer to an alcoholic treatment center than permitted by section 4-36 and therefore be considered to be a "prohibited location," or shall not fail to meet all requirements of building code, fire code, zoning ordinance, and all other state and local regulations for an on-premises pouring outlet, and shall possess a permit as a "permitted location" pursuant to this chapter. The applicant for a qualifying location permit shall submit a plat of survey prepared by a state registered land surveyor showing the distances set forth in this chapter with the application for the qualifying location permit. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish and serve alcoholic beverages at a private function or special event at a permitted location unless food is also served at the private function or special event. 
(e)  Alcoholic beverages furnished and served at a private function or special event may be consumed only on the premises and may not be removed from the premises in an open container. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverages to be sold at a private function or special event, i.e., no "cash bar" sales will be permitted, unless the permitted location also holds an on premises consumption license for alcoholic beverages. 
(g)  The "permitted location" licensee shall be responsible for any violation of this chapter which occurs at the "permitted location" whether by the licensee's employees or agents, a caterer or their employees or agents, or a lessee or invitee of the licensee, their lessee or invitees or any of their employees or agents. 
(h)  The person holding the private function or special event, and not otherwise required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter must purchase and furnish the alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1992, § 3-24; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-48. - Special events. 
(a)  Special event permit. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, wine and/or beer and malt beverages and/or distilled spirits shall only be served at a private function or special event only if the person organizing said event has applied for and received a special event permit. 
(2)  In order to serve wine, and/or beer and malt beverages, and/or distilled spirits at a private function or special event, at a permitted location, the person organizing the private function or special event shall be required to: 
a.  Apply to code enforcement for a "special event permit." The application shall include the name and business address of any caterer providing food service for the private function or special event, the date, time and location of the event, which location must be a permitted location as set forth in this chapter or otherwise exempt as set forth under this chapter; and 
b.  Pay the cost of such permit as set forth by the board of commissioners. If the application meets all of the requirements of this chapter, code enforcement shall issue the special event permit. If code enforcement finds that the application does not meet the requirements of this chapter and denies the special event permit, the applicant may appeal in writing to the board of commissioners within five days of the date of the denial. 
(3)  The "special event permit" shall be maintained at the site of the private function or special event during the hours alcoholic beverages are served. 
(4)  The person holding the private function or special event, and not otherwise required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter, must purchase the alcoholic beverages. 
(5)  The "special event permit" licensee shall be responsible for any violation of this chapter which occurs at the event whether by the licensee's employees or agents, invitee of the licensee or invitee of the invitee of the licensee. 
(b)  Event permit for authorized catered functions. 
(1)  Any licensed alcohol beverage caterer who additionally holds a valid license to sell malt beverages or wine by the package or by the drink for consumption on the premises may apply to code enforcement for an event permit to distribute malt beverages or wine by the drink off-premises within the county at authorized catered functions held at a permitted location. Applications shall be supported by evidence of all required licenses in good standing, and proof of payment of excise and occupation taxes, if applicable. 
(2)  Any licensed alcohol beverage caterer who additionally holds a valid license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on-premises may apply to code enforcement for an event permit to sell distilled spirits by the drink off-premises within the county at authorized catered functions held at a permitted location. Applications shall be supported by evidence of all required licenses in good standing and proof of payment of excise and occupation taxes, if applicable. 
(3)  A licensed alcohol beverage caterer shall apply to code enforcement for an event permit on forms prescribed for that purpose. The application shall include the name of the licensee and, if applicable, the name of the food caterer who will be serving the event, together with a copy of the current licensees and occupation tax certificate(s); the date, time and duration of the event; and the name, address and telephone number of the event host or sponsor, and, if different, the address of the location where the event will be held. The application shall be signed by the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer and the event host or sponsor. If the event host or sponsor is not the owner of the venue at which the event will be held, then the owner of the venue, or the owner's authorized agent, shall also sign the application consenting to the distribution of alcoholic beverages at that location. Each event permit shall require payment of a fee of set by the board of commissioners per day; provided, however, if the licensed alcohol beverage caterer does not maintain a place of business within the unincorporated county, in addition to the above fee, there is hereby levied an excise tax upon the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the unincorporated county for such event. At all times during which an authorized catered function is taking place, the original alcohol beverage caterer's license and the event permit shall be conspicuously posted and made available for inspection upon request by code enforcement, tax, or licensing officer; in addition, at all times while alcoholic beverages are being transported within the county, the licensee shall maintain a copy of the alcohol beverage caterer's license and event permit in the vehicle(s) used for transporting the alcoholic beverages. No event permit shall be issued for more than three consecutive days and a full permit fee shall be assessed for each day of the event. 
(4)  Licensed alcohol beverage caterers shall be subject to the regulations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-11-4. Any licensed alcohol beverage caterer distributing or selling alcoholic beverages off-premises within the county, except in connection with an authorized catered function within the scope of the event permit shall be in violation of this article; if convicted, upon citation to the state court, violators shall be punished in the manner provided in this Code. 
(c)  Exceptions. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to a private function held at a private residence at which alcoholic beverages are purchased and served by a person not otherwise required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter to invited guests of such person, provided that the person holding the event purchases the alcoholic beverages and receives no payment of any kind from invited guests, and the event is not open or accessible to the general public. 
(Code 1992, § 3-25; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-49. - Privilege nature of license. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a grant of privilege to carry on or conduct a business covered by such license during the term of the license, subject to the terms and conditions imposed by this article and other applicable ordinances of the county and the constitution, laws and regulations of the state and of the United States of America applicable thereto. 
(b)  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the face the following words: 
This license is a privilege conditional on the holder meeting all standards for such license and operating regulations applicable thereto set out in county ordinances and state law. Failure to meet such standards or to comply with such operating regulations shall subject the holder to the license being revoked following notice and hearing. 
(c)  All licenses shall be conspicuously posted in the place of business. 
(Code 1992, § 3-26; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Secs. 4-50—4-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, PROBATION 

Sec. 4-72. - Penalty schedule. 
(a)  Within three days following a court appearance of a licensee, license representative, employee or owner of a licensed establishment in state court for violation of this chapter, code enforcement shall submit to the county administrator an investigation report of the violation. The report will include the details of the violation and the specific section of this chapter and/or other county ordinance, or state laws that have been violated and the sentence imposed by the court. 
(b)  The county administrator shall review the investigation report and the official records of the licensee and recommend to code enforcement to either probate, suspend and/or probate, or revoke the license of the violator based on the penalty schedule in this section; except that no license shall be placed on probation, suspended or revoked unless there is due cause. 
(c)  The county administrator shall not be required to strictly adhere to the progressive penalties in the penalty schedule and is authorized to invoke a more or less severe penalty based on the circumstances of the violation, to include forwarding the violation directly to the board of commissioners for an administrative hearing. The county administrator shall schedule the penalty period not earlier than 14 days following written notification of the penalty to the licensee. 

 
Notwithstanding anything stated in this section, the county administrator may, if the circumstances of any violation or potential violation warrant immediate action, refer that violation or potential violation to the board of commissioners for a hearing. 
(d)  If there is a violation during a probation period, the licensee shall be penalized as designated in the next step of the penalty schedule plus an additional seven-day penalty period. Exception: Should a licensee not incur a violation during a 24-month period, the next violation shall be subject to the first violation penalty. 
(Code 1992, § 3-31; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-73. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due cause consists of the violation of any laws or ordinances of the state or the county regulating the sale or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs, or violation of any regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such activities, or violation of any county ordinance related to the sale or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs. 
(Code 1992, § 3-32; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-74. - Appeal. 
A licensee may appeal within ten days the action of code enforcement or the county administrator to the board of commissioners and request a public hearing on the violation. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days following receipt of a written request from the licensee. Upon receipt of an appeal requesting a public hearing, code enforcement shall delay the penalty pending the outcome of the public hearing. 
(Code 1992, § 3-33; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-75. - Hearing to be conducted by the board of commissioners. 
The board of commissioners is authorized to conduct a public hearing at any time when the commissioners are on notice of a violation or potential violation of any local, state or federal regulation or law by a licensee, license representative, employee or owner of a licensed establishment in the county when such actual or potential violation would not constitute due cause for revocation, suspension or probation of the license. The licensee should be prepared to prove or show evidence of all business practices and procedures instituted to ensure compliance with this chapter and state law. The commissioners' inquiry may include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Employment standards of the licensee. 
(2)  Employee direction/supervision. 
(3)  Sales procedures. 
(4)  Enforcement check reports. 
(5)  Previous violations. 
(6)  Any other ordinance deemed relevant to the violation that is the subject of the hearing. 
(Code 1992, § 3-34; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-76. - Procedure; right to counsel; cross examination of witnesses. 
(a)  When a hearing is to be conducted by the board of commissioners, notice shall be sent to either the licensee or license representative personally or by certified mail at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to hearing date. Notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. The times shall be counted from the date of receipt of notice by the licensee or license representative. 
(b)  The licensee shall be entitled to have counsel present at any hearing brought to inquire into suspension, revocation or probation of a license, and shall have the right to cross examine witnesses against him, and to produce evidence in his own behalf. 
(Code 1992, § 3-35; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Secs. 4-77—4-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-96. - Inspection authority of county. 
The county reserves the right to inspect premises from which alcoholic beverages are licensed to be sold at all reasonable times. Compliance inspections will be completed by code enforcement quarterly. 
(Code 1992, § 3-41; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-97. - Employees; investigation; fees. 
(a)  No retail licensee shall employ any minor, except as provided by state law, in his store, or in the department of a store where alcoholic beverages are served, sold or dispensed. No retail licensee shall employ in any premises used for the sale of alcoholic beverages anyone who serves, sells and/or dispenses alcoholic beverages that has been convicted within five years of the date of employment of any felony, or within two years a violation of laws of this county, state, any other state or of the United States, to include illegal gambling, prostitution, violations relating to the manufacture, sale or use of or distribution of alcoholic beverages, narcotics, controlled substances, gambling, sexual offenses, assault, battery, family violence or crimes of moral turpitude. This provision shall not prohibit employees who have been convicted or have a criminal history, when employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores, from handling or carrying alcoholic beverages either within the licensed premises or to customers' vehicles when parked adjacent thereto as a part of employment responsibilities. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding retail or wholesale licenses to sell alcoholic beverages to file with code enforcement or his designee the names of all employees, with their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees, with the names of new employees, must be filed with code enforcement or his designee within three days from the date of any such change. All employees shall be subject to such investigative rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary from time to time by code enforcement. An investigative fee as set by the board of commissioners shall be paid by all applicants. 
(c)  At the time of application each employee of the licensee will be issued an employee's identification card by code enforcement. In addition, each time the licensee hires a new employee, said employee will be issued an employee's identification card by code enforcement. The employee's identification card must be worn by the employee at all times while working as an employee of the licensee. If the card is lost, the employee must replace the card by submitting a replacement fee of $10.00 to code enforcement. No employee shall be permitted to work for a licensee without wearing an employee's identification card issued by the county. 
(d)  No licensee shall allow any person to engage in the sale, dispensing, or serving of alcoholic beverages prior to the completion of a satisfactory investigation by code enforcement. Licensees in violation of this section shall be liable for a fine of $250.00 per employee engaged in such practice. Subsequent offenses may subject licensee to suspension or revocation of the license. 
(e)  No licensee under this chapter shall permit any person under the age of 18 within his employment to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for alcoholic beverages; provided, however, this provision shall not prohibit employees under the age of 18 who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, or drugstores from handling or carrying sealed packages of alcoholic beverages either within the licensed premises or to customers' vehicles when parked adjacent thereto as a part of employment responsibilities so long as such employees under age 18 do not dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1992, § 3-42; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 3-11-2014) 
Sec. 4-98. - Days and hours of operation. 
(a)  No retail package dealer of wine or malt beverage or on premises consumption of wine, malt beverage or distilled spirits shall open his place of business or furnish, sell, or offer for sale, any alcoholic beverages at any time Christmas Day. Sales are permitted on election days; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established during the hours the polls are open. No retail package sales of malt beverages and/or wine shall operate his place of business at any time prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 11:30 p.m. on Monday through Saturday, or prior to 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m. on Sunday, or permit his employees to be in, the place of business at any time prior to one hour before opening time or later than 30 minutes past closing time, except for the purpose of responding to emergency situations; provided, however, when taking inventory, making repairs, renovating or similar business needs cannot reasonably be carried out during normal business hours with customers present, the dealer may notify code enforcement for a specific exception from this limitation. Code enforcement shall be authorized to impose reasonable terms and conditions on the exception. It shall be the duty of a retail package dealer of malt beverages and/or wine to post on all entrances to the premises a sign reading "Closed—No customers allowed on premises" at all times outside of allowed hours of operation. 
(b)  No holder of a license for sales of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall operate his/her place of business at any time prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 11:30 p.m. on Monday through Saturday. In addition, the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. In all establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, tables shall be cleared of all drinks containing alcohol by not later than 30 minutes following the latest time at which alcoholic beverages may be legally sold. 
(Code 1992, § 3-43; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 2, 3-11-2014) 
State Law reference— Sales on Sundays and election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-99. - Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by persons under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages; use of false identification. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
(1)  No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, drink, sell or possess alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption for medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state, at a religious ceremony, or when the parent or guardian of the person under age 21 gives the alcoholic beverage to such person when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian while such parent or guardian is present. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every person seeking to purchase or possess alcoholic beverages from a licensee within the county to furnish, upon request, proper identification showing that the person is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this section, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a physical description of the person, such person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or any identification card authorized by O.C.G.A. § 40-5-100. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee, or any agent, officer or employee of a licensee, to fail to check the proper identification of any patron when selling or otherwise providing any alcoholic beverage, which failure results in an underage person being sold or served, or to have in such underage person's possession while on the licensee's premises, any alcoholic beverage. 
(e)  The retail licensee shall post in a conspicuous place where the actual transaction takes place within the licensed premises a sign stating that no alcoholic beverages shall be sold to or purchased by any person under 21 years of age and that it shall be unlawful for any minor to misrepresent his age in any manner whatsoever to a licensee. Such sign shall be printed in uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(Code 1992, § 3-44; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-23, 3-3-23.1. 
Sec. 4-100. - Open containers. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "open container" means any container, containing alcoholic beverages, which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
(b)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage within the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle. Closed containers of alcoholic beverages may be transported in any part of a vehicle. Open containers shall be placed in a locked trunk or locked storage container. 
(c)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while walking, standing or otherwise occupying any public street, road, or highway, sidewalk adjacent thereto, public parking lot, county park or other property owned or leased by the county; or within any public building thereon, except that Fayetteville Main Street, the county economic development authority, and the county senior center may serve alcoholic beverages within the buildings on their respective property leased from the county provided that: 
(1)  The event is catered and the caterer is duly licensed by the City of Fayetteville; 
(2)  Alcohol is not served at an event more than four times during a calendar year; 
(3)  The event is solely related to the operation, fundraising, or raising awareness of the programs and services offered by the respective organization; and 
(4)  There are no direct sales of alcoholic beverages to the patrons of the event. 
In addition, the board of commissioners may allow the sale and serving of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption within a county-owned property by resolution or intergovernmental agreement. The resolution or intergovernmental agreement shall set the requirements as such. 
(d)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any package dealer, including parking lots adjacent thereto. 
(e)  No person shall enter or leave the premises of any dealer licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption with an open container of any alcoholic beverage. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is operating pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to the law of the state or any other state; 
(2)  A passenger of a bus which the driver holds a valid chauffeurs license pursuant to the law of the state or any other state; or 
(3)  A passenger of a self-contained motor home which is in excess of 21 feet in length. 
(g)  Any person, operator of a vehicle, or passenger who violates this section shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the state court of the county and subject to fines and/or imprisonment as provided by this Code and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1992, § 3-45; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-101. - Brownbagging. 
Brownbagging, as defined in this chapter, is prohibited within the county. Any person who brownbags, participates in consumption of any alcoholic beverage being brownbagged, or any licensee or employee of a licensed establishment in whose presence brownbagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs, shall be in violation of this section. 
(Code 1992, § 3-46; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-102. - Purchases to be made only from licensed wholesalers. 
Package dealers in alcoholic beverages and on-premises consumption dealers shall not buy nor accept deliveries from any person other than a wholesaler, dealer or distributor licensed by the state department of revenue. 
(Code 1992, § 3-47; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-103. - Sanitary regulations; immoral conduct, etc.; inspection and report by fire department. 
(a)  All premises licensed under this article shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on the premises. 
(c)  The fire department shall, upon request of code enforcement, inspect such premises and report their findings to the county. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 3-48; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-104. - Storage of alcoholic beverages at retail. 
All package dealers and on-premises consumption dealers shall store all alcoholic beverages on the premises for which the license was issued and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any duly authorized representative of the county. Any alcoholic beverages found in any licensee's stock which was not sold or distributed by a wholesaler licensed in accordance with laws of the state to make sales and deliveries in the county shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Code 1992, § 3-49; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-105. - Nonprofit civic organizations; temporary permits. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "bona fide nonprofit civic organization" means a nonprofit corporation or entity which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions 26 USC § 501(c), (d), or (e). 
(b)  Bona fide nonprofit organizations may qualify for a temporary permit from code enforcement to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for a period not to exceed three days. No more than six such permits may be issued to a single qualified organization in any calendar year. 
(c)  An authorized representative of a bona fide nonprofit organization may apply code enforcement for a letter certifying the date, time and event location as a condition for seeking a temporary permit from code enforcement. The county shall impose a fee as established by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 3-50; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-106. - In-room sales in hotels. 
Licenses obtained by hotels shall include the right to serve alcoholic beverages by the drink to registered guests in their hotel rooms as well as to deliver alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages to registered guests' rooms when such beverages have been ordered by such guests and/or to provide a cabinet or other facility in a hotel guest's room which contains alcoholic beverages for which licensed, and which is provided upon written request of the guest, and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest, and for which the sale of the alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested, except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused and unopened portion. All alcoholic beverages sold or distributed under this section shall be obtained by the hotel directly from a licensed wholesaler or distributor and shall be stored on the premises of the hotel until sold or served. 
(Code 1992, § 3-51; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-107. - Front window display. 
Each person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at retail shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the inscription "County Retail License No. " in uniform letters not less than four inches in height; however, if a licensee so desires he may have his name displayed on the inside of the window in like manner or in neon or other electric lights, to the extent permitted by the county's sign ordinance or other applicable law. Such sign shall be parallel with the window and so constructed. 
(Code 1992, § 3-52; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-108. - Exterior advertisement of price of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No sign of any kind, painted or electric, advertising any price of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on the exterior of any licensed premises. No placard or sign of any kind which is visible from the exterior of the licensed premises shall make reference to the price of any alcoholic beverages sold therein; however, tags showing the prices of individual bottles or containers may be affixed to each such bottle or container or to the edge of the shelf whereon such bottles or containers are located. 
(Code 1992, § 3-53; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-109. - Interior visibility required. 
No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the window or upon the doors of any retail alcoholic beverage store, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Code 1992, § 3-54; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-110. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public way or public place within the county or within any public building thereon. 
(Code 1992, § 3-55; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-111. - Purchase delivered in paper bag. 
All alcoholic beverages, except prepackaged beer, purchased in a retail store must be put in a paper or plastic bag or otherwise wrapped in any opaque cover before delivery to the purchaser. 
(Code 1992, § 3-56; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-112. - Portable signs prohibited. 
No licensee for the package sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted to utilize a lighted portable sign outside the building. 
(Code 1992, § 3-57; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-113. - Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises. 
No package dealer shall make or allow to be made any deliveries of alcoholic beverages beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Code 1992, § 3-58; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-114. - Nudity and partial nudity prohibited. 
The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon the premises of any establishment licensed to sell, serve, dispense or distribute alcoholic beverages for consumption on such premises: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this section or where such person(s) perform(s) acts of or acts which stimulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law; 
b.  The caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section; provided, however, that nothing contained in subsection (2) of this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theatre which derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1992, § 3-59; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-115. - Price lists or tags. 
Each retail licensee under this article shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than two copies of a printed price list of the alcoholic beverages offered for sale and one printed copy of the penal sections of this article; however, a licensee, in lieu of having two copies of a printed price list, may have the price placed on the bottles or on the bottom of the shelf where alcoholic beverages are exhibited for sale. 
(Code 1992, § 3-60; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Sec. 4-116. - Indebtedness to county. 
No license under this chapter shall issue to any applicant if any person holding beneficial interest in the business to be licensed owes any delinquent taxes or assessment 
(Code 1992, § 3-61; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 8-29-2013) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; removal of identifying item from animal, O.C.G.A. § 16-9-71; destroying or injuring police dog or police horse, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-107; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; inspection of animals, carcasses, meat, and meat food products, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-100 et seq.; game and fish, O.C.G.A. title 27; technical assistance for control or elimination of wild or abandoned dogs, O.C.G.A. § 27-1-7; hunting with dogs, O.C.G.A. § 27-3-16 et seq.; killing of dogs pursuing or killing deer, O.C.G.A. § 27-3-49; guide or service dogs for blind persons, persons with visual or physical disabilities, and deaf persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-4-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; civil liability for damage done by animals, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6 et seq.; Responsible dog ownership law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, adopted Oct. 23, 2014, repealed the former ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-89, and enacted a new ch. 6 as set out herein. The former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1983, §§ 7-1—7-8, 7-10—7-12, 7-14—7-18; Code 1992, §§ 4-26—4-40, 4-56—4-61, 4-64—4-67, 4-81—4-83; Ord. No. 88-08, §§ 1—3, 7-6-1988; Ord. No. 89-10, 8-16-1989; Ord. No. 89-19, §§ 1,2, 11-1-1989; Ord. No 91-15, §§ 1,2, 9-18-1991; Ord. No. 92-01, §§ 1—3, 1-23-1992; Ord. No. 94-02 § 1, 3-2-1994; Ord. No. 94-05, §§ 1—5, 4-14-1994; Ord. No. 94-09 §§ 1, 2, 8-17-1994; Ord. No. 94-11 § A, 9-7-1994 Ord. No. 97-03, § 1, 3-5-1997; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 1, 2, 3-11-2004. 

Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - KEEPING ANIMALS; ANIMAL SHELTER 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon means to forsake entirely, or to neglect, or refuse to provide, or perform the legal obligations for care and support of an animal by its owner, or his/her agent. This definition shall also apply to leaving or relinquishing an owned animal at or to the animal shelter by giving false information about the identity of ownership. 
Abandoned animal means any domesticated animal that has been placed upon public property, within a public building, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property, and is unattended or uncared for. Any domesticated animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without proper food and water for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. Any domesticated animal shall also be considered abandoned when left at or relinquished to the shelter by its owner or his/her agent. 
Animal means every living vertebrate except human beings. 
Animal at large means an animal not under restraint and off of the property of its owner. 
Animal shelter means the facility designated by the board of commissioners for the detention of animals. 
Animal shelter officer means any person so designated by the animal shelter director to perform the duties prescribed by this article. 
Animal under restraint means any animal secured by a leash or lead; or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure; or under the control of a responsible and competent person and obedient to that person's commands, and the person being present with the animal; or the animal confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion. 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to this article. 
Companion animal or pet means a domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. Pets include, but are not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, rabbits, hamsters, horses, mice, reptiles, exotic animals, and other animals associated with man's environment. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Director means the animal shelter director. 
Domesticated animals means animals that are accustomed to living in or about the habitation of men, including but not limited to cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, rabbits, goats, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals. (This definition only applies to those animals mentioned herein and is only applicable to this article and in no way affects the meaning or application of a definition of the described animal, as may be found in any other county ordinance.) 
Estrus means a regular period for female dogs and cats in which the animal seeks to mate or breed. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which he is located. 
Microchip implant means an identifying integrated circuit placed under the skin of an animal for purposes of identification. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of an animal or fowl within this state. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed and/or sheltered for seven days or more. In the case of an animal owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. Owners include, but are not limited to, operators or managers of stables, kennels, pet shops or other animal care establishments. The current registered person on a microchip implant or rabies or identification tag shall also be considered an "owner". 
Public nuisance means any animal which: 
(1)  Is found at large in violation of section 6-22, section 6-23 or section 6-24. 
(2)  Is vicious. 
(3)  Produces, because of quantity, manner or method in which the animals are domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the county. 
(4)  Attacks passersby or passing vehicles. 
(5)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare, or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the county health department, whose rules and regulations are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
Such nuisance is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and any person that knowingly keeps, owns, harbors, or acts as custodian of an animal constituting such nuisance shall be guilty of an unlawful act and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk od death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Unsanitary conditions means an animal living space, including shelter and exercise area, contaminated by health hazards, irritants, items or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Excessive animal waste; 
(2)  Garbage, trash or an outflow of waste; 
(3)  Standing water or mud; 
(4)  Rancid/contaminated food or water; 
(5)  Fumes, foul or noxious odors, contaminated air, hazardous chemicals or poisons; 
(6)  Decaying materials; 
(7)  Uncontrolled parasite or rodent infestation; or 
(8)  Areas that contain nails, screws, broken glass, broken boards, pits, poisons, sharp implements or other items that could cause injury, illness or death to an animal. 
Veterinarian means any person who holds a license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine as defined by Georgia law. 
Vicious animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domesticated animals by virtue of one or more attacks of such severity as to cause property damage or physical injury. An animal shall also be considered vicious and not under restraint if it makes an unprovoked attack on other domesticated animals that are under restraint or on human beings or on physical property of another. 
Vicious dog means any dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(b)  No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or vicious dog for actions that occur while the dog is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the law enforcement or military officer's duties. No dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog if the person injured by such dog was a person who, at the time, was attempting to commit an offense under Chapter 5 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014; Ord. 2016-17, §§ 1—3, 8-25-2016) 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1; definition relating to livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-2; definitions relating to animal protection, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-2. 
Sec. 6-20. - General responsibility of department; department head. 
The animal control department shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing the animal control ordinance of the county and the operation of the county shelter. This department shall be under the direction of the animal shelter director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— State veterinarian, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-1-2, 4-1-3. 
Sec. 6-21. - Animal shelter created. 
There is hereby created the county animal shelter, which shall be under the supervision of the director and staffed with such personnel as may from time to time be authorized by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— County livestock pounds, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-11; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; licenses for animal shelter operators, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-3 et seq. 
Sec. 6-22. - Running at large prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets and highways of the unincorporated limits of the county or on the property of another without such property owner's consent. Any such animal at large shall be impounded by the director or his authorized representative as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Permitting livestock to run at large or stray, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-3; intentionally or knowingly permitting livestock to run at large or stray upon public roads, etc., O.C.G.A. § 4-3-12; permitting dogs in heat to roam free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs to be outside proper enclosure, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-29. 
Sec. 6-23. - Restraint of animals—While on property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal to keep the animal under control at all times while the animal is on the real property of the owner. For purposes of this section, an animal is deemed under control when it is confined by way of fence or other enclosure, restrained by substantial chain or leash, restrained in some other physical manner by a competent person, or is under the control of a competent person who is present with the animal, so that the animal does not wander off the real, leased, rented, or occupied property of the owner while unattended. 
(b)  In addition, all male and female dogs and cats that have not been spayed or neutered must be securely confined in such a way that they not only cannot get out to run at-large, but also cannot be reached by other dogs or cats. Any female dog, while in estrus, must be confined within an enclosure which can reasonably be expected to keep away or keep out, and not attract, male dogs. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a competent person is one of sufficient physical and mental capacity, at the time the animal is in need of restraint, to restrain the animal. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, present shall mean that both owner and animal are physically present within the geographic confines of the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Requirements for possessing dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28 et seq. 
Sec. 6-24. - Same—While off of property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal to keep the animal under control at all times while the animal is off of the real, leased, rented, or occupied property of its owner. For the purposes of this section, an animal is deemed under control when it is confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion, secured by a substantial leash or other device held by a competent person, or is properly confined within an enclosure with the permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located. 
(b)  Any animal kept in the back of an open pickup truck or convertible car must be restrained by a leash. Such leash must be of the size and length to restrict the animal within the confines of the car or bed of the truck and to prohibit the animal from jumping out or over the sides or back of such vehicle. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a competent person is one of sufficient physical and mental capacity at the time the animal is in need of restraint, to restrain the animal. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 6-25. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The primary responsibility for the enforcement of this article shall be vested in the director. He may, in the exercise of his authority as the director, delegate the enforcement responsibilities of this article to such county employees as he may select. 
(b)  If a violation of this article has not been personally witnessed by the director or his authorized representative or other employee of the county, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint to be and appear on the day and time set for trial, then and there to testify on behalf of the county. The director shall refuse to respond to anonymous complaints. 
(c)  If the owner of any dog or other animal is not known and the dog or other animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds, or other public property, or on the property of another without that property owner's permission, or on the premises of a privately-owned multifamily residence, as prohibited by this article, upon complaint made to or information made known to the animal shelter, it shall be the duty of the director or his authorized representative to immediately take possession of such dog or animal and impound it in the animal shelter. With respect to an animal on the premises of a privately-owned multifamily residence, the duty of the director or his authorized representative to collect the animal is predicated on the management of such multifamily residence providing an approved holding pen from which the director or his authorized representative will impound animals on regular intervals of at least once weekly. Consistent with subsection (b) of this section, a subpoena will issue to the person making the complaint from the multifamily residence. Once impounded, an animal shall be kept for a period of time as defined in section 6-26; thereafter, if the animal is not claimed by anyone after a reasonable effort has been made to locate the owner of the animal as hereinafter provided, the animal may be disposed of in a humane fashion or in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 4. Where the director or his authorized representative is required in this section to take possession of any dog or animal and to impound it, he may use any and all means available. 
(d)  In all cases of violations of this article, the director shall have the authority to exercise his discretion and may, in addition to or in lieu of impounding any animal, issue a citation to the owner of such animal. However, in all such instances where the owner of such animal is known or discovered, the director shall at least issue a citation to such owner. The citation shall state the violation, the name and address of the owner, and the name of the individual issuing the citation. All citations shall be transferred to a court of competent jurisdiction for prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014; Ord. 2016-17, § 4, 8-25-2016) 
State Law reference— Impoundment of livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-4. 
Sec. 6-26. - Notice to owners of impounded animals. 
(a)  Upon impounding any dog or other animal, the director or his authorized representative shall cause to be made a prompt and reasonable effort to locate the animal's owner. If, within five days of impoundment the owner cannot be located, it shall be the duty of the director or his authorized representative to adopt out or dispose of the animal in a humane fashion. If verbal contact cannot be made with the owner, a letter providing notification of the impoundment will be mailed to the owner. If the animal is not claimed by the owner within three days of the receipt of the letter giving notice of impoundment, it shall be the duty of the director or his authorized representative to adopt out or dispose of the dog or other animal in a humane fashion. For purposes of this Code section, the aforementioned letter shall be deemed "received" as of the date of the postmark from the U.S. Postal Service on the face of the letter. If any contact with the owner is made, the owner shall be responsible for all boarding fees and other fees provided for in section 6-31 until the animal is reclaimed by the owner. 
(b)  For the first time an owner of a dog, cat or other animal is found in violation of section 6-22, 6-23 or 6-24, regardless of whether or not the animal is picked up and impounded by an animal shelter officer, a minimum fine of $25.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both, shall be imposed against such person. 
(c)  For the second time an owner of a dog, cat or other animal is found in violation of section 6-22, 6-23 or 6-24, regardless of whether or not the animal is picked up and impounded by an animal shelter officer, a minimum fine of $250.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both, shall be imposed against such person. Should an owner be found guilty of a third offense, or for subsequent offenses, a minimum fine of $500.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both, shall be imposed. 
(d)  In addition to the above provisions, any owner of an animal picked up and impounded by the animal shelter must provide to the animal shelter a proof of rabies shot within seven days of receiving notice of impoundment. 
(e)  If for any reason an animal is impounded and not claimed after proper notification imposed by this section, and if the owner is identified by a rabies or license tag or microchip implant on the animal or can be identified by witnesses, the owner will be considered in violation of this article for the offense of abandoning the animal, and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $250.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(f)  In addition, if an animal is impounded and not claimed within the time set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the owner shall be conclusively presumed to have given his consent to the adoption of the impounded animal or to have given his consent to the disposal of the animal in a humane fashion in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 4. 
(g)  If any animal is not claimed as provided within this article, the director or his authorized representative, and after he has satisfied himself that such animal is in good health, may offer the animal for adoption. It is the duty of the director or his authorized agent to have the animal spayed or neutered and to ensure that the animal is given a rabies vaccination, prior to the adoption of the animal. 
(h)  In no event shall any animal be redeemed by its lawful possessor, owner or custodian unless those fees established for boarding the animal, as provided for in section 6-31, are paid. 
(i)  For the second time a person is found in violation of section 6-22, 6-23 or 6-24, regardless of whether or not the animal is picked up and impounded by an animal shelter officer, it is mandatory that the person found in violation have the subject animal spayed or neutered within ten working days after the adjudication of guilt by a court of competent jurisdiction, whether the animal is purebred or mixed breed. The person shall present proof or evidence of the spaying or neutering to the director or other animal shelter officer within ten working days from the date of the adjudication of guilt. A sworn, notarized statement from a veterinarian, licensed to practice veterinary medicine under the Georgia Veterinary Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-50-1 et seq.), stating that the animal has been spayed or neutered or explaining in detail that for health reasons the animal cannot be spayed or neutered, shall be satisfactory proof or evidence of compliance with this subsection. The person who has been found guilty will be considered in violation of this article for failure to submit proof of spaying or neutering of the animal within ten working days following the adjudication of guilt and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014; Ord. No. 2017-17, § 1, 10-26-2017) 
State Law reference— Notice of impoundment and sale of livestock, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-5. 
Sec. 6-26.5. - Investigations by animal control officer; authority; procedure for classification of dog. 
(a)  Investigations. The director of animal control, or his/her designee, shall be authorized to aid in the administration and enforcement of the Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. Upon receipt of information the director of animal control, or his/her designee shall make such investigation as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous or vicious dog. 
(b)  Authority. No animal control board or board of health has been designated by the county board of commissioners as the authority to conduct hearings on matters pertaining to the classification of a dog as dangerous or vicious. 
(c)  Procedure for classification. The process for classification shall be as set out in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23. 
(Ord. 2016-17, § 5, 8-25-2016) 
Sec. 6-27. - Guard/security dogs; precautions to be taken by owners of dangerous dogs or vicious dogs. 
(a)  Guard/security dogs. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of all persons who keep, use or maintain a guard/security dog to ensure the dog is vaccinated against rabies and licensed as required by section 6-59. The dog also must have the current vaccination tag affixed to a collar worn by the dog at all times as required. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of any person that sells, leases, and/or rents any guard/security dog to be used within the county to notify the county animal control office of the location and number of guard/security dogs in use, kept, or maintained at a particular location. The animal control office shall maintain a record of the location, number of guard/security dogs, and current rabies vaccination and licensure of all guard/security dogs utilized within the county. The person that sells, leases, and/or rents a guard/security dog to be used in the county shall furnish the following information to the county animal control office: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of the location where guard dog is located. 
b.  Name, breed, sex, and current license tag information of each guard dog at any location in the county. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to transport any guard/security dog in an open bed truck, and any vehicle transporting guard/security dogs shall be identified as to the business owner. It shall be unlawful to transport any guard/security dog in the county except under the following conditions: 
a.  Each dog shall be placed in separate holding bins. 
b.  Each holding bin shall be enclosed and measure 48 inches long by 18 inches wide by 30 inches high. 
(b)  Precautions to be taken by owners of vicious dogs. 
(1)  Outside enclosure. Whenever outside of its enclosure, but on the owner's property, a vicious dog must be attended by the owner and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(2)  Tied to object. No vicious dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate object, such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its own enclosure. 
(3)  Warning sign. A warning sign (i.e., "Beware of Dog") shall be conspicuously posted denoting a vicious dog is on the premises. 
(4)  Violation. Failure to keep any dog confined or under restraint as provided for in this subsection shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Precautions to be taken by owners of dangerous dogs. 
(1)  Certificate of registration. It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this county a classified dog without a current certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
(2)  Restraint. 
a.  It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. 
b.  It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014; Ord. 2016-17, § 6, 8-25-2016) 
State Law reference— Dangerous and vicious dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 6-28. - Commercial guard/security dogs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all persons who keep, use or maintain any guard/security dog to have signs conspicuously posted on the premises where the guard/security dog is located to warn of the presence of the dog. This warning shall consist of a warning sign placed at each entrance and exit to the premises and in a position to be legible from the sidewalk or ground level adjacent to the sign (eye level). If the premises is not enclosed by a wall or fence, a sign shall be placed at every entrance and exit to each structure on the premises in which a guard/security dog is located. Each sign shall measure at least ten inches by 14 inches and shall contain block lettering stating "Warning, Guard Dog on Duty." In addition, for dogs rented or leased, the sign shall set forth the name, address and phone number of the responsible person or persons to be notified during any hour of the day or night. 
(b)  Each holding bin for guard/security dogs will be adequately ventilated. 
(c)  No guard/security dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate object, such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its own enclosure. 
(d)  A guard/security dog shall be confined by the owner/custodian/harborer within a building or secure enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Exceptions to definitions relating to dangerous dog control, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21(b). 
Sec. 6-29. - Abandonment of animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon any domesticated animal within the county. Each person who does abandon, knowingly or willingly permits such abandonment, or aids in the abandonment of any domesticated animal shall be in violation of the law and shall be punished as provided. 
(b)  Each offense under this section shall be punished with a fine of the maximum amount allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Abandonment of dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-3. 
Sec. 6-30. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
Animal shall not include any fish nor shall such term include any pest that might be exterminated or removed from a business, residence, or other structure. 
Willful neglect means the intentional withholding of food and water required by an animal to prevent starvation or dehydration. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of cruelty to animals when he causes death or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering to any animal by an act, an omission, or willful neglect. Any person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that: 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting conduct which is otherwise permitted under the laws of this state or of the United States, including, but not limited to, agricultural, animal husbandry, butchering, food processing, marketing, scientific, research, medical, zoological, exhibition, competitive, hunting, trapping, fishing, wildlife management, or pest control practices or the authorized practice of veterinary medicine nor to limit in any way the authority or duty of the department of agriculture, department of natural resources, any county board of health, any law enforcement officer, dog, animal, or rabies control officer, humane society, veterinarian, or private landowner protecting his property. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a person from: 
a.  Defending his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or 
b.  Injuring or killing an animal reasonably believed to constitute a threat for injury or damage to any property, livestock, or poultry. 
(c)  The method used to injure or kill such animal shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely injures or kills an animal under the circumstances indicated in this subsection shall incur no civil or criminal liability for such injury or death. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; cruelty to dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5. 
Sec. 6-31. - Fees generally. 
Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be adopted from time to time by the board of commissioners and kept on file with the director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Fees for impounding, serving notice, care and feeding, advertising and disposing of impounded livestock, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-10. 
Sec. 6-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016, § 7, adopted Aug. 25, 2016, repealed § 6-32, which pertained to dangerous dog uniform warning symbol and derived from Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014. 
Sec. 6-33. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment and jail for a period not to exceed 60 days or both. Each and every violation of such provision constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014; Ord. 2016-17, § 8, 8-25-2016) 
Secs. 6-34—6-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-55. - Title. 
The title of this article shall be Rabies Control Rules and Regulations of Fayette County. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 6-56. - Definitions. 
Unless a different meaning is required by the context, the following terms as used in this article shall have the meanings hereinafter respectively ascribed to them. 
Board means the county board of health. 
Cat means a cat, of either sex, vaccinated or not vaccinated against rabies. 
Certificate means a certificate of vaccination on a form furnished or approved by the state department of human resources. 
Department means the state department of human resources. 
Director means the chief executive of the county board as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-11 and 31-3-15, or in his absence, subject to approval of the board, a member of the board appointed by the chairperson for the purposes enumerated herein. 
Dog means a dog, of either sex, vaccinated or not vaccinated against rabies. 
Health department means the county health department, or in the absence of a functioning health department, the county board of health. 
Owner means any person having a right of property in a dog or cat or any person who permits a dog or cat to remain on his premises. 
Rabies vaccination tag means a tag furnished or approved by the state department of human resources, which tag shall be worn by the vaccinated dog. 
Vaccinate or inoculate means the injection of a specified dose of antirabies vaccine by a veterinarian into the proper site of an animal, such vaccine having been approved by the state department of human resources. 
Vaccine means antirabies vaccine approved by the state department of human resources. The term "vaccine," used for the purposes of this article, shall be stored at the temperature prescribed on the package label. Outdated vaccine shall not be used. 
Veterinarian means any person who holds a degree of doctor of veterinary medicine. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to health, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1; inoculation of canines against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5. 
Sec. 6-57. - Legal authority. 
Pursuant to the authority vested in the county board of health under O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq., the county board of health and the board of commissioners adopt the following rules and regulations for the control of rabies within the county. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 6-58. - Purpose. 
To prescribe rules for the prevention and control of rabies within the county by providing for the vaccination, tagging and certification of dogs and cats, for the confinement of dogs, cats, and other animals, for the establishment of a full-time rabies control officer, for the impoundment of stray animals, and for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 6-59. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
Within 60 days following the passage of this article every owner of a dog or cat three months of age or older shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated against rabies. Dogs and cats will be revaccinated one year later, and each subsequent year, unless a dog or cat one year of age or older has been vaccinated with vaccines accepted by the department for providing three year duration of immunity. When dogs or cats one year of age or older are vaccinated with vaccines accepted by the department for providing a three year duration of immunity, boosters will be required every three years. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Inoculation of canines against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5. 
Sec. 6-60. - Evidence of rabies vaccinations for dogs and cats required. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each owner, custodian or harborer of any dog or cat at least three months of age kept, maintained or harbored within the unincorporated area of the county, or within any municipality in the county which has or may enter into an agreement with the county for animal control services, to possess evidence and provide of a current rabies vaccination for such animal at the time of request by an animal control officer. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat at least three months of age brought into any areas of the county to obtain evidence of a rabies vaccination for such dog or cat within 14 days from the date of entry into the county. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of each dog or cat owner, possessor or custodian thereof, to provide a collar for their dog or cat to which a current rabies vaccination tag shall be attached. The collar, together with the tag, shall be worn by the dog or cat at all times for identification and rabies verification. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 6-61. - Rabies control officer. 
(a)  The rabies control officer shall be the director of the county animal shelter. 
(b)  Duties of the rabies control officer will include: 
(1)  Investigate and maintain a record of animal bites in the county. 
(2)  Provide for proper confinement of an animal involved in a bite; or if the animal is dead or killed, preparation and submission of the head for laboratory examination. 
(3)  Enforce proper disposition of animals exposed to known rabid animals. 
(4)  Provide stray animal pickup service. 
(5)  Assist in rabies immunization clinics. 
(6)  Other duties as stated in the rabies control regulations or as ordered by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— County rabies control officer, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-7. 
Sec. 6-62. - Confinement of dogs or other animals. 
(a)  The rabies control officer will maintain enforcement of all regulations pertaining to confinement of dogs or other animals. 
(b)  The owner of any dog or other animal as defined in this section shall confine or cause to be confined such dog or animal as herein prescribed: 
(1)  A dog or other animal, whether vaccinated or not, which has bitten a person (or other animal) shall be confined for a period of ten days following the date of the bite. 
(2)  A dog or other animal, whether vaccinated or not, having signs suggestive of rabies shall be confined and in isolation until its death or until its freedom from suspicion of having rabies is established and its release is authorized by the director. 
(3)  A dog or other animal not vaccinated and bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed; if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in an approved kennel for six months shall be enforced. One month prior to release, the dog shall be vaccinated according to prescribed methods. 
(4)  Any dog or other animal, the rabies vaccination of which is current as evidenced by the certificate of vaccination, which is bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal may be revaccinated, confined in an approved manner for 60 days, and then released if no signs of rabies are evident. 
(5)  Every dog or cat, whether vaccinated or not, in a quarantined area shall be kept confined to the owner's or custodian's premises during the entire quarantine period, unless other provisions suitable to the board are made. 
(6)  Any dog or cat less than three months old may be confined to the owner's premises or kept on leash, provided such permission is granted by the rabies control office. 
(7)  Any dog or cat brought into the county for a permanent stay from outside the county shall be confined or on a leash until vaccinated as provided by this article; except that, when the owner of such dog or cat produces evidence satisfactory to the director that such dog or cat has been vaccinated in a manner and by procedures comparable to the requirements of this article, a certificate of vaccination and a vaccination tag may be issued for the current vaccination year. 
(8)  Any dog or cat brought into the county on temporary stay not exceeding 14 days shall be confined or on a leash at all times; except that, if the owner or custodian of such dog or cat submits evidence to the director that such dog or cat has been vaccinated in a manner and by procedures comparable to the requirements of this article, the director may waive the requirement that the dog or cat be confined or on a leash. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Animal bites, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4 
Sec. 6-63. - Confinement area facility. 
The area or facility to which any dog or animal is confined in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be subject to the approval of the director. The confinement area or facility may include either a pound, a kennel, an animal hospital, or other place which provides: 
(1)  Construction and management which will keep the animal dry and clean and prevent its escape. 
(2)  A method and procedure for the identification of the animal and the recording of the date of its admission to the area or facility. 
(3)  Assurance that the animal will have safe and adequate water and food. 
(4)  Adequate space for the animal's exercise. 
(5)  Protection against excessive heat and cold. 
(6)  Space, cages, pens, and other necessary equipment to isolate the animal for its protection against injury and infectious disease. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Confinement of certain animals, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4. 
Sec. 6-64. - Reporting. 
(a)  The owner or custodian of any animal having signs suggestive of rabies shall confine the animal and immediately notify the director, reporting any information regarding any persons bitten or attacked by such animal. 
(b)  The director shall report all known cases of rabies in the county to the department. 
(c)  The director shall report accumulated data relating to rabies in the county to the department when in his opinion rabies is prevalent or likely to become prevalent to the extent that quarantine procedures are indicated. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
State Law reference— Duty of notification, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-4. 
Secs. 6-65—6-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALE OR EXCHANGE OF ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-87. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shelter means the facility designated by the board of commissioners for the detention of animals. 
Humane society means any unincorporated nonprofit organization existing for the purpose of prevention of cruelty to animals. 
Public or private animal refuge means harborers of unwanted animals of any breed, including crossbreeds, who provide food, shelter and confinement for a group of dogs, a group of cats or a combination of dogs and cats. 
Sexually mature animal means any dog or cat that has reached the age of 180 days or six months or more. 
Sterilization means the surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat in order to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
(Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 6-88. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-17, § 2, adopted Oct. 26, 2017, repealed § 6-88, which pertained to sterilization provisions and derived from Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014. 
Sec. 6-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-17, § 2, adopted Oct. 26, 2017, repealed § 6-89, which pertained to penalties and derived from Ord. No. 2014-17, § 1, 10-23-2014. 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Authority. 
The regulation and regulatory fees provided for in this chapter are imposed pursuant to the general police powers granted to the county and allowed by O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 13, art. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq.). 
(Code 1992, § 6-1; Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-1), 10-24-2013) 
Secs. 8-2—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENT ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 8-21. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement activity includes any fair, carnival, sideshow, circus, tent show, amusement ride and migratory entertainment and those activities, rides and games normally associated with such amusements wherein the general public is allowed to view or participate for a price. 
(Code 1992, § 6-61; Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-26), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-22. - Permit period. 
(a)  No permit for amusement activity shall be valid for more than 14 days from the date that the amusement activity begins. 
(b)  No person or entity shall receive more than two permits per calendar year. 
(Code 1992, § 6-62; Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-27), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-23. - Application for permit. 
(a)  All applications for a permit pursuant to this article shall be on forms prepared by the county administrator or his designee. 
(b)  An application must be submitted to the code enforcement office at least 14 days prior to the date that the amusement activity is to begin. 
(c)  The application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, address and phone number of the business operating the amusement activity; 
(2)  The name of the business owner; 
(3)  The name of the business manager if different from the owner; 
(4)  Proof of any required state permits, proof of liability insurance, fire marshal inspection approval, environmental health inspection approval, zoning approval, current state insurance inspection report and other required approvals; 
(5)  Proper photo identification of the owner and/or manager; 
(6)  Payment of any regulatory fees required by this article; and 
(7)  Any other documents required pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-28), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-24. - Criteria for granting of permit. 
(a)  No application for any permit for amusement activities shall be granted where the application or any evidence, shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant has had any permit issued under the police powers of any county or other governmental subdivision previously suspended or revoked. 
(2)  The applicant, as a previous holder of a permit for the business or business activity for which he now seeks a permit, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance pertaining to such business within a five-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  The applicant and/or the owner of the business operating the amusement activity have been convicted of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude within the last five years. 
(b)  In addition to the conditions listed in subsection (a) of this section, in determining whether or not any permit applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a permit, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(2)  The location for which the permit is sought, as to traffic congestion. 
(3)  The number of permits already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of and the place for which the permit is sought. 
(Code 1992, § 6-63; Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-28), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-25. - Temporary carnival or amusement rides. 
Applicants intending to operate a temporary carnival or amusement rides must provide proof that they hold a valid permit from the state to operate said rides. 
(Code 1992, § 6-64; Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-29), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-26. - Permit issuance or denial; fees. 
(a)  The county administrator or his designee shall issue a permit to an individual who is operating an amusement activity, after the applicant meets the qualifications listed in this chapter and upon the applicant's payment of a fee to be set by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The county administrator or his designee shall deny the issuance of a permit if the applicant submits an incomplete application or if the applicant does not meet the requirements provided for herein. 
(Code 1992, § 6-65; Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 5-13-2010; Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-30), 10-24-2013) 
Secs. 8-27—8-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS 

Sec. 8-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvasser, peddler, or solicitor means any person who sells or solicits for sale in the unincorporated county any new or used goods, wares, merchandise, services, produce or other things of value and goes about from place to place within the unincorporated county selling or offering for sale any of such things to either merchants or customers shall be deemed a peddler or solicitor. Excluded from this definition are persons who sell or solicit for sale goods, wares or merchandise, or other things of value from house to house for charitable organizations or purposes or on behalf of religious organizations, political organizations and political candidates. 
Charitable organization means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary (of, relating to, or supported by charity or alms) corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint-stock company, trust, governmental agency or entity, unincorporated organization or individual who solicits or obtains contributions solicited from, or conducts the sale of merchandise to, the general public, which contributions are used for charitable purposes or governmental purposes. 
Charitable purpose means any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose for religion, health, education, social welfare, arts and humanities, environment, civic or public interest. 
Door-to-door salesperson means any person who shall solicit orders on behalf of a firm, corporation, company, association, partnership or individual of any goods, wares or merchandise, or other things of value from house to house shall be deemed a door-to-door salesperson. Any person who obtains orders for merchandise or other things of value shall be deemed a door-to-door salesperson. Excluded from this definition are persons who solicit orders for goods, wares or merchandise, or other things of value from house to house for charitable organizations or purposes or on behalf of religious organizations, political organizations and political candidates. 
Vehicle means motorized conveyance fully functioning and moving under its own power with valid vehicle tag. A vehicle shall include a trailer or anything pulled by the vehicle. Vehicles shall not be in excess of 20 feet in length, ten feet in width, and eight feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-41), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-57. - Registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser, solicitor, peddler, or door-to-door salesperson without first having registered at the code enforcement office. Each registrant shall be required to fill out a registration form giving complete identification, signature, name of employer, products sold, name of manufacturer of products, name of organization he is representing, time of operation in the county and proposed method of operation within the county and to provide such other identification of information as may be required. Any person selling or peddling any objects or goods shall, before being issued a permit, file with the county proof that the applicant or their business proposed to be conducted pursuant to the permit possesses a valid state sales tax number issued by the commissioner of revenue of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-42), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-58. - Registration fee prescribed; application for identification or registration form. 
Each registrant shall pay a non-prorated, nonrefundable regulatory fee as set by the board of commissioners. Each registrant shall make application with the county for authorization to peddle, canvass or solicit and be issued a permit which shall expire December 31 of each year. Permits will be renewed annually prior to the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-43), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-59. - Evidence of good character; issuance of permit, possession, display. 
(a)  No door-to-door salesperson, solicitor, peddler, or transient merchant shall be authorized to sell or to solicit orders until a signed application has been filed with the county and a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Code enforcement shall make an investigation, including but not limited to an investigation of the GCIC record of the applicant. The applicant will submit an annual administrative processing fee set by the board of commissioners to code enforcement for a thorough background check to be completed. No permit shall be given to any applicant who, based on the information obtained by code enforcement, shall have either a pending charge or a conviction for a crime of moral turpitude or an offense involving the elements of assault and battery, or evidence of any other action by the applicant evidencing actions which would constitute fraud and deceit under the laws of the state. 
(b)  Each person, while peddling, canvassing, soliciting or selling door-to-door within the limits of unincorporated county, shall have the permit available for inspection by any person being solicited or to code enforcement personnel, or sheriff's deputies. Possession of this permit shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any product or project by the county. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit without having first registered with the county in accordance with this chapter and obtained a permit from the county in accordance with this section, or to peddle, solicit or canvass without having the permit available in accordance with this section. Any person violating this chapter shall be punished as provided. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-44), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-60. - Applicability of provisions; exceptions. 
Except for the regulations set forth in this section nothing in this chapter shall apply to the following: 
(1)  Officers or employees in the city, county, state or federal governments or the school system, or any subdivisions thereof, when on official business; 
(2)  Any local nonprofit organization such as boy scouts, civic clubs, religious, charitable, political, or educational organizations and the like, when the membership of such club or organization does the soliciting itself; but it shall apply when the soliciting is done by a paid solicitor or by a solicitor on contract with an individual with only a percentage or portion of any sales or collections to go to the benefit of such nonprofit club or organization; 
(3)  Any person selling only agricultural or forestry products or selling food for immediate consumption at an approved location; 
(4)  Any person who conducts business at any industry or association trade show; 
(5)  Any person selling items at a rummage, garage, antique or similar sale when such person, firm, corporation or other legal entity is a resident of this state or has a permanent place of business within this state and such sale is not part of the regular business activity of such person, firm, corporation or legal entity or when the net proceeds of such sale are to be used for charitable purposes; 
(6)  Any person selling such items at a county-sponsored festival or special event, provided that such person has obtained the necessary approvals from the county to operate at said festival or event. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-45), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-61. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit may be revoked by county administrator or his designee because of any violation by the registrant (or any one of a group of registrants) of these regulations, or of any ordinance of the county, or of any state or federal law, or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and good character required in this chapter for the original registration. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-46), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-62. - Regulations for solicitors and peddlers; operating on public lands or from vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall stand on or adjacent to a street, road, or highway or on rights-of-way within the county limits for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall locate and/or conduct a business from a mobile vehicle, with the exception of mobile ice cream venders, mobile food venders that serve building/construction sites and venders located at special events, or upon the public sidewalks, streets, alleys, walkways, parks, parking lots, rights-of-way, or other public lands of the county or upon state rights-of-way within the county limits. All mobile ice cream venders are required to have a canvasser and solicitors permit per this article and shall only operate on streets where the speed limit is 25 miles per hour or less. 
(c)  The provisions of the county zoning ordinance, pertaining to outside displays, shall be applicable to any solicitor or peddler. 
(d)  The provisions of county environment ordinance, pertaining to stormwater and illicit discharges, shall be applicable to any solicitor or peddler. 
(e)  No canvasser, solicitor, peddler or door-to-door salesperson shall: 
(1)  Call at residences, offices or businesses clearly displaying a sign stating "No solicitors or peddlers invited," "No solicitation," or using similar language; 
(2)  Engage in door-to-door soliciting at residences on Sundays or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.; 
(3)  Enter any private dwelling without the consent of the owner or occupant, or to remain thereafter being requested or directed to leave; 
(4)  Fail to register and carry or produce for inspection a permit when required under this chapter; 
(5)  Make any false or deceptive statement on any registration hereunder. 
(f)  A person who is soliciting or selling on behalf of a nonprofit organization shall be required to verify the nonprofit status of such organization. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-47), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-63. - Applicability of provisions to farm products and food products. 
The legal right of the local farmer and producer to sell the products of his own farm, orchard, poultry yard, etc., is recognized. No permit shall be required from any bona fide farmer who is selling the products of his own farm, orchard, poultry yard, etc.; provided, however, that no such sales shall occur as a door-to-door salesman. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-48), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-64. - Exemption of disabled or indigent veterans of armed forces. 
(a)  Scope of exemption. It shall be lawful for any disabled or indigent veteran of the armed forces, such veteran is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1, to peddle without obtaining a permit for the privilege of so doing, and a certificate from the probate court of the county stating the fact of his being such disabled or indigent veteran shall be sufficient proof thereof; provided, that this section shall not authorize peddling ardent spirits. The privileges hereby granted shall not be transferred to or used by any other person. 
(b)  Effect of exemption. All such persons are authorized to peddle in the county without first obtaining a permit therefor from the county and without being subject to any tax therefor. 
(c)  Affidavit required. Before any such person shall avail himself of the privilege conferred by this section, he shall go before the judge of the probate court of the county and make oath in writing that he served as a soldier and that the business which he proposes to carry on (stating what he proposes to peddle) is his own, and that he will not sell or offer to sell any article for another, directly or indirectly. 
(d)  Issuance of certificate. Upon making and filing the affidavit provided for in this section, the judge of the probate court shall issue a certificate stating that such person has taken the oath prescribed, which certificate shall authorize such person making such affidavit and holding such certificate to peddle in the county without procuring a permit or being subject to any tax therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-49), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-65. - Obstruction of street, highway or sidewalk prohibited. 
No canvasser, solicitor, peddler or door-to-door salesperson authorized to engage in any business in the county shall, in carrying on such business, obstruct the whole or any part of any sidewalk, street or highway of the county and any such person peddling in the county or using the streets or sidewalks in the county for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, medicines or merchandise of any kind, shall continually move from place to place in the county, and shall not in the conduct or carrying on of such. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-50), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-66. - Enforcement. 
Citations for violation of this chapter may be issued by the county administrator or his designee, code enforcement personnel or sheriff deputies. The citation shall be returnable to and tried before the state court of the county. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter may, upon conviction, be fined in an amount, and/or imprisoned for such term as authorized by the county's Charter. Each day said violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-51), 10-24-2013) 
Secs. 8-67—8-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERSONAL CARE HOMES AND COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, adopted Oct. 23, 2014, repealed the former art. IV, §§ 8-91—8-97, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2013-16, §§ 1(6-61)—1(6-67). 

Sec. 8-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator shall mean the person designated to maintain responsibility of the household on a 24-hour basis, seven days a week and 365 days a year and who shall live on site. The administrator shall be registered with the state of Georgia department of community health. 
Employee shall mean any person who receives compensation in any form for services rendered in their duties at a community living arrangement or a personal care home and who has been approved by the state of Georgia department of community health to be employed at such a location. 
Family or family member shall mean one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that all persons are related by blood or marriage or are lawful wards, and shall also include a group of persons, not exceeding four, living and cooking together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. The members of said group need not be related by blood or marriage or be lawful wards, where said group is occupying a single dwelling unit. 
Community living arrangement shall mean any residence, whether operated for profit or not, that undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of daily personal services, supports, care, or treatment exclusively for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage and whose residential services are financially supported, in whole or in part, by funds designated through the department of human resources, division of mental health, developmental disabilities, and addictive diseases. A community living arrangement is also referred to as a "residence". 
Personal care home shall mean any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. 
Resident shall mean any non-family adult living in a community living arrangement or personal care home and receiving services, supports, care, or treatment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 8-92. - Permit required. 
Prior to offering any services to residents, the owner of a community living arrangement or a personal care home must obtain a permit to operate said facility within the unincorporated portion of Fayette County. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 8-93. - Application. 
Any person or entity making application for a permit required by section 8-92 shall submit a complete application prior to being issued a permit. A complete application shall consist of the form required by Fayette County along with the following information and documentation. An application is not considered complete unless the following material is attached thereto: 
(a)  The owner shall provide a copy of the application submitted to the state and a copy of the approved state permit. 
(b)  For the administrator and/or owner (if different), the following information shall be provided: 
(1)  Personal data including: 
a.  Name and address; 
b.  Date of birth; and 
c.  If the individual is the administrator, an affidavit of residency on site. 
(2)  The names, addresses, and phone numbers of at least three individuals, other than family members, as references. 
(3)  A background check conducted by the Fayette County Sheriff's Office. 
(c)  A complete list of all employees, as well as an affidavit of approval from the Georgia Department of Community Health or Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
(d)  An approval letter from the Fayette County Department of Environmental Health stating that the facility has an adequate septic system. 
(e)  An approval letter from the Fayette County Department of Planning and Zoning showing that the use is permitted for the relevant zoning district. 
(f)  An approval letter from the Fayette County Department of Building Permits and Inspections showing that the site has passed all relevant inspections. 
(g)  An approval letter from the Fayette County Fire Marshal showing that the site is in compliance with all life safety codes as required by state and local law. 
(h)  A copy of a liability insurance policy as required by state law. 
(i)  Any other information deemed necessary by Fayette County code enforcement or the Fayette County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 8-94. - Operational procedures. 
(a)  No community living arrangement or personal care home shall have more than three residents and one administrator living on site. 
(b)  All occupants of the permitted location who are not residents receiving care must be family or family members as defined in section 8-91 of this article. 
(c)  Every occupant of the permitted location, regardless of whether they receive care services, shall have a minimum square footage and bed space for residents as required by state and local law. 
(d)  Each permitted facility shall maintain records of treatment as required by state law and/or regulations of the Georgia Department of Community Health and/or the Georgia Department of Behavioral Health and Developmental Disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 8-95. - Permit issued. 
Upon receipt and review of a completed application, the county shall issue a permit in accordance with this article and all other relevant state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 8-96. - Fees. 
Permits shall be issued on a yearly basis and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each year. A permit fee shall be set by the Fayette County Board of Commissioners as part of a schedule of fees and shall include an application/investigation fee (which shall be nonrefundable and shall not be deducted from the permit fee) and an annual permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 8-97. - Denial or revocation of permit. 
In addition to any other justification for denial or revocation stated in this article or any other state or local law, a permit for a community living arrangement or personal care home may be revoked upon grounds including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  The permit holder has committed fraud in the rendering of services or fraud or deceit in obtaining a permit; 
(b)  The permit holder is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person or to the extent the services rendered are not being fulfilled; 
(c)  The permit holder or any employee has engaged in any fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive practices in the operation of the facility; 
(d)  The state permit has been suspended or revoked; or 
(e)  The permit holder, resident or any employee commits any criminal act at the permit holder's premises. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Sec. 8-98. - Adoption of state regulations. 
In addition to the provisions of this article, the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Services and the Georgia Department of Community Health with regard to community living arrangements, chapter 290-9-37, and personal care homes, chapter 111-8-62, as they existed on October 23, 2014, are hereby adopted as part of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 10-23-2014) 
Secs. 8-99—8-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND MASSAGE PARLORS 

Sec. 8-123. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses and massage parlors to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the county and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the county, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of the ordinance from which this article is derived, to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  This article is not intended to interfere with or suppress legitimate expression or any speech activities protected by the first amendment to the United States constitution nor is it intended to permit any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law. 
(c)  Findings and rationale. Based upon evidence of the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses presented to, and made available to the county board of commissioners in reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  A report on Zoning and Other Methods of Regulating Adult Entertainment in Amarillo, dated September 12, 1977, by the planning department, City of Amarillo, Texas; 
(2)  Adult Business Study, dated May 25, 1979, by the planning department of the City of Phoenix, Arizona; 
(3)  Regulation of Adult Uses: Issues and Analysis, dated September 14, 1982, by planning department of Beaumont, Texas; 
(4)  Adult Entertainment Business in Indianapolis: An Analysis, dated February, 1984, by the department of metropolitan development of Indianapolis, Indiana; and Los Angeles, California; 
(5)  Adult Entertainment Businesses in Oklahoma City: A Survey of Real Estate Appraisers, dated March 3, 1986, by the community development department of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; 
(6)  Director's Report on Proposed Land Use Code Text Amendment—Adult Cabarets, dated March 1989, by the department of construction and land use, Seattle, Washington; 
(7)  Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, dated June 6, 1989, Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Attorney General, State of Minnesota; 
(8)  Summary of Land Use Studies Relating to Secondary Effects of "Adult" Businesses, dated September 12, 1991, by Garden Grove, California; 
(9)  Legislative Report of the Committee on the Proposed Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses of the City of Houston, Texas, dated November 30, 1993; updated January 7, 1997; 
(10)  Study conducted by City of Rome, Georgia police department, dated March 6, 1995; 
(11)  NLC summaries of "SOB Land Uses" studies, by the national law center for children and families, dated March 31, 1996; 
(12)  A Digest of Research: The Evidence of Relationship Between Adult-Oriented Businesses and Community Crime and Disorder, dated July 1996, prepared by the chief of police for the City of St. Mary, Georgia; 
(13)  Recent Developments Regarding Local Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, by David W. Owens, dated August 1998, published by the institute of government, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; 
(14)  Crime Risk in the Vicinity of a Sexually Oriented Business: A Report to the Centralia City Attorney's Office, dated February 28, 2004, Centralia, Washington; 
(15)  Survey of Appraisers: Fort Worth & Dallas Effects of Land Uses on Surrounding Property Values, dated September, 2004, by Duncan Associates to the City of Forth Worth, Texas; 
(16)  Report of Thomas J. O'Loughlin, police chief to the City of Milford, Massachusetts, dated May 6, 2008; the board of commissioners finds: 
a.  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
b.  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
c.  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the county has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the county's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and non-sexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the county's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the county. The county finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
The county hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, including the studies, opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-81), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-124. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning. 
Adult arcade means an establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, offers or provides to the public one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, which are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means an establishment which, as one of its substantial business purposes: 
(1)  Offers or provides books, magazines, films, videotapes, compact disks, digital video discs, slides or other visual representations, or software (whether for viewing off-premises or on-premises by use of motion picture machines, televisions, monitors, computers or other image-producing devices), periodicals, or other printed or pictorial materials which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, and which are distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Offers or provides instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for stimulation of human genital organs, for sadomasochistic use or abuse, or for use in conjunction with "specified sexual activities," excluding personal lubricants and creams, condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products. 
Adult cabaret means an establishment, which as a substantial business purpose offers or provides live entertainment, where performers could be appear in a state of nudity, semi-nudity, or fully clothed, which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult encounter parlor means an establishment which as a substantial business purpose offers or provides a premises where customers either congregate, associate, or consort with employees who engage in specified sexual activities with or in the presence of such customers, or who display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such customers, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers. 
Adult items includes any of the following: books, magazines, films, videotapes, compact discs, video discs, digital video discs, slides, software, or other visual representations (whether for viewing off-premises or on-premises by use of motion picture machines, televisions, monitors, computers or other image-producing devices), periodicals, or other printed or pictorial materials which are intended to produce sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to customers, and which are distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas; instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for stimulation of human genital organs, for sadomasochistic use or abuse, or for use in conjunction with specified sexual activities, excluding personal lubricants and creams, condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products. 
Adult modeling studio means an establishment which as a substantial business purpose offers or provides to customers figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
Adult movie theater means an establishment which as a substantial business purpose offers or provides the exhibition to customers of motion pictures, films, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers. 
Adult service means a dance, performance or other activity, including, but not limited to, service of food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking, or listening conducted for any consideration in an adult service business by a person who exposes one or more specified anatomical areas or performs a specified sexual activity during all or part of the time that the person is providing the service. 
Adult service business means a commercial establishment where any adult service is provided to patrons in the regular course of business and as one of the substantial business purposes of the establishment. 
Adult service provider or providers means any person who provides an adult service, or bathhouse technician. 
Adult theatre means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Adult video facility means a commercial establishment which, as one of its substantial business purpose, offers or provides films, motion pictures, videocassette projections, slides, photographs or other visual media characterized by depiction of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" which are shown in the regular course of business and as a substantial business purpose of the establishment. The term "adult video facility" does not include a theater where all viewing occurs in a common area with seating for 50 or more persons. 
Applicant means the applicant for a permit shall be the intended operator of the sexually oriented business. 
Bath means any method of washing or cleansing of the structure of the human body or any external part thereof with water or other liquid, vapor or steam, including but not limited to steam rooms, cabinet baths, sauna baths, sitz baths, colon irrigations, showers and baths of all kinds. 
Bath technician means any person who for any consideration whatsoever administers a bath to another person at a bathhouse. 
Bathhouse means any establishment which, as a substantial business purpose, offers or provides baths administered by bath technicians or where any person engages in any or all of the activities mentioned in the definition of bath, provided that nothing in this section contained shall be construed to include a duly licensed hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, physician, surgeon, physical therapist, chiropractor, osteopath, naturopath, podiatrist, or person holding a drugless practitioner's certificate under the laws of the state. Furthermore, this definition shall exclude from its operation establishments wherein duly licensed barbers and cosmetologists administer baths only to the scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulders. 
Child care facility means an agency, organization, or individual providing care for four or more children not related by blood or marriage or not the legal wards of the attendant adult. 
County means Fayette County, Georgia. 
County administrator means the administrator of the county or such person as the county administrator may designate to perform the duties of the county administrator under this article. 
Conduct any business in a sexually oriented business means any person who does any one or more of the following shall be deemed to be conducting business in a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Operates a cash register, cash drawer or other depository on the sexually oriented business premises where cash funds or records of credit card or other credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation of the establishment or the activities conducted therein are kept; 
(2)  Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(4)  Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other persons into the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of the foregoing activities on the sexually oriented business premises. 
Customer means any person who: 
(1)  Is allowed to enter a sexually oriented business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; 
(2)  Enters a sexually oriented business and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Is a member of and on the premises of a sexually oriented business operating as a private club. 
Employee means any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of a sexually oriented business, whether as an independent contractor or otherwise, or who works in or about a sexually oriented business and who receives compensation for such service or work from the operator or owner of the sexually oriented business or from the customers therein. 
Entertainment means any act or performance, such as a play, skit, reading, revue, pantomime, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease, whether performed by employees, agents, contractors, or customers. The term "entertainment" shall also mean bartenders, waiters, waitresses, or other employees exposing specified anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual activities in the presence of customers. 
Escort means a person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its substantial business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establish or establishment means any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
Exterior portion means any part of the physical structure of a sexually oriented business, including a wall, veneer, door, fence, roof, roof covering, or window, which is visible from any public way or public property. 
Floor space means the floor inside a sexually oriented business that is visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. 
Influential interest means any of the following: 
(1)  The actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business; 
(2)  Ownership of a financial interest of 30 percent or more of a business or of any class of voting securities of a business; or 
(3)  Holding an office (e.g., president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Manager means any person, who supervises, directs or manages any employee of a sexually oriented business or any other person who conducts any business in a sexually oriented business with respect to any activity conducted on the premises of the sexually oriented business, including any on-site manager. 
Massage is the manipulation of soft tissue and includes but is not limited to effleurage (stroking skin without going deep), petrissage (kneading movement by lifting and grasping), tapotement (brisk blows in rapid alternating fashion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes, and other movements, whether by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus, for the purpose of muscular massage. This may include the use of oil, salt glows, hot and cold packs, and other recognized forms of massage therapy. The term "massage therapy" shall not include a diagnosis, service, or procedure normally provided by a doctor of medicine, doctor of chiropractic, or doctor of podiatry, nor shall it apply to athletic trainers, technicians or physical therapists who act by a prescription or under the supervision of an authorized licensee to practice medicine or surgery. Massage shall not include any "massage therapy" performed by a licensed "massage therapist" pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.). 
Massage parlor means any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentation, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment involving manipulation of the human body occurs as a part of or in connection with specified sexual activities, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto, exposes his specified anatomical areas or performs a specified sexual activity. The definition of massage parlor shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program. A facility which is operated for the purpose of massage therapy performed by a massage therapist is not a massage parlor. A "massage therapist" means a person who: 
(1)  Has graduated from a massage therapy program of at least 500 hours of training approved by the state nonpublic postsecondary education commission or by a technical college of the department of technical and adult education or by a university or higher education institute of the state, or from a school with comparable approval or accreditation from another state with transcripts indication completion of at least 500 hours of training in massage therapy; or 
(2)  Is currently licensed, certified, or registered as a massage therapist in another jurisdiction, state, or territory of the United States or of a foreign country, which requires graduation from a massage therapy program of at least 500 hours of training. 
Multifamily tract means any residential tract that contains any building or buildings or portion or portions thereof, that is designed, built, rented, leased, sold, let out or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied, in separate units, each containing living, sleeping and food preparation facilities, as the homes or residences of three or more families, groups, or individuals living independently of each other. 
Nudity or state of nudity means a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover the cleft of the human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or female breast or breasts or any portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
On-site manager means a person charged by an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business with the responsibility for direct supervision of the operation of the sexually oriented business and with monitoring and observing all areas of the sexually oriented business to which customers are admitted at all times during which the sexually oriented business is open for business or customers are on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
Operator means the manager or other natural person principally in charge of a sexually oriented business. 
Owner or owners means the proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all general partners if a partnership, or the corporation and all officers, directors, and persons holding 20 percent or more of the outstanding shares of a corporation. 
Permit means a current, valid permit issued by the county pursuant to the terms of this article to an operator of a sexually oriented business, to an adult service provider, manager, operator or other adult service employee. 
Public park means a publicly owned or leased tract of land, whether situated in the county or not, designated, dedicated, controlled, maintained and operated for use by the general public for active or passive recreational or leisure purposes by the county or any political subdivision of the state and containing improvements, pathways, access or facilities intended for public recreational use. The term "public park" shall not include parkways, public roads, rights-of-way, esplanades, traffic circles, easements or traffic triangles unless such tracts or areas contain and provide improvements or access to a recreational or leisure use by the public. 
Religious institution means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building, whether located within the county or not, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and related religious activities or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Residential means pertaining to the use of land, whether situated within the county or not, for premises such as homes, townhomes, patio homes, manufactured homes, duplexes, condominiums and apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein. A premises which is designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein shall be deemed to be residential in character unless it is actually occupied and used exclusively for other purposes. Hotels, motels, boardinghouses, nursing homes, college or university dormitories, hospitals, and nursery schools shall not be considered to be residential. The term "residential" shall also include any unimproved tract zoned for residential uses by the zoning ordinances of the county, and any unimproved tract within the county zoned for residential uses by the zoning ordinances of the county. 
School means a building, whether situated within the county or not, where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the playgrounds, stadia and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term is limited to: 
(1)  Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education, in which any regular kindergarten or grades one through 12 classes are taught; and 
(2)  Special educational facilities in which students who have physical or learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular classes in kindergarten or any of grades one through 12. 
Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Separate area means any portion of the interior of a sexually oriented business separated from any other portion of a sexually oriented business by any wall, partition or other divider. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult encounter parlor, adult lounge, adult modeling studio, adult movie theater, adult theatre, massage parlor, escort agency or any establishment which has a substantial business purpose of offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "sexually oriented business" shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  Any business operated by or employing state licensed psychologists, licensed physical therapists, licensed athletic trainers, licensed cosmetologists, or licensed barbers performing functions authorized under the state permits held; 
(2)  Any business operated by or employing state licensed physicians or state licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts; or 
(3)  Any retail establishment whose major business is the offering of wearing apparel for sale to customers. 
Sexually oriented business manager or managers means a person on the premises of sexually oriented business who has overall supervisory authority over the operation of the business. 
Sign means any display, design, pictorial, or other representation, which shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that the same is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business and that is used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services or merchandise available at such sexually oriented business. The term "sign" shall also include such representations painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a sexually oriented business as well as such representations painted on or otherwise affixed to any part of the tract upon which such a sexually oriented business is situated. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; 
b.  Anus or cleft of the buttocks. Attire that is insufficient to comply with this requirement includes, but is not limited to, G-strings, T-backs, thongs and any other similar garment that does not completely and opaquely cover the cleft of the buttocks; 
c.  Female breast or breasts or any portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
d.  Any combination of the foregoing; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, masturbation, oral copulation, flagellation, bestiality, fondling, or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock or female breast or breasts; or 
(4)  Any combination of the foregoing. 
Substantial business purpose means a business within the county which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  At least 25 percent of the business's displayed merchandise consists of the "adult items"; 
(2)  At least 25 percent of the wholesale value of the business's displayed merchandise consists of the "adult items"; 
(3)  At least 25 percent of the retail value (defined as the price charged to customers) of the business's displayed merchandise consists of the "adult items"; 
(4)  At least 25 percent of the business's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of the "adult items"; 
(5)  The business maintains at least 25 percent of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of the "adult items" (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); 
(6)  The business maintains at least 500 square feet of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of the "adult items" (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); 
(7)  The business regularly offers for sale or rental at least 2,000 of the "adult items"; 
(8)  The business regularly features the "adult items" and regularly advertises itself or holds itself out, by using "adult," "adults-only," "XXX," "sex," "erotic," or substantially similar language, as a business that caters to adult sexual interests; or 
(9)  The business maintains an "adult arcade." 
Tract means a contiguous parcel of land under common ownership, whether situated within the county or not. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business includes: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; and 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
Zoning administrator means the person appointed and responsible for the enforcement of the zoning ordinances of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-82), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-125. - Construction of definitions. 
Words and terms not explicitly defined in these regulations or in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-83), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-126. - Administration. 
(a)  The administration of this article, including the duty of prescribing forms, is vested in the county administrator or his designee, except as otherwise specifically provided. The code enforcement section, sheriff's office and zoning administrator shall render assistance in the administration and enforcement of this article as follows: 
(1)  The sheriff shall make sheriff's office facilities and personnel available to fingerprint an applicant for a permit. The cost of fingerprinting shall be paid by the applicant at the time the service is provided. Records of fingerprints so obtained shall be maintained at the sheriff's office in the normal course of business. 
(2)  Code enforcement shall have a criminal history inquiry conducted on all persons listed as applicants in a permit application. The inquiry shall be limited to determining whether an applicant for a permit has a criminal conviction of the type described and for the period indicated in section 8-129 of this article. Code enforcement shall notify the county administrator or his designee in the event such criminal conviction is found to exist. 
(3)  The zoning administrator shall confirm whether the proposed location of the sexually oriented business is in the appropriate zoning district. 
(4)  Nothing herein is intended to prohibit or restrict code enforcement or the zoning administrator from providing additional assistance as may derive from their normal duties and responsibilities or as may be requested by the county administrator or his designee. In no event shall any assistance as described herein, or the absence of such assistance, delay or extend the time period specified for the county administrator or his designee to act on a permit application. 
(b)  An application for a permit or for the renewal of a permit, made pursuant to this article shall be submitted to code enforcement, which shall investigate the application and submit its findings to the county administrator or his designee who shall grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this article. The county administrator or his designee shall also suspend or revoke a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  A permit issued pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in and for which it is issued and may be renewed annually. 
(d)  A permit, if granted, shall state on its face: 
(1)  The name of the permit holder; 
(2)  The name and address of the permitted premises; 
(3)  The date of issuance of the permit; 
(4)  The particular classification or classifications of sexually oriented business for which the permit is granted, pursuant to the classifications in subsection (e) of this section; and 
(5)  The permit number. 
(e)  Sexually oriented businesses shall be classified as follows, based upon the information in the application and subject to subsequent inspection for verification: 
(1)  Adult arcade; 
(2)  Adult bookstore; 
(3)  Adult cabaret; 
(4)  Adult encounter parlor; 
(5)  Adult modeling studio; 
(6)  Adult movie theater; 
(7)  Adult video facility; 
(8)  Bathhouse; or 
(9)  Escort agency. 
(f)  Massage parlors are prohibited as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-84), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-127. - Permit; purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the county, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the county. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this article to in any way condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-85), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-128. - Sexually oriented business permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid permit issued pursuant to this article for the particular classification of sexually oriented business sought to be operated. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented business in an establishment that is licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented business under any name or designation, or under any premises name or designation, or at any premises address not specified in a valid permit issued pursuant to this article. Each additional premises sought to be operated as a sexually oriented business shall require a separate permit. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a sexually oriented business to hire or engage any provider, employee or manager who does not hold a valid permit as required under this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, or conduct any business in a sexually oriented business located within the county unless the permit is posted at or near the principal public entrance to the sexually oriented business in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to patrons who enter the premises. 
(f)  In any prosecution under this section, it shall be presumed that there was no permit at the time of the alleged offense, unless a permit was then posted as provided. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-86), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-129. - Application for permit. 
(a)  A person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business shall make application for a permit in person at the code enforcement office. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the county administrator or his designee and obtainable from code enforcement. The application shall be signed under oath by each individual listed as an applicant and notarized. An application shall be deemed filed with the county when code enforcement has received the required fee in full, in addition to a completed application with all information required in subsection (c) of this section, and the photograph and fingerprints of each applicant. The application shall be in duplicate, including all addendum or attachments thereto, with one copy being kept on file with code enforcement and one copy being transmitted to the county administrator or his designee. 
(b)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, that individual must be listed in the application for the permit as the applicant and also as the designated permit holder. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is a legal entity other than an individual, each officer, manager, or general partner of the entity, and any other individual who has an influential interest in the business, must be listed in the application as an applicant, with the individual appearing in person to make application being further designated as the primary applicant with general authority to act on behalf of the entity in connection with the application, and the entity listed as the designated permit holder. Each applicant shall provide his photograph and fingerprints as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  In addition to such other information as may be requested on the face of the application form, the application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, premises address, business mailing address if different for the premises address, and phone number of the proposed sexually oriented business; 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the designated permit holder; 
(3)  Where the person seeking to operate the sexually oriented business is other than an individual, the entity's state of origination and date of formation; 
(4)  The name under which the sexually oriented business is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided; 
(5)  The telephone number of the sexually oriented business; 
(6)  The address, plat and/or legal description of the tract of land on which the sexually oriented business is to be located; 
(7)  If the sexually oriented business is in operation, the date on which the owners acquired the sexually oriented business for which the permit is sought, and the date on which the sexually oriented business began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for which the permit is sought; 
(8)  If the sexually oriented business is not in operation, the expected start-up date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the permit). If the expected start-up date is to be more than ten days following the date of issuance of the permit, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same; 
(9)  Each applicant's full true name and any other names, aliases or stage names used in the preceding five years; 
(10)  Each applicant's current residential mailing address and telephone number. This information shall be supplemented in writing to code enforcement by letter postmarked not later than ten days after any change in this information; 
(11)  Written proof of each applicant's age, in the form of either a current driver's permit with picture or other picture identification issued by an appropriate governmental agency; 
(12)  The issuing jurisdiction and the effective date of any permit or permit relating to the operation of a sexually oriented business or relating to the provision of any adult services which is held or has been held at any time by any applicant or by the designated permit holder, whether any such permit has been revoked or suspended, and the reason or reasons therefor; 
(13)  Any "specified criminal" acts committed by the applicant or the intended permit holder for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the "specified criminal" acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or statutory rape, prostitution, bestiality, sodomy, sexual assault, kidnapping, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering, or any conviction in another jurisdiction for conduct which, if carried out in the county or the state, would constitute a specified criminal act under this section; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for the "specified criminal" acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or statutory rape, prostitution, bestiality, sodomy, sexual assault, kidnapping, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering, or any conviction in another jurisdiction for conduct which, if carried out in the county or the state, would constitute a specified criminal act under this section; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period for the "specified criminal" acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or statutory rape, prostitution, bestiality, sodomy, sexual assault, kidnapping, gambling, family violence or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering, or any conviction in another jurisdiction for conduct which, if carried out in the county or the state, would constitute a specified criminal act under this section; 
d.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
(14)  The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process; 
(15)  The names of the sexually oriented business managers who will have actual supervisory authority over the operation of the business. This information shall be supplemented in writing to code enforcement by letter postmarked no later than ten days after any change in this information; and 
(16)  An accurate, to-scale, but not necessarily professionally drawn, floor plan or diagram of the business premises clearly showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business, the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted, the location of all manager's stations and overhead lighting fixtures, and clearly designating all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Code enforcement may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(d)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Payment in full of the fee as required; 
(2)  A certified copy of the trade name certificate filed in compliance with the trade name statute of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, if the sexually oriented business is to be operated under an assumed name; 
(3)  If the sexually oriented business is a state corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto; 
(4)  If the sexually oriented business is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with all amendments thereto; 
(5)  If the sexually oriented business is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the state, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the secretary of the state; 
(6)  If the sexually oriented business is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the secretary of the state; 
(7)  Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the sexually oriented business is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed; 
(8)  If the persons identified as the fee owners of the tract of land in subsection (7) of this section are not also the owners of the sexually oriented business, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other documents evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners of the sexually oriented business to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the sexually oriented business for the purpose of the operation of the sexually oriented business; and 
(9)  Any of subsections (d)(1) through (d)(8) of this section, shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished code enforcement with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
(e)  The application shall contain a statement under oath that: 
(1)  The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and 
(2)  The applicant has read the provisions of this article. 
(f)  A separate application and permit shall be required for each sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-87), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-130. - Fees. 
Every application for issuance or renewal of a sexually oriented business permit shall be accompanied by a non-prorated and nonrefundable application fee to be set by the board of commissioners and changed as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-88), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-131. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  Within 45 days after the completed application for a sexually oriented business permit is filed with code enforcement, the county administrator or his designee shall mail to the designated permit holder a permit or a written notice of granting of the permit or of intent to deny. 
(b)  The county administrator or his designee shall issue a permit to the applicant unless one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant's sexually oriented business is located within 1,000 feet of any school, religious institution, public park, child care facility, or zoned for residential purposes. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the front door of the applicant's sexually oriented business to the nearest point on the property line of such school, religious institution, public park, child care facility, or zoned for residential purposes, as certified by a registered surveyor; 
(2)  The applicant's sexually oriented business is located within 1,000 feet of any other sexually oriented business for which there is a permit under this article. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the front door of the applicant's sexually oriented business to the front door of any other sexually oriented business, as certified by a registered surveyor; 
(3)  The applicant's sexually oriented business is located in a section of the county that is zoned other than the M-1 light industrial district; 
(4)  The applicant holds a license, issued under chapter 4 of this Code, to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages upon the premises of the intended sexually oriented business; 
(5)  The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application; 
(6)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(7)  The applicant, or the intended permit holder, has been convicted of a specified criminal act; 
(8)  The application or the sexually oriented business does not meet any other requirement of this article; 
(9)  The operator has had a permit revoked for the same sexually oriented business within the 12-month period next proceeding the date that the application was filed. The fact that a revocation is being appealed shall have no effect; 
(10)  The applicant has not demonstrated that the owner of the sexually oriented business owns or holds a lease for the property or the applicable portion thereof upon which the sexually oriented business will be situated or has a legally enforceable right to acquire the same; 
(11)  The applicant or the designated permit holder has failed to comply with or is in violation of applicable provisions of the zoning ordinances, or the building codes, development standards or other land use ordinances and regulations of the county relating to the business or activity to be conducted under the permit; Within the past two years, the applicant or the designated permit holder has had a permit similar to that authorized under this article, but issued in another jurisdiction, revoked on the basis of conduct which would be a ground for revocation of a permit issued under this article if committed in the county. The fact that the revocation is being appealed at the time of the decision on this application shall have no effect; 
(12)  The granting of a permit would violate a state or federal statute, county ordinance, or a court order. 
(c)  Property uses and distances for original applications shall be determined as of the time that the application is filed. If a renewal application is timely filed as provided in this article of this article, the property uses and measurements for the renewal application shall be determined as of the time that the original application for the sexually oriented business was filed. If not timely filed, renewal applications shall be subject to the same fees and shall be treated in the same manner in all respects as original applications. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-89), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-132. - Appeal from denial of permit. 
(a)  In the event that, prior to submitting the application to the county administrator or his designee, code enforcement determines that an applicant is not eligible for a permit, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within 20 days of the receipt of its application by code enforcement, provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply. An applicant may appeal the decision of code enforcement regarding such denial by filing a written request for a hearing with the county administrator or his designee within ten days after he is given notice of such denial. The county administrator's or his designee's decision on the application shall be final unless an appeal of said decision is timely filed. An appeal shall not stay the county administrator's or his designee's decision on the issuance of a permit. The applicant's written request for a hearing shall set out the grounds on which the denial is challenged. The hearing shall be conducted before the board of commissioners at a reasonable date and time established by the board and after reasonable notice to the applicant. At the hearing, the board of commissioners shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the application. Hearings shall be conducted under procedures established by the board, which shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall conduct the hearing within 30 days after receipt of the applicant's written request for a hearing unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. The board of commissioners shall render a written decision and issue notice thereof to the applicant within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(c)  In any instance in which the applicant's establishment is to be situated within 1,000 feet, as measured hereunder, from another proposed establishment for which a previously filed permit application under this article has been denied, and the previously filed application is still subject to appeals, the county administrator or his designee may grant the permit on a conditional basis, subject to the outcome of the appeals on the previous application. A permit so issued may be withdrawn and denied effective upon the third day after notice thereof is given to the operator following the resolution of the appeals on the prior permit. In case of denial the applicant shall have the same rights of appeal hereunder as if the permit had been denied in the first instance. 
(d)  The provisions of section 8-131 shall not be construed to prohibit a sexually oriented business for which there is a permit from relocating to another location situated within 1,000 feet of its existing location, provided that the proposed location complies with all applicable requirements of this article other than its proximity to its own existing sexually oriented business location. An original permit application shall be required to be filed for the proposed relocation, and code enforcement shall conditionally grant the application, if granted, on the stipulation that the permit will not actually be issued until the applicant discontinues operation at its existing location and surrenders the permit for its existing location. Any such relocation must be completed within 180 days from the date that the permit is conditionally granted or the conditional grant of the application will become void. Pending the removal of the sexually oriented business to its new location, both the old and new locations shall be deemed to be operating under a permit for purpose of measurements to locations of other proposed sexually oriented business for which applications may be filed. 
(e)  In any instance in which the proposed sexually oriented business tract description submitted by an applicant pursuant to this article for a permit reflects a tract or parcel of land that has resulted from a subdivision of property for which compliance with the applicable subdivision requirements of this article was required, and the zoning administrator determines that the property has not been lawfully subdivided in accordance with the proper subdivision requirements, then the code enforcement shall cause all measurements and determinations regarding the issuance of the permit to be made on the basis of the parent tract from which the subdivision was made, rather than the subdivided tract. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-90), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-133. - Nontransferability of permit. 
(a)  Permits issued under this article are not transferable as to permit holder or location. A permit holder shall not conduct a different classification of a sexually oriented business than that designated in the permit or conduct a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the application. No sexually oriented business shall be conducted under any name or under any designation or classification not specified in the permit for that business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface, or alter a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-91), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-134. - Term; renewal. 
Each permit shall be valid until December 31 of the year of issue and shall expire on December 31 of the year of issue, unless sooner revoked, or surrendered. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-92), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-135. - Suspension of permit. 
The county administrator or his designee shall suspend a permit for a period of 30 days if a permit holder is convicted of violating a provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-93), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-136. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The county administrator or his designee shall revoke a permit issued pursuant to this article if: 
(1)  The permit holder knowingly allowed a person less than 18 years of age to enter a sexually oriented business; 
(2)  The permit holder is convicted of a violation of this article in any 12-month period; 
(3)  The permit holder is convicted of any crime or crimes on the basis of which a permit may be denied under section 8-131; 
(4)  The permit holder gave false or misleading information in the application; 
(5)  The sexually oriented business has not been open for business for a period of 30 consecutive days, unless due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner, and the owner is proceeding with due diligence, given all attendant circumstances, to open or reopen the establishment; 
(6)  The permit was erroneously issued in contravention of the criteria of this article; or 
(7)  The permit holder has knowingly operated or worked in the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permit was suspended. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-94), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-137. - Permit renewal. 
(a)  A permit may be renewed by filing an application for renewal on a form provided by code enforcement. The application for renewal shall be received by code enforcement not less than 45 days before the expiration of the permit. When the application for renewal is received less than 45 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit shall not be delayed, postponed or otherwise affected. 
(b)  The county administrator or his designee may deny an application for renewal for any reason for which a new application may be denied or revoked under this article. 
(c)  An application for issuance or renewal of a sexually oriented business permit shall be accompanied by such fee as required. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-95), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-138. - Procedure for revocation, suspension and denial of renewal of existing permits. 
(a)  If the county administrator or his designee determines that grounds exist to suspend or revoke a permit, or to deny an application for renewal of a permit, the county administrator or his designee shall notify the designated permit holder or permit applicant, as applicable, in writing of the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke, which notice shall include a summary of the grounds therefor. The notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the address of the designated permit holder or permit applicant listed in the current year's permit application or renewal application. 
(b)  Within ten days after the effective date of notice, the respondent may provide to the county administrator or his designee in writing a response which shall include a statement of reasons why the permit, or renewal thereof, should not be denied, suspended, or revoked and which may include a request for a hearing. If a response is not received by the county administrator or his designee in the time stated, the denial of renewal, suspension or revocation shall be final, and notice thereof shall be sent to the applicable designated permit holder, or permit applicant by registered or certified mail. 
(c)  Within ten days after receipt of a response, the county administrator or his designee shall withdraw the intent to deny the renewal, suspend, or revoke, and so notify the respondent, or shall deny the renewal, impose a suspension or revoke the permit. Following a decision to deny renewal, suspend or revoke a permit, county administrator or his designee shall send notice thereof to the respondent, which shall include a statement of the reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation. The effective date of notice shall be the date the notice is actually received or five days after the date the notice is mailed, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-96), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-139. - Appeal from suspension, revocation or denial of renewal. 
(a)  An applicant may appeal the decision of the county administrator or his designee regarding a suspension, revocation or denial of renewal of a permit by filing a written request for a hearing before the board of commissioners with the county administrator or his designee within ten days after he is given notice of such denial. The county administrator's or his designee's decision on the application shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. The applicant's written request for a hearing shall set out the grounds on which the county administrator's or his designee's decision is challenged. The hearing shall be conducted before the board of commissioners' at a reasonable date and time established by the board and after reasonable notice to the applicant. At the hearing, the board of commissioners shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the application. Hearings shall be conducted under procedures established by the board of commissioners, which shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall conduct the hearing within 30 days after receipt of the applicant's written request for a hearing unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. The board of commissioners shall render a written decision and issue notice thereof to the applicant within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-97), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-140. - Persons younger than 18 and intoxicated persons prohibited from entry; attendant required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time that the sexually oriented business is open for business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is visibly intoxicated to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time that the sexually oriented business is open for business. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such sexually oriented business's regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to not allow any person under the age of 18 years to enter the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state or another official government agency containing a description of the person so identified, such person's photograph, and such person's date of birth. Appropriate forms of such identification include a passport, or military identification card. Appropriate forms of identification shall not include a birth certificate nor any traffic citation or complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-101), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-141. - Exterior portions of sexually oriented business. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business to be visible from any point outside such sexually oriented business. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to opaquely cover each non-opaque area through which a person outside the premises of the sexually oriented business may otherwise see inside the sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-102), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-142. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, or manager of an adult sexually oriented business to knowingly allow the sale, dispersion or consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the premises, including all outdoor areas, of a sexually oriented business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator or manager of an adult sexually oriented business to knowingly allow any person, whether a patron, employee or otherwise, to bring any alcoholic beverage onto the premises of the sexually oriented business, including all outdoor areas. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-103), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-143. - Access, visibility, lighting, supervision. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or manager of any sexually oriented business to permit any employee to provide any entertainment to any customer in any separate area within a sexually oriented business to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier, regardless of whether entry to such separate area is by invitation, admission fee, club membership fee or any form of gratuity or consideration. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to allow immediate access by any law enforcement officer, county fire department official, code enforcement personnel, or health official to any portion of the premises of the sexually oriented business upon request for purpose of inspection of such premises for compliance with this article, or any other applicable law. 
(c)  Each sexually oriented business shall be equipped with lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as measured at four feet above floor level. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to ensure that at least one on-site manager is on duty on the premises at all times during which the sexually oriented business is open for business or during which customers are on the premises. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business to ensure that all persons acting as managers or adult service providers on the premises hold and display permits under division 4 of this article, and that adult service providers comply with this article. 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the on-site manager to ensure that no adult service provider or manager is allowed or suffered to conduct any business on the premises of a sexually oriented business unless the on-site manager thereof has in his possession or control an on-site card, as referenced in this article for the manager or adult service provider. On-site cards shall be made available for immediate inspection by any law enforcement officer, fire department official, code enforcement personnel, or health official. Managers or adult service providers working at more than one sexually oriented business may retrieve their on-site cards upon departing the premises in order to present them to a manager at any other sexually oriented business where such persons are employed to hold while the manager or adult service provider remains on those premises. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager to maintain a complete list of all persons, including names and addresses, which conduct any business on the premises and are required to obtain a permit under division 4 of this article. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of an owner and manager of a sexually oriented business to provide that all off-street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually oriented business are illuminated from sunset to one hour following the time of closing of the sexually oriented business with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce specified criminal conduct as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-104), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-144. - Adult service business; operating requirements. 
An adult service business shall be provided in accordance with the following regulations. Knowing failure of a permit holder or manager to ensure compliance with the regulations on the premises is a violation of this article by the permit holder or manager. 
(1)  A person employed or acting as an adult service provider or manager shall have a valid permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. A permit or a certified copy thereof for each manager or provider shall be maintained on the premises in the custody of the manager at all times during which a person is serving as a provider or manager on the premises. Such permits shall be provided by the manager for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other authorized county official. 
(2)  A person under the age of 18 years may not receive, observe or provide an adult service. 
(3)  A person may not provide an adult service in an adult service business except upon a stage elevated at least 18 inches above floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated area thereof within which the adult service is provided, shall be a distance of at least three feet from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons may be present. The stage or designated area thereof shall be separated from the area in which patrons may be located by a solid barrier or railing the top of which is at least three feet in height. A provider or patron may not extend any part of his body over or beyond the barrier or railing. 
(4)  An adult service provider, in the course of providing an adult service, may not perform or simulate any specified sexual activities. 
(5)  Adult services may not be provided between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on and between Monday through Sunday morning, or between the hours of 12:01 a.m. on Sunday to 10:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(6)  An adult service may not be provided in any location which is not visible by direct line of sight at all times from a manager's station located in a portion of the premises which is accessible to patrons of the adult service business. 
(7)  An adult service shall not be provided in any location or area of a premises so as to be visible or viewable from a public right-of-way. 
(8)  An adult service provider shall wear his adult service work identification card at all times while on the premises except while providing an adult service. The card shall be affixed to clothing on the front of the person and above waist level so that the picture and permit number are clearly visible to patrons. 
(9)  A sexually oriented business manager shall be on the premises of an adult service business at all times during which any adult service is provided on the premises. The manager shall wear his work identification card, in the manner described above. 
(10)  An employee shall not touch the breast, buttocks, or genitals of a patron or another employee while on the premises, nor may a patron touch the breast, buttocks, or genitals of an employee. 
(11)  A sign, in a form prescribed by the county summarizing the provisions of this section shall be posted near the entrance of an adult service business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(12)  An adult service provider shall not touch a customer or the clothing of a customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities. 
(13)  An adult service provider shall not approach closer than three feet to any customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities. 
(14)  An adult service provider shall not provide an adult service, expose any specified anatomical areas or perform specified sexual activities in the presence of a customer in any separate area within a sexually oriented business to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier separating entry to such are from any other area of the sexually oriented business. 
(15)  An adult service provider or adult service provider shall not, by bending, stooping and other postural movements, display the interior of the anus or vagina. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, §1(6-105), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-145. - Adult video facility; operating requirements. 
An adult video facility shall be operated in accordance with the following regulations. Knowing failure of a permit holder or a manager to ensure compliance with the regulations on the premises is a violation of this article by the permit holder or manager. 
(1)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle, as measured at the floor level. 
(2)  The premises shall be configured in such a way that a patron, whether sitting or standing, is visible below the waist by direct line of sight from a manager's station at all times during which the patron is viewing video material or other visual media material characterized by depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. The manager's station shall be located in a portion of the premises accessible to patrons and shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be an unobstructed view from the manager's station. It is the duty of the permit holder or manager to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. 
(3)  A sexually oriented business manager shall be on the premises of an adult video facility at all times that the facility is open for business. The manager shall wear his identification card in the manner described above. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-106), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-146. - Other regulations. 
A permit required by this article is in addition to any other permits required by the county, or the state to engage in the business or occupation. Persons engaging in activities described in this article, including the operation of a sexually oriented business, shall comply with all other ordinances and laws, including the zoning ordinances, as may be required, to engage in the business or profession. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-111), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-147. - Penalty. 
(a)  Violation of any requirement or prohibition stated in this article is a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months. With respect to a violation that is continuous in nature, each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The revocation or suspension of any permit shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of a permit. Imposition of a criminal penalty shall be a prerequisite to the revocation or suspension of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-112), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-148. - Injunction. 
The operation of a sexually oriented business without a valid permit in violation of this article shall constitute a nuisance, and any person who operates or causes to be operated such business shall be subject to a suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-113), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-149. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all persons engaging in the activities described herein. Persons so engaged as of the effective date of this article shall be in full compliance with the provisions of this article, including receipt of any permit required by this article, within 120 days from its effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-114), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-150. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a permit to act as an adult service provider or a sexually oriented business manager of or in a sexually oriented business. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator and owners of each sexually oriented business to ensure that no person acts as an adult service provider or manager of or in the sexually oriented business unless that person holds a permit issued by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-117), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-151. - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  Any person who desires to obtain an original or renewal permit shall make application to code enforcement in person. The application shall be made under oath upon a form prescribed by code enforcement and shall include: 
(1)  The name, home street address and mailing address (if different) of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's age, date and place of birth; 
(3)  Proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the identity of the applicant, including at least one photographic identity card issued by a governmental agency; 
(4)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(5)  A list of any specified criminal acts, and time of service in jail or prison, as specified; and 
(6)  Two passport-type photographs of the applicant of a size specified code enforcement, which shall become part of the photographic identity cards if a permit is issued. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee set by the county board of commissioners. Each applicant shall be required to provide fingerprints taken by the county sheriff office for a fee, equal to that fee charged by the state, to be used to verify the applicant's identity and criminal history information. Each applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization form authorizing code enforcement to request on behalf of the applicant criminal history reports from GCIC or any other appropriate state or federal government entity. 
(c)  Code enforcement shall issue the permit of the application unless he finds that the applicant has been convicted of or spent time in jail or prison for an offense specified in the applicable provisions of this article within the time specified therein. If the application is not granted, then the applicant shall be mailed notice of the grounds and of their right to provide evidence and request a hearing as provided below, within ten days from the date of filing of the application. 
(d)  Each permit issued by code enforcement shall consist of two photographic identification cards, a personal card and an on-site card. 
(e)  Any applicant whose application is denied and who requests a hearing on the denial shall be granted a hearing within ten days following the receipt of the request by code enforcement. The hearing shall be conducted as provided in this article. 
(f)  If any personal card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder thereof shall immediately notify code enforcement and request a replacement, which shall be issued for a fee decided by the board of commissioners within three days following verification of the identity of the holder. 
(g)  No permit application shall be accepted nor shall a permit be issued to any person who does not provide proof that he is at least 18 years old. Any permit issued by virtue of any misrepresentation or error to any person under age 18 shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-118), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-152. - Term, transfer, amendment. 
(a)  A permit is valid for one year from the date of its issuance. 
(b)  A permit is personal to the named permit holder and is not valid for use by any other person. 
(c)  Each permit holder shall notify code enforcement of his new address within ten days following any change of his address. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-119), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-153. - Display. 
(a)  Each manager or adult service provider shall conspicuously display his personal card upon his person at all times while acting as an adult service provider or manager of or in a sexually oriented business. 
(b)  Each manager or adult service provider shall provide his on-site card to the manager or on-site manager in charge of the sexually oriented business to hold while the manager or adult service provider is on the premises. 
(c)  In any prosecution under this article, it shall be presumed that the actor did not have a permit unless the permit was on display as required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-120), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 8-154. - Revocation. 
In the event that code enforcement has reasonable grounds to believe that any permit holder has been convicted of an offense as specified in the applicable provision of this article within the time specified therein or after, or has violated a requirement or prohibition of this article, then the county administrator or his designee may revoke the permit following a notice of the grounds and a hearing as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-121), 10-24-2013) 
Secs. 8-155—8-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TOURIST ACCOMMODATIONS 

Sec. 8-200. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bed and breakfast inn shall mean an establishment which serves food to its registered guests and not to the public at large. This term shall include establishments serving breakfast or a similar early morning meal and an appropriate light snack in which the price of the food is included in the price of the overnight accommodation. The length of stay for bed and breakfast inns as defined is limited to not more than 30 consecutive days. For the purposes of this article, this term shall mean an establishment in which the predominant relationship between the occupants thereof and the owner or operator of the establishment is that of guest and innkeeper. 
County shall mean unincorporated Fayette County, Georgia. 
Innkeeper shall mean any person who is furnishing for value to the public any room(s), lodging, or accommodations. 
Occupancy, transient shall mean occupancy or use by a paying guest or tenant for a period of less than 30 consecutive days or by the offering or advertising of a residence as being available in whole or in part to be used for such occupancy. Such occupancy is characteristic of tourist accommodations or other establishments, by whatever name called. 
Operator shall mean any person operating a tourist accommodation (as defined in this section) in unincorporated Fayette County, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of the premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, or any other person otherwise operating a tourist accommodation. 
Overnight guest shall have the same meaning as the term "tourist". 
Premises shall mean and include all physical buildings, appurtenances, parking lots, and all property owned and/or used by and for the tourist accommodation. 
Special event shall mean an organized occasion such as a social function (ie. wedding, reception, reunion, retreat, meeting, etc.) 
Tourist shall mean anyone who has a home address somewhere other than where he or she is spending the night and other than where he or she pays a fee for accommodations. 
Tourist accommodation shall mean any property, facility, or structure providing accommodations for value to the public for not more than 30 consecutive days. 
Traveler shall have the same meaning as the term "tourist". 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 8-201. - Permit required. 
(a)  Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a tourist accommodation in the county shall immediately apply and obtained approval for the business with code enforcement on the forms provided by the same for such business. Persons engaged in such business must obtain a permit no later than 30 days after this section becomes effective; but such grace period for registration after the effective date of this section shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of such permit fee on and after the date of imposition thereof. The required permit hereunder shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business, and other such information as would be required by code enforcement. The permit application shall be signed by the owner if a natural person, by a member or partner in case of ownership by partnership, or an officer in the case of corporation. 
(b)  A separate permit will be required for each location of business. 
(c)  A bed and breakfast inn shall be permitted subject to the following: 
(1)  No food preparation, except beverages, is permitted within individual guest rooms. 
(2)  Meal service may be provided to registered guests and not open to the public. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(d)  Operators of tourist accommodations shall be permitted to serve food to guests for sale or otherwise, provided they obtain all state and local permits for the operation of a food service establishment and comply with all state and local rules and regulations for the operation of food service establishments. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-06, §§ 2, 3, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 8-202. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Each person seeking to obtain a permit to operate a tourist accommodation shall submit an application to code enforcement on a form provided by the same. Said application shall include: 
(1)  A statement that each applicant is a citizen or legal resident of the United States; 
(2)  The address of the tourist accommodation; 
(3)  The current set room rates and fees; 
(4)  Consent by each applicant to undergo a criminal background check; 
(5)  Complete set of fingerprints for the applicant(s) taken by the county sheriff's office; 
(6)  A copy of a deed showing the applicant to be the owner of the premises for which the permit is sought or a copy of a lease showing any interest the owner of the premises has in the tourist accommodation for which the license is sought; 
(7)  All state and local permits pertaining to the operation of tourist accommodations, including approvals of Fayette County Health Department and Fayette County Fire Marshal as to maximum permitted capacity, approvals by the Fayette County Planning & Zoning Department as to zoning of the premises, and approvals of the Fayette County Building Permits & Inspections Department as to compliance with all property maintenance and building codes; 
(8)  Certified plans of the property and structure; 
(9)  Copy of the guest occupancy agreement as required by O.C.G.A. § 43-21-3.2; 
(10)  Documents showing compliance with state and local occupation taxes, excise taxes and sales taxes; and 
(11)  Any other information as required by code enforcement or the board of commissioners. 
(b)  All applications for a permit to operate a tourist accommodation shall be accompanied by the payment of a permit fee as set in a schedule of fees adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-06, § 2, 3-23-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 8-203. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Upon approval of the application for the permit and the timely payment of the permit fee, code enforcement shall issue the appropriate permit for the year in which approval was granted. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for any tourist accommodation where any individual having interest either as an operator, owner, partner, principal stockholder, or licensee, whether such interest is direct or indirect, or beneficial or absolute, has been convicted or has taken a plea of nolo contendere within five years for a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, or has been convicted or has taken a plea of nolo contendere within two years for any misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal or county ordinance which would have any effect on the applicant's ability to properly conduct such business, except traffic offenses. The term "conviction" as used in this section shall include adjudication of guilty pea, plea of nolo contendere or forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may, on appeal, waive any conviction as a disqualification if it finds that it would have no material effect upon the applicant's ability to properly conduct its business if such license were granted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-06, § 2, 3-23-2017; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 2, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 8-204. - Annual renewal of permits. 
All permits issued pursuant to this article are annual permits that run from January 1 to December 31 of each year. Holders of existing permits in good standing shall apply to code enforcement for renewal for the next calendar year by filing a renewal application in proper form and tendering the required fees. Fees for renewal of permits shall be according to a schedule of fees adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 8-205. - Transfer of permits. 
No permit issued pursuant to this article shall be transferred from one owner to another. Any violation of this section shall constitute due cause for probation, suspension, or revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2018-05, § 3, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 8-206. - Display of permit. 
Every holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall keep such permit conspicuously displayed at all places where such business is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 8-207. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  Grounds. Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the board of commissioners, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the permit; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with any transaction; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; or 
(4)  The conducting of the business permitted under this article in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Hearing. 
(1)  Notice of hearing for the revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be given by the county administrator in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be served on the holder of the permit by handing the same personally to the person operating the permitted business, or by mailing the same, postage prepaid, to the holder of the permit at his or her last known address at least five days prior to the date set out for the hearing. 
(2)  The giving of such notice shall suspend the permit pending the outcome of the hearing, and any business conducted under the permit shall cease during said period of suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 8-208. - Records. 
Each operator of a tourist accommodation is required to keep a guest register. Each guest shall register on the date of their arrival, stating their names, current residence, address and description and license plate number of the vehicle they are using. Each operator of a tourist accommodation shall keep for a period of at least three years the above-described register, along with all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers setting forth rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as required by code enforcement. Said records shall be made available for examination by code enforcement, the county health department, or any authorized law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-06, § 2, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 8-209. - Standards for health, sanitation and safety. 
(a)  All operators of tourist accommodations shall comply with all rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Public Health and the Fayette County Health Department for the operation of tourist accommodations. 
(b)  Toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities shall be provided at all tourist accommodations. Such facilities shall be easily accessible, convenient and available to patrons at all times and operated pursuant to all applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Public Health and the Fayette County Health Department. 
(c)  Public sewer is not available in unincorporated Fayette County, therefore sewage disposal shall be provided to efficiently dispose of all water carried wastes in a sanitary manner pursuant to all applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Public Health and the Fayette County Health Department. 
(d)  All plumbing in tourist accommodations shall comply with all applicable state and local rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-06, § 2, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 8-210. - Alterations to structure and signs. 
No exterior alterations may be made to a residence to indicate that it is being used as a tourist accommodation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 8-211. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-06, § 4, adopted March 23, 2017, repealed § 8-211, which pertained to parking and derived from Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014. 
Sec. 8-212. - Special events. 
Special events are not permitted at tourist accommodations located in a residential or A-R zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-06, § 5, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 8-213. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any operator to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  Fail to keep the guest register and any other records required by this article for the time period so specified; 
(2)  Make any false entry therein; 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, destroy or remove from his or her place of business such register or records; 
(4)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer after proper identification to inspect such register or records during the ordinary hours of business or at other reasonable time; or 
(5)  Fail to obtain from any guest the identification required by this article. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment, any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the judge. The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 4-24-2014) 
Secs. 8-214—240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - Pawnbrokers, dealers in precious metals and gems and flea market operators[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, adopted August 28, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as art. VI. Inasmuch as there were already provisions designated as art. VI, the provisions have been redesignated as art. VII, at the discretion of the editor. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-241. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address the interest of public safety, health and the welfare of the community and to aid and assist in the recovery of stolen property, and to aid and assist local law enforcement in fulfilling their public safety functions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Secs. 8-242—8-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 8-281. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section or shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, § 44-12-130, should those definitions differ: 
Employee shall mean any person who works in a pawnshop, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received or not. 
Licensee shall mean a person holding a license issued by Fayette County to engage in the business of being a pawnbroker and/or to operate a pawnshop. 
Month shall mean that period of time from one date in a calendar month to the corresponding date in the following calendar month, but if there is no such corresponding date, then the last day of such following month. 
Pawnbroker shall mean any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. 
Pawnshop shall mean any place of business operated by a pawnbroker where pawn transactions take place. 
Pawn transaction shall mean any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledger or seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Pledged goods shall mean tangible personal property, including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this division, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. The term "pledged goods" shall not include choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-282. - General policies and purposes. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers may operate only after the issuance of a license for such operation by the county and only in the manner permitted by such license. Pawn transactions may only occur through a licensee who complies with the rules and regulations of this division and with the licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of the state of Georgia. 
(b)  All licenses are a mere grant or privilege subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this ordinance and state law and subject to being revoked by the county. 
(c)  Each licensee of the county shall display the license issued under this division prominently at all times at the outlet for which the license is issued. A separate license must be issued for each outlet of sale and a separate application must be made for each outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-283. - Location of businesses. 
All businesses licensed under this division shall be located in strict compliance with the Fayette county zoning ordinance and at a location with an identifiable street address, which shall be stated on the license or renewal application along with other required information. No business licensed under this division shall change its address without giving advance notice to the county and receiving an approval of the change, such approval to be granted if the new location complies with this division and the Fayette County Zoning Ordinance. No business licensed under this division shall be operated in or from a motel or hotel. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-284. - Qualifications for issuance of license. 
Any person who desires to obtain a license to engage in the business of a being a pawnbroker and/or for the operation of a pawnshop must meet the minimum qualifications set forth in this section. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner must meet the qualifications of any individual license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the applications process. If the applicant is a corporation, the majority stockholder and each principle officer of the corporation must meet the qualifications as part of the applications process. 
(a)  No owner, employee, pawnbroker or any person connected with a pawnshop for which a license or permit is sought shall have been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony within five years prior to the date of the application and/or been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any misdemeanor involving crimes of moral turpitude, gambling, sexual offenses, assault, battery, any violation of the "Family Violence Act", or illegal drugs within two years prior to the date of the application. 
(b)  No license shall be granted to an applicant who is under the age of 18 years of age. 
(c)  All persons filing an application for a pawnshop license will be required to complete a waiver in order for the applicant's criminal history to be obtained. 
(d)  No license shall be granted where the applicant has had any pawnshop license issued by any county, municipality, or other governmental subdivision suspended or revoked. 
(e)  No license shall be granted for a location that is not in compliance with any federal, state, or local regulation including, but not limited to, a state certificate of occupancy or a Fayette County certificate of occupancy. 
(f)  No license shall be issued where the applicant has supplied false information in the license application or where any required fee has not been paid by such applicant, including any fees or assessments owed to other departments of the county. 
(g)  No license shall be issued unless the applicant and each individual licensee is and continues to be a resident of the State of Georgia. Corporations must either be incorporated in the State or Georgia or must have registered to do business in this State, and only the applying general manager or applying corporate officer must meet the residency requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-285. - Employee permit required. 
(a)  No person shall be an employee of a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been authorized by code enforcement to be employed by a pawnshop and issued an employee's identification badge. This identification bade must be worn at all times while working. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to ensure that there is compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  No employee permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony within five years prior to the date of the application and/or been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any misdemeanor involving crimes of moral turpitude, gambling, sexual offenses, assault, battery, any violation of the "Family Violence Act", or illegal drugs within two years prior to the date of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-286. - Annual license. 
Before operating a pawnshop or becoming an employee of a pawnshop, any person must first file an application with Fayette County code enforcement for a license to operate or be employed in the pawnshop, pursuant to the following: 
(a)  The application shall be made on an annual basis; 
(b)  No license shall be issued until a fee in an amount established by action of the county, a copy of which is on file with code enforcement, is paid to the county; 
(c)  The application shall state the physical address of the pawnshop; 
(d)  The application shall contain the full name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, e-mail address, Social Security number, and date of birth and of any employee, owner, or pawnbroker; 
(e)  Code enforcement or any other officer of the county designated by the county administrator shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall make a report to the county administrator as to whether such applicant is a person of good character and as to whether such applicant has been convicted of a criminal offense as described in subsection (a) of section 8-284 of this division. 
(f)  Any license holder subject to this division shall apply for renewal of any existing license and shall pay the annual license fee no later than November 1st of each calendar year in which it does business. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-287. - Application for license. 
(a)  All applications required in section 8-286 of this division shall be in writing and on forms provided by code enforcement. 
(b)  All applications shall be completed by the applicant and sworn to and signed by the applicant in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them, and failure to furnish such data, information, and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve as grounds to deny the application. An applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for questioning any person(s) who are considered relevant to the ascertainment of facts relative to such license, as may be requested by code enforcement, the county sheriff's department, or other official designated by the county administrator. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so may result in denial of the application. 
(d)  Each application shall be accompanied by an affidavit of each person whose name appears on the application stating that said person has not been convicted or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any of the crimes listed in section 8-284(a) of this division within the time periods specified in said section. 
(e)  Each application shall be accompanied by a deed showing the applicant to be the owner of the premises for which the license is sought or a copy of a lease showing any interest the owner of the premises has in the business for which the license is sought. 
(f)  No pawnshop shall be operated at the same location or in the same premises with the sale, dealing in, exchange, or handling of other than new goods, wares, or merchandise. No license for the sale, dealing in, exchange, or handling of other than new goods, wares, or merchandise shall be issued for a location licensed as a pawnshop. 
(g)  Each applicant shall certify on the application that they have read this division and, if the license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this division on the premises. 
(h)  Upon receipt of an application, as well as all accompanying documents and required investigative and license fees, code enforcement will begin a criminal investigation of the applicant and prepare a written criminal investigation report detailing all information relating to fingerprinting, criminal history, arrest data, and other matters pertinent to law enforcement. Upon completion of the criminal investigation report, code enforcement shall assemble the tendered application forms and accompanying documents relating to the investigation and processing of the application and deliver such documents to the county administrator or his or her designee. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this division, or if the applicant fails to meet all other requirements outlined by this division, then the county administrator or his or her designee shall inform the applicant, in writing, that the application has been denied, and shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his or her right to appeal. Such appeal shall be before the board of commissioners in accordance with section 8-300 of this division. If an applicant desires to appeal a denial, the applicant must file a written request for an appeal with the county administrator within ten business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial of the license. 
(i)  Any application that the county administrator or his or her designee determines to satisfy all the requirements outlined in this division, including character requirements as contained in the criminal investigation report of code enforcement, shall be approved. 
(j)  In all instances in which an application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for the same type of license for at least one year from the date of denial. 
(k)  Upon the issuance of a license, the licensee must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this division may be served. This person must be an individual and must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall submit the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, to code enforcement. The identity of the agent may also be submitted contemporaneous to filing the license application. 
(l)  Upon approval of the application for a license, code enforcement shall issue a license in accordance with the approved application. If the applicant is an individual, the license shall be issued in the name of the individual. If the application is a corporation, the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation. If the application is a partnership, the license shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners. All licenses issued shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1 shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1 shall be one-half the annual license fee. License fees are not refundable once the license is granted by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-288. - Commencement and forfeiture. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this division must, within six months after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment as referred to in this subsection within the six-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(b)  Any holders of a license under this division who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall automatically forfeit his or her license, which license shall by virtue of such failure to operate be canceled without the necessity for any further action by the county administrator or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-289. - Transfers. 
No license granted for a pawnshop shall be transferable except upon application to code enforcement in the same form and manner, and subject to the same requirements with respect to the transferee as are applicable in an original application. Any such license may be transferred only to another applicant doing the same business at the same place as the license holder to whom the license was originally issued. When permission for transfer has been granted, the original licensee or transferee shall cause the license to be delivered to the county administrator or his or her designee who shall record such transfer, and the transferee shall pay a fee as a condition precedent to engaging in operations under the license. The fee for such transfer shall be established in a schedule of fees adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-290. - Disposal of articles. 
Any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop who makes a loan on pledged goods, or buys pledged goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase said goods, shall hold said goods for at least 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Non-pledged goods bought under this section shall be held for at least 30 calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014; Ord. No. 2014-20, § 1, 12-11-2014) 
Sec. 8-291. - Minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to receive goods in pawn, trade, purchase or sale from a person of less than 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-292. - Hours of operation. 
All holders of licenses under this division shall operate only between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-293. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating a pawnshop or employed by a pawnshop to report to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department any article or goods sold or pawned to him or her if he or she shall have a reason to believe that the article or goods were stolen or lost when presented by the seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any items which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop becomes aware that such items have had the identification removed, defaced or destroyed, such fact shall be immediately reported to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, traded or pawned by a seller or customer to the pawnbroker or his or her employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the surrender of said item to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department shall be done upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-294. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
Immediate suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of a license shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the board of commissioners consistent with the procedures set forth in this division and only upon the following occurrences: 
(a)  Any license issued under this division for the operation of a pawnshop shall be immediately revoked in the case of bankruptcy, receivership or levy of legal process upon the licensed outlet or property therein. 
(b)  Except as provided in this division, any change in the ownership of any entity operating or owning a licensed outlet shall be grounds for revocation of the license by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  A license shall be immediately suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners upon learning that a licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, or fails to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this division. 
(d)  the board of commissioners shall immediately suspend or revoke the license of any licensee who does not meet the qualifications set forth in this division at any time such information becomes known to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-295. - Record of transactions. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent electronic record of its pawn transactions in which an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop can be transmitted to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department via an electronic automated reporting system, approved by the Fayette County Sheriff's Department. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale of the property. 
(2)  The full name, street address and telephone number of the customer making the pledge, trade or sale. 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer. 
(4)  A description of the pledged or purchased property by serial, model or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.). 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought. 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned. 
(7)  The maturity date of the transaction, if a pawn. 
(8)  A photograph of the customer and the item pawned or bought which will be taken with the electronic automated reporting system at the time of the transaction. 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
(10)  The fingerprint of the customer as generated by the electronic automated system. 
(b)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system or may elect to upload electronically via the internet a batch file of all transactions for each business day to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system immediately at the conclusion of each business day. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department. 
(c)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, pawnshops and pawnbrokers will be notified as soon as possible. In this event, the pawnbrokers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in paragraph (a) of this Code section. Pawnbrokers shall maintain a three-day supply of these paper forms. 
(d)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business or any other reasonable time, inspect any pawnbroker's electronic records at the pawnbroker's place of business to ensure compliance with this section. 
(e)  The Fayette County Sheriff's Department shall select and designate the required automated reporting system. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-296. - Identification required. 
All businesses licensed under this division shall, when receiving or purchasing goods, require a proper identification (e.g., driver's license, military I.D. card, state approved I.D. card or company employee I.D. card) containing a picture showing positive identification of the person who is selling or trading, or such identification shall be verified. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-297. - Fingerprinting required. 
All businesses licensed under this division shall require every person from whom it accepts goods to place the fingerprint of his or her right index finger (if right index finger is missing, the next finger in line will be used) on the copy of the purchase ticket which is to be sent to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-298. - Erasers, obliterations, write-overs and type-overs not allowed. 
No person licensed under this division shall erase, obliterate, type over, write over or in any way cause the original entry on the records required under this division to become illegible. All purchase tickets filled out in error shall be sent to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department in their numbered order along with daily reports and shall have the word "VOID" typed or written across the front; such entry shall not be used to cause the original entry to be illegible. If an error is made and the ticket is still to be used, then a single line shall be drawn through the incorrect entry. This line shall not cause the original entry to be illegible and the correct information entry shall be made on the next available area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-299. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to violate any of the provisions of this division, whether or not such person or employee is the holder of a current valid permit issued according to the terms of this division. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this division or other rules, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the board of commissioners for conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall upon conviction, have the license to conduct such business revoked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for any permit provided for in this division. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by the terms of this division. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker. 
(c)  Any person who violates a provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-300. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a timely appeal of an administrative denial, or upon alleged violation of those items in section 8-294, the county administrator or his or her designee shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners and provide written notice to the adverse party of the time, place and date of the scheduled hearing. The county administrator or his or her designee shall also state in the written notice the basis for the administrative denial or the violation or occurrence alleged that forms the basis for the denial or potential suspension or revocation. After notice of hearing, matters scheduled for hearing may only be continued by agreement of the county attorney and the adverse party and/or counsel for the adverse party. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall have the duty of conducting hearings concerning the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license. The standard of proof on all issues in the hearing shall be a preponderance of the evidence and a determination will be made on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(c)  At the hearing, after presentation of the case against the adverse party, the adverse party will have an opportunity to present his or her case, to rebut the allegations made against him or her, and present whatever defenses he or she has. The adverse party shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the adverse party, and to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. An opportunity for rebuttal shall be provided. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the findings and conclusions of the board of commissioners shall be forwarded to the county administrator or his or her designee and it shall be the duty of county administrator or his or her designee to provide written notification via certified mail to the adverse party of the decision of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final unless appealed to the Superior Court of Fayette County within 30 days of receipt by the adverse party of the written notification of the decision of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Secs. 8-301—8-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

Sec. 8-341. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer in precious metals and gems shall mean a person, as either owner or manager, whose business involves receiving through purchase or trade precious metals (such as gold, silver or platinum), jewelry, gems, precious or semiprecious stones, in any form, but not one who purchases from licensed wholesalers in the normal course of business. 
Employee shall mean any person employed or allowed to perform duties, whether or not such person receives a salary, wages or other compensation or consideration, but not including the person covered on the license or renewal application. 
Goods shall have its normal meaning, however it should be further construed in the broadest sense allowable and should include all forms of personal property. 
Numismatic coins shall mean coins whose value as collectors' item exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
Owner shall mean any person, partner or stockholder owning 25 percent or more of a business. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-342. - License required. 
Every person doing business in the unincorporated area of Fayette County as a dealer in precious metals or gems shall, prior to commencing business, make proper application for and receive the appropriate license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-343. - General policies and purposes. 
(a)  Dealers of precious metals and/or gems may operate only after the issuance of a license for such operation by the county and only in the manner permitted by such license. Purchase transactions may only occur through a licensee who complies with the rules and regulations of this division and with the licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  All licenses are a mere grant or privilege subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and state law and subject to being revoked by the county. 
(c)  Each licensee of the county shall display the license issued under this division prominently at all times at the outlet for which the license is issued. A separate license must be issued for each outlet of sale and a separate application must be made for each outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-344. - Qualifications for issuance of license. 
Any person who desires to obtain a license to engage in the business of a being a dealer in precious metals and/or gems must meet the minimum qualifications set forth in this section. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner must meet the qualifications of any individual license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the applications process. If the applicant is a corporation, the majority stockholder and each principle officer of the corporation must meet the qualifications as part of the applications process. 
(a)  No owner, employee, dealer in precious metals and/or gems or any person connected with a such business for which a license or permit is sought shall have been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony within five years prior to the date of the application and/or been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any misdemeanor involving crimes of moral turpitude, gambling, sexual offenses, assault, battery, any violation of the "Family Violence Act", or illegal drugs within two years prior to the date of the application. 
(b)  No license shall be granted to an applicant who is under the age of 18 years of age. 
(c)  All persons filing an application for a license to engage in the business of being a dealer in precious metals and/or gems will be required to complete a waiver in order for the applicant's criminal history to be obtained. 
(d)  No license shall be granted where the applicant has had any license to engage in the business of being a dealer in precious metals and/or gems issued by any county, municipality, or other governmental subdivision suspended or revoked. 
(e)  No license shall be granted for a location that is not in compliance with any federal, state, or local regulation including, but not limited to, a state certificate of occupancy or a Fayette County certificate of occupancy. 
(f)  No license shall be issued where the applicant has supplied false information in the license application or where any required fee has not been paid by such applicant, including any fees or assessments owed to other departments of the county. 
(g)  No license shall be issued unless the applicant and each individual licensee is and continues to be a resident of the State of Georgia. Corporations must either be incorporated in the State of Georgia or must have registered to do business in this state, and only the applying general manager or applying corporate officer must meet the residency requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-345. - Exclusions and exceptions. 
Businesses which limit the purchase of used valuables to the acceptance of trade-ins for credit for new goods or the dispensing of refunds in regard to valuables previously purchased from the business shall not be regulated or covered under this division. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-346. - Annual license. 
Before becoming a dealer of precious metals and/or gems, any person must first file an application with Fayette County Code Enforcement for a license to operating as a dealer of precious metals and/or gems, pursuant to the following: 
(a)  The application shall be made on an annual basis; 
(b)  No license shall be issued until a fee in an amount established by action of the county, a copy of which is on file with code enforcement, is paid to the county; 
(c)  The application shall state the physical address of the pawnshop; 
(d)  The application shall contain the full name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, e-mail address, social security number, and date of birth and of any employee, owner, or pawnbroker; 
(e)  Code enforcement or any other officer of the county designated by the county administrator shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall make a report to the county administrator as to whether such applicant is a person of good character and as to whether such applicant has been convicted of a criminal offense as described in subsection (a) of section 8-344 of this division. 
(f)  Any license holder subject to this division shall apply for renewal of any existing license and shall pay the annual license fee no later than November 1st of each calendar year in which it does business. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-347. - Application for license. 
(a)  All applications required in section 8-346 of this division shall be in writing and on forms provided by code enforcement. 
(b)  All applications shall be completed by the applicant and sworn to and signed by the applicant in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them, and failure to furnish such data, information, and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve as grounds to deny the application. An applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for questioning any person(s) who are considered relevant to the ascertainment of facts relative to such license, as may be requested by code enforcement, the Fayette County Sheriff's Department, or other official designated by the county administrator. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so may result in denial of the application. 
(d)  Each application shall be accompanied by an affidavit of each person whose name appears on the application stating that said person has not been convicted or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any of the crimes listed in section 8-284(a) of this division within the time periods specified in said section. 
(e)  Each application shall be accompanied by a deed showing the applicant to be the owner of the premises for which the license is sought or a copy of a lease showing any interest the owner of the premises has in the business for which the license is sought. 
(f)  No dealer of precious metals and/or gems shall operate at the same location or in the same premises with the sale, dealing in, exchange, or handling of other than new goods, wares, or merchandise. No license for the sale, dealing in, exchange, or handling of other than new goods, wares, or merchandise shall be issued for a location where a licensed dealer of precious metals and/or gems operates. 
(g)  Each applicant shall certify on the application that they have read this division and, if the license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this division on the premises. 
(h)  Upon receipt of an application, as well as all accompanying documents and required investigative and license fees, code enforcement will begin a criminal investigation of the applicant and prepare a written criminal investigation report detailing all information relating to fingerprinting, criminal history, arrest data, and other matters pertinent to law enforcement. Upon completion of the criminal investigation report, code enforcement shall assemble the tendered application forms and accompanying documents relating to the investigation and processing of the application and deliver such documents to the county administrator or his or her designee. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this division, or if the applicant fails to meet all other requirements outlined by this division, then the county administrator or his or her designee shall inform the applicant, in writing, that the application has been denied, and shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his or her right to appeal. Such appeal shall be before the board of commissioners in accordance with section 8-369 of this division. If an applicant desires to appeal a denial, the applicant must file a written request for an appeal with the county administrator within ten business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial of the license. 
(i)  Any application that the county administrator or his or her designee determines to satisfy all the requirements outlined in this division, including character requirements as contained in the criminal investigation report of code enforcement, shall be approved. 
(j)  In all instances in which an application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for the same type of license for at least one year from the date of denial. 
(k)  Upon the issuance of a license, the licensee must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this division may be served. This person must be an individual and must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall submit the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, to code enforcement. The identity of the agent may also be submitted contemporaneous to filing the license application. 
(1)  Upon approval of the application for a license, code enforcement shall issue a license in accordance with the approved application. If the applicant is an individual, the license shall be issued in the name of the individual. If the application is a corporation, the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation. If the application is a partnership, the license shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners. All licenses issued shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1 shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1 shall be one-half the annual license fee. License fees are not refundable once the license is granted by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-348. - Commencement and forefeiture. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this division must, within six months after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment as referred to in this subsection within the six-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(b)  Any holders of a license under this division who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall automatically forfeit his or her license, which license shall by virtue of such failure to operate be canceled without the necessity for any further action by the county administrator or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-349. - Employee permit. 
(a)  No person shall be an employee of a dealer of precious metals and/or gems in any capacity until such person has been authorized by code enforcement to be so employed and issued an employee's identification badge. This identification bade must be worn at all times while working. It shall be the duty of the dealer of precious metals and/or gems to ensure that there is compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  No employee permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony within five years prior to the date of the application and/or been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any misdemeanor involving crimes of moral turpitude, gambling, sexual offenses, assault, battery, any violation of the "Family Violence Act", or illegal drugs within two years prior to the date of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-350. - Transfer of license. 
No license granted for a dealer of precious metals and/or gems shall be transferable except upon application to code enforcement in the same form and manner, and subject to the same requirements with respect to the transferee as are applicable in an original application. Any such license may be transferred only to another applicant doing the same business at the same place as the license holder to whom the license was originally issued. When permission for transfer has been granted, the original licensee or transferee shall cause the license to be delivered to the county administrator or his or her designee who shall record such transfer, and the transferee shall pay a fee as a condition precedent to engaging in operations under the license. The fee for such transfer shall be established in a schedule of fees adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-351. - Record of transactions. 
(a) Every dealer of precious metals and/or gems shall maintain a permanent electronic record of its purchase transactions in which an accurate description of all property traded or sold to the dealer can be transmitted to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department via an electronic automated reporting system, approved by the Fayette County Sheriff's Department. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property traded or sold to the dealer and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the trade or sale of the property. 
(2)  The full name, street address and telephone number of the customer making the trade or sale. 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer. 
(4)  A description of the traded or sold property by serial, model or other number, if available, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry and all identifying marks. 
(5)  The number of the receipt or transaction issued for the property traded or sold. 
(6)  The price paid. 
(7)  A photograph of the customer and the item traded or sold which will be taken with the electronic automated reporting system at the time of the transaction. 
(8)  The signature of the customer. 
(9)  The fingerprint of the customer as generated by the electronic automated system. 
(b)  Every dealer of precious metals and/or gems shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system or may elect to upload electronically via the internet a batch file of all transactions for each business day to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system immediately at the conclusion of each business day. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department. 
(c)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, dealers of precious metals and/or gems will be notified as soon as possible. In this event, said dealers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in paragraph (a) of this Code section. Dealers of precious metals and/or gems shall maintain a three-day supply of these paper forms. 
(d)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business or any other reasonable time, inspect any pawnbroker's electronic records at the pawnbroker's place of business to ensure compliance with this section. 
(e)  The Fayette County Sheriff's Department shall select and designate the required automated reporting system. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-352. - Special report. 
It shall be the duty of each business licensed hereunder to keep an additional record book in which it shall list the name, address, race, height and age of every person from which the licensee receives smelted or non-formed precious metals. If the licensee receives or should be aware he or she is receiving smelted or non-formed precious metal from one person or household more than twice in any one-year period, he shall immediately report each and every such occurrence to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-353. - Identification required. 
All businesses licensed under this division shall, when receiving or purchasing goods, require a proper identification (e.g., driver's license, military I.D. card, state approved I.D. card or company employee I.D. card) containing a picture showing positive identification of the person who is selling or trading, and such identification shall be verified. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-354. - Fingerprinting required. 
All businesses licensed under this division shall require every person from whom it accepts goods to place the fingerprint of his or her right index finger (if right index finger is missing, the next finger in line will be used) on the copy of the purchase ticket which is to be sent to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-355. - Erasers, obliterations, write-overs and type-overs not allowed. 
No person licensed under this division shall erase, obliterate, type over, write over or in any way cause the original entry on the records required under this division to become illegible. All purchase tickets filled out in error shall be sent to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department in their numbered order along with daily reports and shall have the word "VOID" typed or written across the front, such entry shall not be used to cause the original entry to be illegible. If an error is made and the ticket is still to be used, then a single line shall be drawn through the incorrect entry. This line shall not cause the original entry to be illegible and the correct information entry shall be made on the next available area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-356. - Serial numbers. 
No business licensed under this division shall accept any articles which have had the serial number altered, obliterated or removed from such article or which the person who is making the business transaction knows should have a serial number upon it, unless such person immediately notifies the Fayette County Sheriff's Department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-357. - Alteration. 
Any item required to be kept or displayed shall be so kept in its original form as it existed when first received and its physical characteristics shall not be altered in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-358. - Purchased articles not to be disposed of for fifteen days after acquisition. 
Every business licensed under this division shall hold, on the premises designated in the license for doing business, every item required to be listed under this division for at least 15 days before disposing the same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. The provisions of this section shall not apply to purchases from licensed wholesalers in the normal course of business. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-359. - Display of goods pledged or purchased. 
For a period of 15 days from the date of purchase or trade, all goods required to be listed shall be kept in a clearly visible place on the premises, designated in the license for doing business, and readily available to the general public. Every item required to be displayed shall have attached to it either a copy of the purchase ticket or the number of the ticket. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-360. - Location of businesses. 
All businesses licensed under this division shall be located in strict compliance with the Fayette County Zoning Ordinance and at a location with an identifiable street address, which shall be stated on the license or renewal application along with other required information. No business licensed under this division shall change its address without giving advance notice to the county and receiving an approval of the change, such approval to be granted if the new location complies with this division and the Fayette County Zoning Ordinance. No business licensed under this division shall be operated in or from a motel or hotel. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-361. - Hours of operation. 
All holders of licenses under this division shall operate only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-362. - Business transactions conducted outside. 
No business transactions by any business licensed under this division shall be conducted outside the building designated as the normal place to conduct transactions unless the business does not have a building. Business transaction means any part of a business including inspection or appraisal of any goods when it is possible for such goods to be taken inside the building where transactions normally are made ("possible" being used here in the broadest sense); and no persons other than those possessing a license or employee permit shall be allowed to conduct any form of business transactions either inside the establishment or on any part of outside land area specified on the license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-363. - Separate business establishment. 
No business licensed under this division shall be designed or operated so as to allow access to the business immediately from any other business without first exiting the other business into a common or open area to which the public at large has access. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-364. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this division to receive in purchase or trade any goods of any character or of any description from any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-365. - Stolen items. 
Every person licensed under this division shall, immediately upon request, turn over to the Fayette County Sheriff's Department every item believed by the Fayette County Sheriff's Department to be a stolen item. Such item shall be returned to the licensee only after it has been determined that such item is not stolen. If it is determined that such item is stolen, it shall be returned to its lawful owner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-366. - Inspection. 
As a condition of any license covered under this division, every licensee agrees to allow any law enforcement officer, pursuant to his or her official duties, to be and remain on or about his premises without the formality of a warrant, provided the officer does not unduly interfere in the licensee's operation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-367. - Penalties. 
Any person licensed under this division who shall engage in any of the following shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and punished as a misdemeanor, as defined by state law: 
(1)  Fail to make any entry of any required item in a permanent record book; 
(2)  Make any false entry therein; 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, record so that information is illegible, destroy or remove from his or her place of business such permanent record book; 
(4)  Refuse to allow any law enforcement officer of the county or the state to inspect such permanent record book, or any goods in his or her possession, during the ordinary hours of business or any reasonable time, or refuse to allow any member of the general public to inspect goods in his or her possession being held under purchase or trade (within the fifteen-day purchase period) during ordinary business hours; 
(5)  Fail to maintain a record of each purchase or trade transaction for at least four years; or 
(6)  Violate any other provisions of this division. 
Operation of any business under this division in violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense for each day of operation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-368. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
Immediate suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of a license shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the board of commissioners consistent with the procedures set forth in this division and only upon the following occurrences: 
(a)  Any license issued under this division for a dealer of precious metals and/or gems shall be immediately revoked in the case of bankruptcy, receivership or levy of legal process upon the licensed outlet or property therein. 
(b)  Except as provided in this division, any change in the ownership of any entity operating or owning a licensed outlet shall be grounds for revocation of the license by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  A license shall be immediately suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners upon learning that a licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, or fails to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this division. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall immediately suspend or revoke the license of any licensee who does not meet the qualifications set forth in this division at any time such information becomes known to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-369. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a timely appeal of an administrative denial, or upon alleged violation of those items in section 8-368, the county administrator or his or her designee shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners and provide written notice to the adverse party of the time, place and date of the scheduled hearing. The county administrator or his or her designee shall also state in the written notice the basis for the administrative denial or the violation or occurrence alleged that forms the basis for the denial or potential suspension or revocation. After notice of hearing, matters scheduled for hearing may only be continued by agreement of the county attorney and the adverse party and/or counsel for the adverse party. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall have the duty of conducting hearings concerning the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license. The standard of proof on all issues in the hearing shall be a preponderance of the evidence and a determination will be made on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(c)  At the hearing, after presentation of the case against the adverse party, the adverse party will have an opportunity to present his or her case, to rebut the allegations made against him or her, and present whatever defenses he or she has. The adverse party shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the adverse party, and to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. An opportunity for rebuttal shall be provided. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the findings and conclusions of the board of commissioners shall be forwarded to the county administrator or his or her designee and it shall be the duty of county administrator or his or her designee to provide written notification via certified mail to the adverse party of the decision of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final unless appealed to the Superior Court of Fayette County within 30 days of receipt by the adverse party of the written notification of the decision of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Secs. 8-370—8-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FLEA MARKET OPERATORS 

Sec. 8-401. - Definitions. 
Unless the context of this division requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and administration of this division. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; and the word "shall" is mandatory and not optional. 
Booth shall mean a designated space or a structure constructed for the purpose of displaying and selling merchandise within a flea market. 
Flea market shall mean any business whereby there is operated a center for shopping where a vendor or vendors sell merchandise to the public including salvage operations, antique stores, thrift stores, jewelry stores, coin shops, clothing shops or other businesses involving the sale of common merchandise. 
Flea market operator shall mean any person operating, maintaining and promoting a flea market. 
Flea market vendor shall mean any person renting a booth from a flea market operator for sales to the public of new and used merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-402. - Exclusions. 
These regulations shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  An annual fund-raising event which is organized for the exclusive benefit of any community chest, fund, foundation, association, or corporation organized and operated for religious, educational, or charitable purposes, provided that no part of any admission fee or parking fee charged vendors or prospective purchasers or the gross receipts or net earnings from the sale or exchange of personal property, whether in the form of a percentage of the receipts or earnings, as salary, or otherwise, inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or person participating in the organization or conduct of the event; 
(b)  An antique mall where all sales transactions are through the antique mall operator; 
(c)  An arts and crafts fair where the sale of such is by a person or persons who produced such arts and crafts; 
(d)  A farmer's market where persons offer the sale of agricultural products including value-added agricultural products and; or 
(e)  A county sponsored event. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-403. - License requirement. 
It is unlawful for any person to locate a flea market or to construct, alter or extend any flea market within the limits of unincorporated Fayette County unless a valid license is issued by the code enforcement Department for Fayette County. Construction, if necessary, must begin within 180 days after issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-404. - Applications. 
(a)  All applications for licenses for flea markets shall be submitted to code enforcement on a form prescribed by code enforcement. Said application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors; 
(2)  Name and address of the owner of the land upon which the flea market is to be located. In the event that the applicant intends to locate and/or operate a flea market on leased property, a copy of the lease shall be submitted with the application. If, however, the property is owned by the applicant, said applicant shall attach to the application a copy of the deed conveying title unto the applicant; 
(3)  Telephone number of the applicant; 
(4)  The affidavit of each person whose name appears on an application for a license pursuant to subsection swearing that such person has not been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony within five years prior to the date of the application or been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contender to any misdemeanor involving crimes of moral turpitude, gambling, sexual offenses, assault, battery, any violation of the "Family Violence Act", or illegal drugs. 
(5)  Date of birth and identification (i.e., driver's license) of the applicant; 
(6)  Fingerprints of applicant; 
(b)  All applications for a license to operate a booth within a flea market shall be submitted to code enforcement on a form prescribed by code enforcement. Said application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners; if the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors; 
(2)  Name and address of the flea market within which the booth will be located; 
(3)  Telephone number of the applicant; 
(4)  The affidavit of each person whose name appears on an application for a license pursuant to subsection swearing that such person has not been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony within five years prior to the date of the application or been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contender to any misdemeanor involving crimes of moral turpitude, gambling, sexual offenses, assault, battery, any violation of the "Family Violence Act", or illegal drugs. 
(5)  Date of birth and identification (i.e., driver's license) of the applicant; and 
(6)  Fingerprints of applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-405. - License. 
(a)  Any person, firm, organization or corporation conducting a flea market on property located within the unincorporated portion of Fayette County shall obtain a license for such flea market and shall pay a yearly license fee adopted as part of a schedule of fees by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Any person, firm, organization or corporation operating a booth within a flea market located within the unincorporated portion of Fayette County shall obtain a license for such booth and shall pay a yearly license fee adopted as part of a schedule of fees by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-406. - Inspections. 
(a)  The Fayette County Sheriff's Department is authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this division. 
(b)  The Fayette County Sheriff's Department shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to enforcement of this division. 
(c)  The Fayette County Sheriff's Department may request inspections by and verifications of compliance from the department of health relating to any of the rules and regulations of the state and/or local health department. Representatives of the department of health shall have the same powers of entry and inspection as provided for the Fayette County Sheriff's Department. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-407. - Suspension and revocation. 
Immediate suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of a license shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the board of commissioners consistent with the procedures set forth in this division and only upon the following occurrences: 
(a)  Any license issued under this division for a flea market shall be immediately revoked in the case of bankruptcy, receivership or levy of legal process upon the licensed outlet or property therein. 
(b)  Except as provided in this division, any change in the ownership of any entity operating or owning a licensed outlet shall be grounds for revocation of the license by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  A license shall be immediately suspended or revoked by the board of commissioners upon learning that a licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, or fails to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this division. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall immediately suspend or revoke the license of any licensee who does not meet the qualifications set forth in this division at any time such information becomes known to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-408. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a timely appeal of an administrative denial, or upon alleged violation of those items in section 8-404, the county administrator or his or her designee shall schedule a hearing before the board of commissioners and provide written notice to the adverse party of the time, place and date of the scheduled hearing. the county administrator or his or her designee shall also state in the written notice the basis for the administrative denial or the violation or occurrence alleged that forms the basis for the denial or potential suspension or revocation. After notice of hearing, matters scheduled for hearing may only be continued by agreement of the county attorney and the adverse party and/or counsel for the adverse party. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall have the duty of conducting hearings concerning the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license. The standard of proof on all issues in the hearing shall be a preponderance of the evidence and a determination will be made on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(c)  At the hearing, after presentation of the case against the adverse party, the adverse party will have an opportunity to present his or her case, to rebut the allegations made against him or her, and present whatever defenses he or she has. The adverse party shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the adverse party, and to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. An opportunity for rebuttal shall be provided. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the findings and conclusions of the board of commissioners shall be forwarded to the county administrator or his or her designee and it shall be the duty of county administrator or his or her designee to provide written notification via certified mail to the adverse party of the decision of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final unless appealed to the Superior Court of Fayette County within 30 days of receipt by the adverse party of the written notification of the decision of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-409. - Minimum size of booths. 
The minimum size of a booth within a flea market shall be ten feet by ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-410. - Structural requirements. 
All flea markets shall be within a permanent structure which meets the minimum standards of the applicable county building code. Move-in buildings or temporary structures of any type are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Sec. 8-411. - Exterior of structure. 
There shall be no displays permitted on or around the outside of the structure which houses a flea market. 
(Ord. No. 2014-12, § 1, 8-28-2014) 
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE OF EMERGENCY REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-19—10-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUSPENSION OF PORTIONS OF CODE DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 10-40. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fees include any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7), means a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile home or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 12-242; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 2, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-41. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. Under circumstances necessitated by emergency conditions involving public safety or the preservation of property or public services, the county governing authority may meet by means of teleconference so long as notice is provided and means are afforded for the public to have simultaneous access to the teleconference meeting, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-14-1. 
(b)  Emergency procurement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or determination by the county governing authority, its designee, or emergency interim successor (hereinafter referred to as the "county governing authority") of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority may suspend purchasing ordinances, regulations, policies or procedures to provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to victims of the emergency. The county governing authority may authorize emergency measures for the duration of the emergency and the subsequent recovery period. The county governing authority may: 
(1)  Waive the requirement for competitive bidding for emergency purchases of supplies, equipment, materials, or services. 
(2)  Contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract as required by established statutes, rules, regulations, or policies. 
(3)  Authorize specific individuals to approve purchases or contracts which exceed the authorization limit of the purchasing director, or approve other procurement actions as warranted by emergency conditions. 
(4)  Temporarily increase any department's P-Card spending limit as warranted by the nature of the emergency, including the limit per purchase, limit per month, and number of transactions per day to levels deemed appropriate by the county governing authority. 
(5)  Authorize any other procurement actions deemed necessary by the county governing authority to provide for the health and safety of persons and property. 
Any contracts or other agreements executed using emergency procurement procedures shall be entered in the minutes of the county as soon as practical, and the nature of the emergency shall be described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee of the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(2)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue permits for temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicles or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the county building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon the expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon the expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Code 1992, § 12-241; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 1, 5-23-2002; Ord. No. 2013-10, §§ 1—3, 7-9-2013) 
Secs. 10-42—10-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to establish a program of emergency registration of businesses doing business in the county during a state of emergency, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-56. 

Sec. 10-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor , as used in this division, means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business means any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this division if: (a) he has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or (b) he performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Code 1992, § 12-262; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 2, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-72. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this division to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this division. Violation of this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 12-265; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 5, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-73. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this division. 
(Code 1992, § 12-261; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-74. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposed to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Code 1992, § 12-263; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 3, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-75. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this division at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Code 1992, § 12-264; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 4, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-76. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this division is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Code 1992, § 12-266; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 6, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-77. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Code 1992, § 12-267; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 7, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-78. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this division is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this division or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Code 1992, § 12-268; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 8, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-79. - Effective date; expiration. 
This division, and any certification issued pursuant to it shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Code 1992, § 12-270; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 10, 5-23-2002) 
Secs. 10-80—10-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 10-102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 12-292; Ord. No. 2002-06, § 2, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-103. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Code 1992, § 12-291; Ord. No. 2002-06, § 1, 5-23-2002) 
Secs. 10-104—10-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CURFEWS 

Sec. 10-135. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this division from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals, unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to sections 10-73 through 10-79, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), means a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Code 1992, § 12-312; Ord. No. 2002-07, § 2, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-136. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Code 1992, § 12-311; Ord. No. 2002-07, § 1, 5-23-2002) 
Sec. 10-137. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the unincorporated county during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Code 1992, § 12-313; Ord. No. 2002-07, § 3, 5-23-2002) 
Chapter 12 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire escapes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; forest fires, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-80 et seq.; criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-22, 16-7-23; arson and explosives, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-60 et seq.; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; transmitting false report of fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; refusal to obey official request at fire or other emergency, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-30; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. title 25; firemen's pensions, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-1 et seq.; liability of firemen for activities, O.C.G.A. § 51-1-30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - General guidelines. 
(a)  Purposes of chapter. This chapter is adopted for providing the county with rules and regulations to improve public safety by promoting the control of fire hazards; regulating the installation, use, and maintenance of equipment; regulating the use of structures, premises, and open areas; providing for the abatement of fire hazards; establishing the responsibilities and procedures for code enforcement; and setting forth the standards for compliance and achievement of these objectives. 
(b)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this chapter, to permit or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision hereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation except as variation may be allowed by the action of the fire marshal in writing. Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such act is that of the owner, occupant or other person in control of the premises. Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner, occupant, or the person in charge shall not be deemed to relieve any of the others. 
(c)  Enforcement generally. The fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services shall be responsible for the enforcement of the county fire prevention code. The fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services may assign qualified members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties placed upon the fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services, a bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the county is hereby created. 
(d)  The bureau of fire prevention . The bureau of fire prevention shall operate under the supervision of the fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services. The fire chief of the fire department and/or the director of emergency services shall designate a fire official of the county fire department as fire marshal. The fire marshal shall be responsible for the direct administration and enforcement of the county fire prevention code as may be set forth by the fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services. The fire marshal shall be appointed on the basis of examination or other method for determining qualifications. The fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services may also designate such number of technical inspectors as shall from time to time be authorized by the board of commissioners. Such technical inspectors shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. 
(e)  Subjects covered; functions of officers. It shall be the duty of the officers of the bureau of fire prevention to enforce all laws and ordinances of the county covering the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires; 
(2)  The storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable or explosive materials; 
(3)  The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment; 
(4)  The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes; 
(5)  The means and adequacy of exits, in case of fire, from factories, schools, hotels, lodginghouses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters, and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live, or congregate, from time to time, for any purpose; 
(6)  The investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires; 
(7)  The maintenance of fire cause and loss records. 
The fire marshal shall examine plans for evidence of compliance with applicable requirements of specific Code sections. The fire marshal may require tests or other investigations to be conducted by an agency satisfactory to the jurisdiction when appliances, devices, equipment, or systems intended for installation do not specifically meet the requirements of this Code, but meet the intent of this Code. The officers shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as set forth in other sections of the Code and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. The fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services may delegate any powers or duties under this chapter to the fire marshal. 
(f)  Instructions; forms. The fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services shall prepare instructions for the fire marshal and the fire marshal's assistants, and forms for their use in the reports required by this Code. 
(g)  Investigation of fires. The bureau of fire prevention shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in the county by which property has been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the other authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with other agencies in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. 
(h)  Inspections; orders. The fire marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises on a periodic basis, and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same and for the safeguarding of life and property from fire, explosion and other hazards incident to the use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises. 
(i)  Correction of unsafe conditions. Whenever any inspector, as defined above, shall find in any building, or upon any premises or other places, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of waste paper, boxes, shavings, or any highly flammable materials especially liable to fire, and which are so situated as to endanger property; or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, or windows liable to interfere with operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, the inspector shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to the appeals procedure provided for in the county fire prevention code. 
(1)  Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a reasonable period after the service of the order shall be liable to penalties as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of same to such occupant personally, or leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or, in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with such person a copy of the order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing such copy by certified mail to the owner's last known post office address. 
(j)  Record of fires. The fire marshal shall compile and keep a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same, including injuries, deaths, rescues of persons, and statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. 
(k)  Annual report. The fire marshal shall make an annual report of the activities of the bureau of fire prevention and shall transmit this report to the chief executive officer and/or the county administrator through the fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services. This report shall contain all proceedings under the county fire prevention code with such statistics as the fire chief and/or the director of emergency services may wish to include therein. 
(l)  Amendments. The fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services or the fire marshal shall also recommend any amendments to the county fire prevention code or ordinance which shall be desirable. 
(m)  Scope of fire prevention code. The provisions of the county fire prevention code shall apply equally to both public and private property, and it shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as otherwise specified. 
(n)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Code adopted in this chapter; or shall fail to comply therewith; or shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder; or shall build in violation of any details, statements, specifications, or plans submitted or approved thereunder; or shall operate not in accordance with the provisions of any certificate, permit, or approval issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken; or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the fire marshal or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not less than 30 days nor more than 360 days or by both such fines and imprisonment. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation, nor shall the violation be permitted to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, the application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(o)  Appeals. The presiding board of commissioners at the time that an appeal is filed shall serve as the official board of appeals and adjustments for the county fire prevention code. Any appeal filed shall conform to the requirements of section 108 of chapter 1 of the International Fire Code as adopted in section 102-22. 
(Code 1992, § 9-1; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-1, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 91-07, 8-8-1991; Ord. No. 91-10, § 1, 9-18-1991; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 1, 1-5-2005) 
Sec. 12-2. - Code adopted; conflicts. 
The International Fire Code, and all revisions and/or amendments thereto as hereafter enacted, is hereby adopted as the fire rules and regulations for the county, with certain exceptions which may be set out hereinafter, and although not specifically hereafter set out, where the provisions of the International Fire Code conflict with this chapter of the Fayette County Code of Ordinances, this chapter shall be superior and shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2016-23, § 1, 12-8-2016) 
Secs. 12-3—12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN BURNING AND AIR QUALITY CONTROL CODE 

Sec. 12-21. - Burning code; purpose. 
This article shall be known as the Open Burning and Air Quality Control Code. The purpose of this article is to regulate open burning, and to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare within the county. 
(Code 1992, § 9-4; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997) 
Sec. 12-22. - Amendments to International Fire Prevention Code. 
The provisions of this article amend the specific section of article II, Fire Prevention Code, specifically section 307 of the International Fire Prevention Code, and it is hereby amended or revised consistent with this article. 
(Code 1992, § 9-47; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997; Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1, 8-10-2006) 
Sec. 12-23. - Permit required. 
No person shall cause, suffer or allow open burning in an area of the county without first having obtained either a residential or commercial permit as defined herein unless specifically exempted by section 12-24. 
(Code 1992, § 9-48; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997) 
Sec. 12-24. - Open burning not requiring permit. 
No person shall cause, suffer or allow open burning in any area of the county without a permit except as follows: 
(1)  For the recreational purpose of cooking food for immediate human consumption; 
(2)  Fires set for the purpose of training firefighting personnel authorized by the county director of fire and emergency services; 
(3)  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used; 
(4)  Setting and maintenance by contractors and tradesmen of miscellaneous small warming fires for their workers. 
(Code 1992, § 9-49; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997) 
Sec. 12-25. - Fire extinguished. 
The county department of fire and emergency services shall have the authority to order that any fire be extinguished if it is determined that there is a danger to public safety, a nuisance or sign of environmental harm. 
(Code 1992, § 9-50; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997) 
Sec. 12-26. - Permits required. 
If in the opinion of the fire marshal of the county there are no adequate disposal facilities reasonably available for the particular combustible materials involved, the following open burning may be allowed with the appropriate permit so long as the burning pile size shall be no greater than ten feet wide, ten feet long, and ten feet high, or 1,000 cubic feet of material; and no more than one pile shall be burning at a time. In addition, all burning (both residential and commercial) shall occur consistent with the requirements of section 12-28. 
(1)  Residential permit. A residential permit shall be issued without charge for the following types of open burning: 
a.  Reduction of leaves, clippings, brush and limbs on residential property by or through direction of the owner of the premises; 
b.  Disposal of tree limbs from storm damage; 
c.  For weed abatement, disease, and pest prevention; 
d.  Fire extinguishing equipment such as a garden hose, shovel, rake, or other device shall be readily available; and 
e.  The county department of fire and emergency services retains authority to extinguish any fire in the event that complaints are received. 
(2)  Commercial permit. A commercial permit shall be issued by the county bureau of fire prevention for all types of open burning deemed commercial in nature. Commercial permits are available under certain circumstances at no charge. Unless the commercial permit falls clearly within the guidelines requiring no charge, a charge will be assessed for the commercial permit. All types of burning requiring permits are deemed commercial in nature unless they are designated under subsection (b) of this section. 
a.  The following types of open burning are available without charge but require a commercial permit: 
1.  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops with the appropriate forestry permit. 
2.  Burning over of any forest land by the owner of such land with the appropriate forestry permit and a copy of the prescribed burning unit plan. 
b.  The following types of open burning shall be assessed a permit fee as set from time to time by the county board of commissioners: 
1.  Destruction of combustible demolition; 
2.  Open burning for the purpose of land clearing or construction of right-of-way maintenance provided the following conditions are met: prevailing winds at the time of the burning are away from the major portion of the area's population. 
(Code 1992, § 9-51; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997; Ord. No. 2006-10, § 2, 8-10-2006) 
Sec. 12-27. - Air curtain destructor; requirements. 
All open burnings which require the type of commercial permit for which the permittee is assessed a fee must be accomplished through the proper use of an air curtain destructor: 
(1)  The location of the air curtain destructor must be at least 500 feet from any occupied structure or public road; 
(2)  No more than one air curtain destructor may be operated within a ten acre area at one time or there must be at least 1,000 feet between any two air curtain destructors; 
(3)  Only wood waste consisting of trees, logs, large brush and stumps which are relatively free of soil may be burned in the air curtain destructor; 
(4)  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils or asphaltic based or impregnated materials may not be used to start or maintain the operation of the air curtain destructor; 
(5)  The air curtain destructor must be constructed, installed and operated in a manner consistent with good air pollution control practice for minimizing emissions of fly ash and smoke; and 
(6)  The cleaning out of the air curtain destructor pit is performed in a manner to prevent fugitive dust. 
(Code 1992, § 9-52; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997) 
Sec. 12-28. - Open burning requirements. 
(a)  Materials such as heavy oils, gasoline, asphaltic materials, plastic, tires and items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any other material producing dense smoke and/or obnoxious odors shall not be used for starting or maintaining an open fire. 
(b)  All burning shall be carried out between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and all fires shall be completely burned. 
(c)  All burning shall be located on private property so as not to interfere with any traffic on the public streets or sidewalks. 
(d)  All burning shall be conducted at least 50 feet from any structure or such other minimum distance requirement contained herein, whichever is greater. 
(e)  During any open burning, the burning activity shall be constantly attended by a competent person of at least 18 years of age. 
(Code 1992, § 9-53; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997; Ord. No. 2006-10, § 3, 8-10-2006) 
Sec. 12-29. - Exceptions. 
The director of fire and emergency services of the county may grant specific or general classes of exceptions to or variances from the particular requirements of any rule, regulation or general order upon such conditions as the director of fire and emergency services may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, if, upon petition, the director of fire and emergency services finds that strict compliance with such rule, regulation, or general order is inappropriate for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  Because of conditions beyond the control of the petitioner, i.e. those conditions which, though ordinary diligence be employed, remain unforeseeable or unpredictable, e.g. strikes, walkouts, or other industrial disturbances, embargoes, or other causes of like character; provided, however, that this shall not include conditions solely because they are dependent upon contingencies, i.e. including, but not limited to, the variable cost or availability of maintenance, equipment, labor, raw materials, fuel or energy; or 
(2)  Because of special circumstances which would render strict compliance unreasonable, unduly burdensome, or impracticable due to special physical conditions or causes; 
(3)  Because strict compliance would result in substantial curtailment or closing of the business operation; or 
(4)  Because no alternative method of handling is available. 
(Code 1992, § 9-54; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997) 
Sec. 12-30. - Additional safety precautions; restrictions. 
If the fire marshal of the county determines that certain open burning, otherwise permitted, imposes a threat to the public health, safety and general welfare, the fire marshal shall have the authority to impose additional safety precautions or restrict the burning, including the issuance of a complete ban on the open burning in the particular location. 
(Code 1992, § 9-55; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997) 
Sec. 12-31. - Permits prohibited. 
During an air pollution emergency declared by the board of commissioners or other proper county or state authorities, no open burning of any kind shall be permitted unless open burning is required in the performance of an official duty or any public office, or fires necessary to thwart or prevent a hazard which cannot be properly managed by any other means, or as necessary for the protection of public health. 
(Code 1992, § 9-56; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997) 
Sec. 12-32. - Penalty. 
Persons violating this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. 
(Code 1992, § 9-57; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997) 
Sec. 12-33. - Blanket prohibition; exceptions. 
Beginning January 1, 1996, all open burning shall be prohibited during the months of May, June, July, August, and September. The only exceptions to this general prohibition against open burning during the months of May, June, July, August and September shall be: 
(1)  For the recreational purpose of cooking food for human consumption. 
(2)  Fires set for the purpose of training firefighting personnel when authorized by the county director of fire and emergency services. 
(3)  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used. 
(Code 1992, § 9-58; Ord. No. 97-11, 10-23-1997; Ord. No. 2006-10, § 4, 8-10-2006) 
Secs. 12-34—12-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE ALARM CODE 

Sec. 12-55. - Title and purpose. 
This article shall be known as the Fire Alarm Code. The purpose of this article is to provide for a safe, efficient and dependable method of providing uniform fire alarm systems. 
(Code 1992, § 9-61; Ord. No. 89-03, § 4-40, 3-23-1989; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-61, 9-27-1990) 
Sec. 12-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Occupancy classification means the use to which a structure is put. Occupancy classification shall further be defined in the chapter pertaining to definitions of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code. The various classifications shall be as follows: 
(1)  Ambulatory health care; 
(2)  Assembly; 
(3)  Business; 
(4)  Day care; 
(5)  Detention and correctional; 
(6)  Educational; 
(7)  Health care; 
(8)  Industrial; 
(9)  Mercantile; 
(10)  Residential; and 
(11)  Storage. 
Substantial renovation means repairs and alterations to a structure, the total cost of which exceeds 30 percent of the fair market value as shown on the then current property tax records of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 9-62; Ord. No. 89-03, §§ 4-41, 4-46, 3-23-1989; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-62, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 1, 1-5-2005) 
Sec. 12-57. - Scope of article. 
The provisions of this article apply to the selection, installation, alteration, equipment, and maintenance of all public and private fire alarm systems installed within the jurisdiction of the county after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article was derived. The provisions of this article based upon occupancy shall also apply to changes of existing buildings and structures or portions thereof from one occupancy classification to another. 
(Code 1992, § 9-63; Ord. No. 89-03, § 4-42, 3-23-1989; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-63, 9-27-1990) 
Sec. 12-58. - Validity of other laws. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws which prescribe more restrictive limitations. 
(Code 1992, § 9-64; Ord. No. 89-03, § 4-43, 3-23-1989; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-64, 9-27-1990) 
Sec. 12-59. - Standards adopted. 
NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm Code, shall apply within the boundaries of the county except where this article is more restrictive. 
(Code 1992, § 9-65; Ord. No. 89-03, § 4-44, 3-23-1989; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-65, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 4, 1-5-2005) 
Sec. 12-60. - Occupancy requirements. 
(a)  Every detention and correctional, educational, health care, and residential structure with an occupant load of greater than 50 persons shall have an appropriate alarm system which shall terminate in a remote supervising station or as otherwise required in NFPA 101. 
(b)  Every assembly structure with an occupancy load of greater than 300 persons shall have an appropriate alarm system which shall terminate in a remote supervising station consistent with a remote supervising station fire alarm system. 
(Code 1992, § 9-67; Ord. No. 89-03, § 4-46, 3-23-1989; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-66, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 6, 1-5-2005; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 8-10-2006) 
Sec. 12-61. - False alarm user fee. 
The county fire marshal is hereby permitted to issue a written warning after the first false alarm transmitted by an automatic signaling device. Said warning shall direct corrective action be taken by the owner and/or subscriber of the alarm system for necessary repairs. Written warnings shall be hand delivered or posted by affixing said warning to the subject property. Subsequent to the issuance of such written warning, the county fire department will be permitted to impose a user fee of $50.00 for each false alarm transmitted from an alarm system within the 90 days immediately following the date upon which said written notice was issued. 
(Code 1992, § 9-68; Ord. No. 89-03, § 4-47, 3-23-1989; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-68, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 7, 1-5-2005) 
Sec. 12-62. - Special alarm systems. 
All structures equipped with sprinkler systems which are built or substantially renovated, or which undergo a change in occupancy classification, shall have an automatic water flow alarm installed which will transmit an immediate alarm to a central monitoring station, with the exceptional of those sprinkler systems located in single-family residential structures. 
(Code 1992, § 9-69; Ord. No. 89-03, § 4-47, 3-23-1989; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-69, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 8, 1-5-2005) 
Sec. 12-63. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person failing to comply with this article shall be subject to citation and the imposition of penalties in accordance with chapter 9, article 1, of the county code of ordinances. 
(b)  Should any building or structure fail to be in compliance with the above standards and exist in such condition as to pose a hazard to life and property, all persons shall be prohibited from occupying the structure by order signed by the fire marshal and posted on the premises. 
(Code 1992, § 9-71; Ord. No. 89-03, § 4-50, 3-23-1989; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-71, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 10, 1-5-2005) 
Secs. 12-64—12-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE PROTECTION 

Sec. 12-89. - Definition. 
A "private fire protection system," is that pipe and its appurtenances on private property between a source of water and the base of the riser (flange or flange and spigot piece or base fee) for automatic sprinkler systems, open sprinkler systems, water spray fixed systems, stand pipe systems, inlets to foam-making systems or the base elbow of private hydrants or monitor nozzles. When connected to the public water system, the private fire protection system begins at a point designated by the public water system. 
(Code 1992, § 9-81; Ord. of 9-24-1987, § 5-1; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-81, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 2006-12, § 2, 8-10-2006) 
Sec. 12-90. - Mandatory connection to public water system. 
(a)  Every lot of a proposed subdivision shall be supplied with adequate water and waste water facilities which shall be approved by the state commissioner of health. Septic tank drain field approval shall be on an individual lot basis. Where public water or waste water facilities are available within the distance specified below, the subdivider shall assure that every lot of the subdivision shall be provided with public water. 

 
For each additional lot after six, an additional 150 feet shall be added per lot to the minimum distance from a water line requiring connection thereto. 
*Measured along public right-of-way to closest point on property. Cost differentials based on line sizes and fire hydrants needed to serve a subdivision versus that needed as part of the overall system will be determined by the water system. 
(b)  Standard fire hydrants will be provided at the spacing defined under section 12-91. Design standards shall be as specified by the American Water Works Association. 
(Code 1992, § 9-82; Ord. of 9-24-1987, § 5-2; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-82, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 2000-14A, § 1, 9-28-2000) 
Sec. 12-91. - Water supplies and fire hydrants. 
(a)  Fire service connections shall be not less than 12 inches nor more than 28 inches above the level of the adjoining ground or pavement. 
(b)  Fire hydrants and water mains in shopping centers, apartments, office condominiums, industrial, multifamily residential and other such private developments shall be measured as an extension of the public fire protection system. Systems of such design shall meet the requirements of the public fire protection system in regard to design, installation standards and testing criteria. Appropriate documentation shall be made available to the fire marshal upon request. Ownership, repair and maintenance shall remain the responsibility of the private developer or owner, or his assigns. Installation approval shall be the responsibility of the county water system. Annual inspection shall be the responsibility of the county fire marshal's office. 
(c)  Fire hydrants shall be spaced a distance not to exceed 400 feet apart in industrial, commercial and multifamily residential areas, including but not limited to hotels, motels, nursing homes, offices, educational buildings, apartments and condominiums, with all areas of each building capable of being reached by 400-foot hose lays. 
(d)  Fire hydrants shall be spaced not less than 600 feet in single-family residential areas. 
(Code 1992, § 9-83; Ord. of 9-24-1987, § 5-3; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-83, 9-27-1990) 
Sec. 12-92. - Standpipes required. 
(a)  Approved standpipe systems shall be installed in all new nonresidential construction exceeding three stories or 36 feet in height. Height shall be determined by measuring from the lowest floor surface at grade to the uppermost floor surface. 
(b)  All standpipe systems shall have a standard Siamese fire department connection. 
(Code 1992, § 9-84; Ord. of 9-24-1987, § 5-4; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-84, 9-27-1990) 
Secs. 12-93—12-137. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES FEE SCHEDULE 

Sec. 12-138. - Bureau of fire prevention permit/inspection fee schedule. 
The board of commissioners shall from time to time establish or amend fees to be collected by services rendered by the county bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1992, § 9-101; Ord. No. 90-15, art. VII, 9-27-1990; Ord. No. 91-10, §§ 5—7, 9-18-1991; Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 8-10-2006; Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 7-12-2010) 
Secs. 12-139—12-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL SPRINKLER CODE 

Sec. 12-150. - Scope. 
This standard deals with the design and installation of automatic sprinkler systems for protection against fire hazards in residential occupancies up to four stories in height. Residential occupancies falling under the scope of this standard include apartment buildings, lodging and rooming houses, residential board and care facilities, hotels, dormitories, personal care, and residential board and care occupancies. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-12-2015) 
Sec. 12-151. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this standard is to provide design and installation requirements for an automatic fire sprinkler system to aid in the detection and control of fires in residential occupancies and thus provide improved protection against injury, life loss, and property damage. A sprinkler system designed and installed in accordance with this standard is expected to prevent flashover (total involvement) in the room of fire origin, when sprinklered, and to improve the chance for occupants to escape or be evacuated. Nothing in this standard is intended to restrict new technologies or alternate arrangements, providing that the level of safety prescribed by the standard is not lowered. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-12-2015) 
Sec. 12-152. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment building shall mean a building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities. 
Automatic fire sprinkler system shall mean those systems that satisfy the standards and definitions contained in the National Fire Protection Association, Fire Codes, specifically: 
(1)  NFPA 13 Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems; and 
(2)  NFPA 13R Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and including Four Stories in Height 
Dormitory shall mean a building or a space in a building in which group sleeping accommodations are provided for more than 16 persons who are not members of the same family in one room, or a series of closely associated rooms, under joint occupancy and single management, with or without meals, but without individual cooking facilities. 
Hotel shall mean a building or group of buildings under the same management in which there are sleeping accommodations for more than 16 persons and primarily used by transients for lodging with or without meals. 
Lodging and rooming house shall mean a building or portion thereof that does not qualify as a one or two-family dwelling, that provides sleeping accommodations for a total of 16 or fewer people on a transient or permanent basis, without personal care services, with or without meals, but without separate cooking facilities for individual occupants. 
Personal care shall mean care involving responsibility for the safety of the resident while inside the building and shall include, but not be limited to, daily awareness by management of the resident's functioning and whereabouts, making and reminding a resident of appointments, the ability and readiness for intervention in the vent of a resident experiencing a crisis, supervision in the areas of nutrition, and actual provision of transient medical care. 
Residential board and care facility shall mean an occupancy used for lodging and boarding of four or more residents, not related by blood or marriage to the owners or operators, for the purpose of providing personal care services. 
Residential board and care occupancy shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Group housing arrangement for physically or mentally handicapped persons who normally attend school in the community, attend worship in the community, or otherwise use community facilities. 
(2)  Group housing arrangement for physically or mentally handicapped persons who are undergoing training in preparation for independent living, for paid employment, or for other normal community activities. 
(3)  Group housing arrangement for the elderly that provides personal care services but that does not provide nursing care. 
(4)  Facilities for social rehabilitation, alcoholism, drug abuse, or mental health problems that contain a group housing arrangement and that provide personal care services but do not provide acute care. 
(5)  Assisted living facilities. 
(6)  Other group housing arrangements that provide personal care services but not nursing care. 
Residential occupancy shall mean any building that satisfies the definitions contained herein for apartment building, lodging and rooming house, residential board and care facility, hotel, dormitory, personal care, and/or residential board and care occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-12-2015) 
Sec. 12-153. - Requirements. 
(a)  Buildings which are included within the definitions of section 12-152 as residential occupancies shall provide and be protected by a fire sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any building shall be responsible for having the system inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 25 Standard for the Inspection, Testing, and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire Protection Systems, 2011 Edition. 
(c)  No person shall shut off, disable, or disarm any automatic fire sprinkler system except for the following purposes: 
(1)  In order to perform required or necessary service or maintenance to such system. Any such maintenance may be conducted after notice has been given to the fire department. 
(2)  In the event of accidental damage to the system that causes undo water flow. 
(d)  In the event that a fire sprinkler system must stay off for an extended time due to repair or maintenance a fire watch may be required during that period. If required the fire watch is to remain in effect until such time that the system is returned to its full capacity. 
(e)  Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the governing NFPA standard for the systems listed below shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of two years. 
(Ord. No. 2015-02, § 1, 2-12-2015) 
Chapter 14 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq.; adoption of rules by county board of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Adoption of state health codes. 
The following health codes established and promulgated by the Georgia department of public health are hereby adopted by the county board of commissioners as part of this Code of Ordinances: 
(a)  The Rules and Regulations for Tourist Accommodations, Chapter 511-6-2 of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Public Health, as it existed on February 28, 2016. 
(b)  The Rules and Regulations for Food Service, Chapter 511-6-1 of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Public Health, as it existed on February 28, 2016. 
(c)  The Rules and Regulations for Portable Sanitation Contractors, Chapter 511-3-6 of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Public Health, as it existed on February 28, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06, § 1, 4-10-2014; Ord. No. 2016-05, § 1, 2-25-2016) 
Editor's note— The Rules and Regulations for Tourist Accommodations, adopted April 10, 2014, is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out at length, and a copy is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the county. 
Sec. 14-2. - Payment of fees. 
(a)  The board of health of the county has adopted a schedule of fees for the enforcement of the regulations contained in this chapter. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, corporation, or other entity to fail to pay a service, inspection, and/or permit fee required by said schedule of fees at the time the permit is issued or the fee is due. In the case of an annual service, permit, or inspection fee, it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, corporation, or other entity to fail to pay such fee on or before the day the fee is due. 
(b)  Any violation of this section may be prosecuted in the same manner as all other board of health regulations are prosecuted and, upon conviction, may be punishable according to the provisions of section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  The director of environmental services may also, after giving 14 days written notice of intention to do so, revoke any permit issued pursuant to board of health regulations. Holders of revoked permits may appeal their revocation to the board of health by filing written notice of their intention to do so in writing within ten days after the decision of the director of environmental services. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, 11-12-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2015, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as § 14-1. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as § 14-2, at the descretion of the editor. 
Secs. 14-3—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SWIMMING FACILITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-19. - Scope. 
The scope of the provisions of this article is to regulate and provide standards for swimming facilities operated in the unincorporated areas of the county, for the use of which a charge is assessed, whether in the form of admission, fees, dues, or otherwise; such swimming facilities to include private as well as public operations. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1; Code 1992, § 18-1) 
Sec. 14-20. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to provide for the general welfare of the citizens of the county by imposing certain minimum standards and requirements regarding the safety and health of those using swimming facilities as herein described. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2; Code 1992, § 18-2) 
Sec. 14-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bathing beach means any swimming or bathing place, together with any building, apparatus, water or land areas used in connection therewith, located at a pond, lake, stream or any other body of fresh water. 
Swimming pool means a structure, either in ground or aboveground, designed for swimming and other water recreation, utilizing water manually or mechanically supplied and including any building or apparatus used in connection therewith. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3; Code 1992, § 18-3) 
Sec. 14-22. - Special regulations for swimming pools. 
(a)  A swimming shell or liner shall be constructed so as to be smooth and have an impervious surface. 
(b)  The swimming pool apron or deck shall be constructed so that there are no raised edges at the joint between the swimming pool capping and the deck. The joint shall be caulked to eliminate any gaps. 
(c)  The swimming pool deck shall be constructed so that the surface pitches at least one-fourth to one inch away from the pool. 
(d)  Filter and equipment rooms shall be constructed so that any surface waters or equipment leaks will drain away from the equipment. 
(e)  The swimming pool shall not be operated without the pool water being continuously filtered. The filter and pump shall be able to turn over the entire pool volume every eight hours against the prevailing head. This shall not include "baby" pools that are emptied at least once a day. 
(f)  Swimming pools shall have an individual water supply. 
(g)  The filter equipment shall be capable of rendering the pool water sparkling clear so that a four-inch diameter black and white disk can be visible at the deepest point in the pool. 
(h)  The free chlorine residual must be maintained continuously at 0.6 mg/l or more. 
(i)  The pH must be maintained at a level of 7.2 to 8.0. 
(Code 1983, § 9-4; Code 1992, § 18-4) 
Sec. 14-23. - Sanitation facilities. 
(a)  There shall be installed at all swimming facilities flush toilets, separately for each sex. 
(b)  Toilet facilities shall: 
(1)  Be located adjacent to the swimming facility. 
(2)  Be clean and free of odors. 
(3)  Have impervious floors properly drained with a covered joint at the wall junction. 
(4)  Have toilet paper and holder provided. 
(5)  Be properly screened so as to be insect proof. 
(6)  Be properly ventilated either naturally or mechanically so as to eliminate any objectionable odor. 
(7)  Be provided with self-closing doors. 
(8)  Have at least one lavatory provided for every 60 bathers. 
(9)  Have at least one shower provided for every 40 bathers. 
(10)  Have urinals pre-hung and of the flush type. 
(Code 1983, § 9-5; Code 1992, § 18-5) 
Sec. 14-24. - General regulations. 
(a)  Persons with excessive sunburn, open sores or bandages of any kind shall not be admitted into the water at any swimming facilities. 
(b)  Persons in an intoxicated condition shall not be allowed in the swimming area. 
(c)  Regarding bathing beach areas, the use of floats shall be allowed, but only in specified, roped-off areas. 
(d)  There shall be a telephone within the immediate vicinity of the swimming facility. 
(e)  The height of diving boards shall be determined by the depth of the water at the site. Each diving board shall be no more than one foot in height for each 1½ feet of water depth. Where there is a minimum depth of eight feet, a springboard may be installed complying with the foregoing regulations. The bottom of each facility must be free of debris at all times. 
(f)  All swimming facility rules and regulations, including the hours that the facility is officially open and a prohibition against swimming at any other time, shall be prominently posted outside the main entrance of the swimming facility and at an appropriate place within the swimming area. 
(g)  Signs or markings clearly indicating water depths shall be posted at all swimming facilities. Such signs or markings shall indicate intervals of no more than two-foot changes in water depth. 
(h)  At all bathing beach areas, the limits of the swimming area shall be marked with ropes and buoys. 
(Code 1983, § 9-6; Code 1992, § 18-6) 
Sec. 14-25. - Lifeguard and lifesaving equipment. 
(a)  Lifeguard. Lifeguards shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  A lifeguard shall not be required, but signs shall be prominently posted wherever a lifeguard is not on duty or is not used. 
(2)  Where lifeguards are used, the hours that a lifeguard is on duty shall be prominently posted. 
(3)  All lifeguards shall have a current senior red cross or YMCA advanced lifesaving rescue and water safety certificate. 
(4)  All lifeguards shall wear some means of identification to denote their position and make them discernible from other swimmers. 
(b)  Lifesaving equipment. Every swimming facility shall have the following minimum lifesaving equipment, which shall be used for only such purposes: 
(1)  One or more light but sturdy poles, not including bamboo, at least 15 feet long and fitted at one end with a blunt hook having its tip at least 18 inches from one end of the pole and to be used for pulling submerged people from the water. 
(2)  One or more throwing ring buoys, for every 50 feet of beach area, not over 24 inches in diameter, having attached a length of one-fourth inch nylon rope (or suitable equivalent, but not including manila rope) at least equal in length to the width of the swimming pool but in no case less than 45 feet in length. 
(3)  The diving area of the swimming facility shall be separated by the use of a buoyed rope stretched across the surface of the water. 
(4)  There shall be provided a first-aid kit in a permanently posted area adjacent to the swimming facility, which shall contain the following: Two blankets, one-inch bandages, two-inch bandages, three-inch bandages, one-inch adhesive tape-by the roll, one pair of scissors, one pair of tweezers, one mild antiseptic, wood splints-at least four of 36 inches in length. All kits should have instructions for mouth-to-mouth resuscitation printed on the front. 
(5)  Each bathing beach area, for all bodies of water over three acres in area, shall have at least one sturdy rowboat in good repair and equipped with two oars. All other bathing beach areas must have a sturdy surfboard capable of carrying two people, and which shall be located close to the water. In addition, each bathing beach area shall have at least one rescue ring or rescue tube with 60 feet of rope placed on a reel. At beaches where there are piers extending into the water, one ring buoy with 60 feet of rope attached shall be placed at each end of the pier. All rope shall be one-fourth-inch diameter nylon or an approved equivalent, but not manila, in good repair. All equipment for lifeguards shall be marked "for lifeguards only." 
(6)  Signs shall be posted in prominent locations around the swimming facilities designating that area where lifesaving equipment is furnished. 
(Code 1983, § 9-7; Code 1992, § 18-7) 
Sec. 14-26. - Compliance. 
All swimming facilities located in the unincorporated areas of the county shall comply with the provisions of this article by no later than June 15, 1982. All swimming pools whose construction does not comply with these regulations shall be deemed nonconforming. Such swimming pools may continue to operate, but any renovation, expansion, repair, or reconstruction shall conform to the provisions as set forth in this article. This section shall not apply to lifesaving equipment. 
(Code 1983, § 9-8; Code 1992, § 18-8) 
Sec. 14-27. - Enforcement. 
The board of commissioners shall provide for the enforcement of this article for swimming facilities and shall cause such facilities to be inspected from time to time in order to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1983, § 9-9; Code 1992, § 18-9) 
Secs. 14-28—14-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATIONS FOR SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, AND RECREATIONAL WATER PARKS 

Sec. 14-58. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division: 
Abrasion hazard means a sharp or rough surface that would scrape the skin by chance during normal use. 
Accessible means easily exposed for the inspection and replacement of materials and/or parts with the use of tools. 
Air induction system means a system whereby a volume of air (only) is induced into a hollow ducting in a spa floor, bench, or other location. The air induction system is activated by a separate air power blower. 
Air pump assist backwash means the compressing of a volume of air in the filter effluent chamber (by means of an air compressor or by the water pressure from the re-circulating pump) which, when released, rapidly decompresses and forces water in the filter chamber through the elements in reverse, dislodging the filter aid and accumulated dirt, carrying it to waste. 
Alkalinity means the amount of bicarbonate, carbonate or hydroxide compounds present in water solution. See also " total alkalinity ." 
Backwash means the process of thoroughly cleansing the filter medium and/or elements and the contents of the filter vessel by the reverse flow of water through the filter. 
Barrier means a fence, safety cover, wall, building wall or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds or covers the swimming pool or spa and obstructs access to the swimming pool, spa or recreational water park. 
Bather means any person using a swimming pool, spa or recreational water park and adjoining deck area for the purpose of water sports, recreation therapy or related activities. 
Bather load means the number of persons in the pool/spa area at any given moment or during any stated period of time. 
Beginner's area means those water areas in pools which are three feet or less in water depth. 
Booster pump system means a system whereby one or more hydrotherapy jets are activated by the use of a pump which is completely independent of the filtration and heating system of a spa. The term "booster pump system" is also a device used to provide hydraulic support for certain types of equipment such as cleaning systems, gas chlorinators and solar systems. 
Breakpoint chlorination means the addition of a sufficient amount of chlorine to water to destroy the combined chlorine present. 
Brominator means a device to apply or to deliver a bromine disinfectant to water at a controlled rate. 
Cartridge means a depth, pleated, or surface-type filter component with fixed dimensions that is designed to remove suspended particles from water flowing through the filter. 
Chemical feeder means a mechanical device for applying chemicals to pool or spa water. 
Chloramine means a compound formed when chlorine combines with nitrogen or ammonia that causes eye and skin irritation and has a strong, objectionable odor. 
Chlorinator means a device to apply or to deliver a chlorine disinfectant to water at a controlled rate. 
Chlorine generator means equipment that generates chlorine, hypochlorous acid, or hypochlorite on site for disinfection and oxidation of water contaminants. 
Circulation equipment means the mechanical components that are part of a circulation system in a pool or spa. Circulation equipment may be, but is not limited to, categories of pumps, hair and lint strainers, filters, valves, gauges, meters, heaters, surface skimmers, inlet/outlet fittings, and chemical feeding devices. The components have separate functions, but when connected to each other by piping, perform as a coordinated system for purposes of maintaining pool or spa water in a clear, sanitary and desirable condition for using. 
Circulation system means an arrangement of mechanical equipment or components, connected by piping to a pool or spa in a closed circuit. The function of a circulation system is to direct water from the pool or spa, causing it to flow through the various system components for purposes of clarifying, heating, purifying and returning the water back to the original body of water. 
Clarifier means a chemical that coagulates and neutralizes suspended particles in water. There are two types: inorganic salts of aluminum or iron and water-soluble organic polyelectrolyte polymers. Also called coagulant or flocculent. 
Contact concentration means the concentration of a chemical in a flow of water. This concentration depends on the rate of addition, the flow rate of the water and the efficiency of the mixing. It is calculated using the equation (assumes complete mixing): 
Amount of chemical (grams/hour/water flow rate (gpm) × 4.41 = contact concentration (mg/l) 
Coping means the cap on the pool or spa wall that provides a finishing edge around the pool or spa. Coping can be formed, cast in place or pre-cast, or pre-fabricated from metal or plastic materials. 
Cove means the radius between the pool or spa wall and the pool or spa floor. 
Covers means something that protects or shelters, or a combination thereof, a swimming pool or spa. 
Cyanuric acid means a chemical that helps reduce the excess loss of chlorine in water due to the ultraviolet rays of the sun. It is also called stabilizer, isocyanuric acid, conditioner or triazinetrione. 
Decks means those areas immediately adjacent to or attached to a pool or spa that are specifically constructed or installed for use by users for sitting, standing or walking. 
Deep areas means water depths in excess of five feet (1.42 meters). 
Department means the department of human resources, State of Georgia. 
Diatomite means the filtering medium of a diatomaceous earth filter composed of microscopic fossil skeletons of the "diatom," a tiny freshwater marine plankton. 
Disinfectant means energy or chemicals to kill undesirable or pathogenic (disease-causing) organisms that have a measurable residual at a level adequate to make the desired kill. 
Diving board means a recreational mechanism for entering a swimming pool, consisting of a semirigid board that derives its elasticity through the use of a fulcrum mounted below the board. 
(1)  Jump board means a recreational mechanism that has a coil spring, leaf spring or comparable device located beneath the board which is activated by the force exerted in jumping on the board. 
(2)  Stationary diving platform means a stationary diving platforms are used for diving and are constructed or located on site. They may be natural or artificial rocks, pedestals or other items. 
DPD (Diethl-p-phenylene diamine) means a reagent and test method that specifically measures bromine or free available and total chlorine, producing a series of colors from pale pink to dark red. 
Effective filter area means total surface area through which the designed flow rate will be maintained during filtration. 
Effluent means the water that flows out of a filter, pump or other device. 
Feet of head means a basis for indicating the resistance in a hydraulic system, equivalent to the height of a column of water that would cause the same resistance (100 feet of head equals 43 pounds per square inch). 
Filter means a device that removes undissolved particles from water by recirculating the water through a porous substance (a filter medium or element). 
Filter element means a device within a filter tank designed to entrap solids and conduct water to a manifold, collection header, pipe, or similar conduit and return it to the pool or spa. A filter element usually consists of a septum and septum support, or a cartridge. 
Free available chlorine (FAC) means that portion of the total chlorine remaining in chlorinated water that has not combined with ammonia or nitrogen compounds and will react chemically with undesirable or pathogenic organisms. 
Handhold/handrail means a device that can be gripped by a user for the purpose of resting and/or steadying him. It is not limited to but may be located inside or outside the pool or spa or as part of a set of steps or deck-installed equipment. 
Hardness means the amount of calcium and magnesium dissolved in water; measured by a test kit and expressed as parts per million (ppm) of equivalent calcium carbonate. 
Health authority means the county board of health—environmental health section. 
Hydrotherapy spa means a unit that may have a therapeutic use but which is not drained, cleaned or refilled for each individual. It may include, but not be limited to, hydrotherapy jet circulation, hot water/cold water mineral baths, air induction bubbles or any combination thereof. Industry terminology for a spa includes, but is not limited to, "therapeutic pool," "hydrotherapy pool," "whirlpool," "hot spa," etc. 
Influent means the water entering a filter or other device. 
In-ground swimming pool means any pool where the sides rest in partial or full contact with the earth. 
Multiple filter-control valve means a multi-port valve having a number of control positions for various filter operations that combines in one unit the function of two or more single valves. 
Non-swimming area means any portion of a pool where water depth, offset ledges or similar irregularities would prevent normal swimming activities. 
Organic matter means perspiration, urine, saliva, suntan oil, cosmetics, lotions, dead skin and similar debris introduced to water by users and the environment. 
Orthotolidine (OTO) means a colorless reagent that reacts with chlorine or bromine to produce a series of yellow-to-orange colors which indicate the amount of chlorine or bromine in water. 
Overflow system means a system for the removal of pool/spa surface water through the use of overflows, surface skimmers and surface water collection systems of various design and manufacture. 
Permanently installed swimming pool means a pool that is constructed in the ground or in a building in such a manner that it cannot be readily disassembled for storage. 
pH means a value expressing the relative acidity or basicity of a substance, such as water, as indicated by the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Pool means any artificial water-holding structure with a closed-loop circulation of water through a water treatment system with a return to the structure. 
Potable water means any water, such as an approved domestic water supply, which is bacteriologically safe and otherwise suitable for drinking. 
PPM means an abbreviation for parts per million, the unit of measurement used in chemical testing which indicates the parts by weight in relation to one million parts by weight of water. It is essentially identical to the term "milligrams per liter (mg/l)." 
Precipitate means a solid material which is forced out of a solution by some chemical reaction and which may settle out or remain as a haze in suspension (turbidity). 
Private pool means any constructed pool, permanent or non-portable, that is intended for noncommercial use as a swimming pool by not more than one owner family and their guests, and that is over 24 inches in depth, has a surface area exceeding 250 square feet and/or a volume over 3,250 gallons. 
PSI means an abbreviation for pounds per square inch. 
Public swimming pool means any structure, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water used by the public for swimming, diving, wading, recreation, or therapy, together with buildings, appurtenances, and equipment used in connection with the body of water, regardless of whether a fee is charged for its use. The term includes municipal, school, hotel, or motel pools and any pool to which access is granted in exchange for payment of a daily fee. The term shall also include pools and spas operated by or serving camps, churches, day care centers, group home facilities of 12 or more clients, institutions, parks, state agencies, apartment complexes, subdivisions, condominiums, country clubs, manufactured home parks, recreational vehicle parks, associations, health clubs, special purpose pools, and recreational water park attractions. 
Rate of flow means the quantity of water flowing past a designated point within a specified time, such as the number of gallons flowing in one minute (gpm). 
Rated pressure means that pressure that is equal to or less than the designed pressure and appears on the data plate of the equipment. 
Recreational water parks means a facility or area together with associated buildings, appurtenances and equipment, that is designated for public bathing or swimming. 
Rehabilitation means the activity of restoring all or part of a pool or spa structure and its component parts back into good condition including the rebuilding and/or replacing of worn and broken parts or components. 
Removable means capable of being disassembled with the use of only simple tools such as a screwdriver, pliers or wrench. 
Return inlet means the aperture or fitting through which the water under positive pressure returns into a pool or spa. 
Return piping means that piping through which water is returned to the pool. 
Ring buoy means a ring-shaped floating buoy capable of supporting a user. 
Shallow areas means portions of a pool or spa with water depths five feet or less. 
Shock treatment means the practice of adding significant amounts of an oxidizing chemical to water to destroy ammonia and nitrogenous and organic contaminants in water. 
Skimmer weir means the part of a skimmer which adjusts automatically to small changes in water level to assure a continuous flow of water to the skimmer. 
Slip resisting means a surface that has been treated or constructed so as to significantly reduce the chance of a user slipping. The surface should not be an abrasion hazard. 
Sodium Hypochlorite (NaOCl) means a clear liquid form of an inorganic chlorine compound obtainable in concentrations of five to 16 percent available chlorine. 
Spa means a hydrotherapy pool of irregular or geometric shell design. See also " hydrotherapy spa. " 
Special purpose pool means any pool operated for recreational play and other special purposes including, but not limited to, wave or surf-action pools, activity pools/interactive pools, wading pools and play areas. These include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Activity/interactive/wading pool means a pool which does not exceed 24 inches in depth and contains any number of water features within the pool area. 
(2)  Continuous watercourse means a riding watercourse where ingress and egress is effectively limited to designated points of entry and exit. This is also known as a lazy river. 
(3)  Dual use pool means a pool that is normally used as a swimming pool, but has no more than one water slide or other feature other than diving boards, that uses the main body of water as its landing or activity area. 
(4)  Falling-entry pools includes, but is not limited to, slides, flumes, lily pad walks, log rolls, cable, rope, or boom drops, and any other falling-entry features. These types of pools allow for the bather to drop into the pool area from a height of one to four feet above the water surface and in various positions of entry. 
(5)  Wading pool means a shallow pool not exceeding 24 inches, that is void of any water activity features. 
(6)  Wave pool means a large body of water that has a mechanism for generating an oscillating wave-form at one end and ending at the other end with a zero-depth-entry. 
(7)  Zero-depth-entry pools means any type of pool that, in place of a wall at one end, may have a sloping edge or beach. 
(8)  Zero-depth-pool means a pad which contains various fountains and/or interactive water spray or waterfall features. The pad slopes to one or more drains which empty into a reservoir which is re-circulated and disinfected before its return to the water features. 
Suction outlet means the aperture or fitting through which the water under negative pressure is drawn from the pool or spa. 
Suction piping means that piping through which water is removed from the pool. 
Surface skimming system means perimeter-type overflows, surface skimmers, and surface water collection systems of various design and manufacture which permit the continuous removal of floating debris and surface water to the filter. 
Test kit means a device used to monitor specific chemical or agent residual or demands in pool or spa water. 
Therapeutic pool means a pool used in physical programs operated by medical facilities licensed by the department and operated by a licensed physical therapist. 
Time clock means a mechanical device that automatically controls the periods that a pump, filter, chlorinator, heater, blower and other electrical devices are running. 
Total alkalinity means the ability or capacity of water to resist change in pH; also known as the buffering capacity of water. Total alkalinity is measured with a test kit and expressed as ppm. 
Total available chlorine (TAC) means the sum of both the free available and combined chlorines. 
Turbidity means the cloudy condition of water due to the presence of extremely fine particulate materials in suspension that interfere with the passage of light. 
Turnover rate means the period of time (usually in hours) required to circulate a volume of water equal to the pool or spa capacity. 
Vacuum means the reduction of atmospheric pressure within a pipe, tank, pump or other vessel. Vacuum is measured in inches of mercury. One inch of mercury is equivalent to 1.13 feet of head. The practical maximum vacuum is 30 inches of mercury or 33.9 feet of head. 
Waterline means, in relation to the following systems: 
(1)  Skimmer system means the waterline shall be at the midpoint of the operating range of the skimmers when there are no users in the pool or spa. 
(2)  Overflow system means the waterline shall be at the top of the overflow rim. 
(Code 1992, § 18-20; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-59. - Scope. 
(a)  These rules prescribe minimum design, construction, and operation requirements that are intended to protect the health and safety of the public in swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks. 
(b)  These rules are intended to cover certain aspects of the design, equipment, operation, installation, new construction and rehabilitation of swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks. Where adequate standards do not exist and these rules do not provide sufficient guidance for consideration of innovations in design, construction, and operation of proposed pools, spas or recreational water parks, the health authority will establish requirements necessary to protect the health and safety of the pool patrons. 
(c)  These rules shall not apply to private swimming pools and hot tubs/spas, therapeutic pools, therapeutic chambers drained, cleaned and refilled after each individual use nor to religious ritual baths used solely for religious purposes. 
(d)  All pools, existing and newly constructed, shall meet these rules except as allowed for in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Public swimming pools constructed or remodeled prior to December 31, 2000, that do not meet specific design and construction requirements of these rules, shall not be required to comply with design and construction requirements other than requirements related to the abatement of suction hazards. 
(f)  No single drain, single-suction outlet public swimming pool shall be allowed to operate unless a protective cover is properly installed over the single-suction outlet. 
(Code 1992, § 18-21; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-60. - Provisions. 
(a)  Permit. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public pool, spa or recreational water park, without having first obtained a valid operating permit from the health authority pursuant to this division; 
(2)  Permits are not transferable and are invalidated by change of ownership; 
(3)  Each individually-treated pool will operate under a separate permit; 
(4)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to new or existing public pools, spas or recreational water park attractions, the applicant shall provide evidence of satisfactory compliance with the provisions of these rules and all other provisions of laws which apply to the location, construction and maintenance of the pool, spa or recreational water park and the safety of persons therein; 
(5)  The permit shall be prominently displayed at all times, as close to the main entrance as practicable, as determined by the health authority; 
(6)  The permit shall be the property of the health authority and shall be returned within seven days to the health authority when the pool, spa or recreational water park ceases to operate, has a change of ownership, or where the permit is revoked. 
(b)  Application for initial operating permit. 
(1)  The management of a public pool, spa or recreational water park shall submit to the health authority an application to operate a swimming pool, spa or recreational water park attraction at least 14 days prior to the starting of construction. 
(2)  The application shall be prepared in duplicate on forms provided by the health authority. The original shall be forwarded to the health authority and a copy retained by the management. 
(c)  Plans. 
(1)  Submission of plans. Properly prepared plans and specifications must be submitted to the health authority for review, approval and issuance of a construction permit when a public swimming pool, spa or recreational water park attraction is constructed or extensively remolded or renovated, or when an existing structure is converted to use as a public pool, spa or recreational water park attraction. 
(2)  Plans and specifications. The plans and specifications shall be submitted to the health authority at least 14 days prior to beginning construction. The plans shall indicate, at a minimum, the proposed layout, the mechanical plans, the construction materials, and the type and model of proposed equipment. 
(3)  A minimum of two sets of drawings of the construction project shall be submitted, containing complete details so as to clearly document to the health authority the work to be undertaken. Additional sets of drawings may be required. Drawings shall be complete and shall comply with standard architectural/engineering practice. The maximum bathing load shall be stated on the plans. 
(4)  Complete specifications of the project shall accompany the plans including manufacturer's cut sheets and/or specifications on all equipment, and hydraulics analysis. 
(5)  Any additional data required by the health authority for the purpose of clarification, anticipated use, or to support any changes in design or scope of the project, must be submitted prior to the issuance of a permit to construct. 
(6)  One signed and approved set of the construction plans shall remain at the construction site at all times during construction. 
(7)  The swimming pool, spa or recreational water park shall be built in compliance with the plans as approved unless subsequent written approval of changes has been given by the health authority. 
(8)  The swimming pool, spa or recreational water park owner or agent shall notify the health authority at specific, predetermined stages of construction and at the time of completion of the pool to allow inspections. 
(9)  A construction permit is valid for 12 months from the date of issue. After this time the health authority may require re-submission of plans and specifications and issuance of a new construction permit if the project has not begun or has not been completed. 
(Code 1992, § 18-22; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-61. - Structural design. 
(a)  The structural design and materials used shall be in accordance with generally accepted good structural engineering practices. 
(b)  Sand or earth shall not be permitted as an interior finish in a swimming pool or spa. 
(c)  In climates subject to freezing temperatures, the pool or spa shell and appurtenances, piping, filter system, pump and motor and other components shall be designed and constructed so as to facilitate protection from damage due to freezing. 
(d)  The surfaces within the pool or spa intended to provide footing for users shall be designed to provide a slip-resistant surface that is ridged, and puncture and tear resistant. 
(e)  The roughness or irregularity of the surfaces within the pool shall not be constructed so as to cause injury or discomfort to the feet during normal use. 
(f)  The colors, patterns or finishes of the pool interior shall not obscure the existence or presence of objects or surfaces within the pool. 
(g)  Swimming pools and spas as well as all appurtenances shall be constructed of materials which are nontoxic to man and the environment; which are impervious and enduring; which can withstand the design stresses; and which will provide a watertight structure with a smooth and easily cleaned surface without cracks or joints, excluding structural joints, or to which a smooth, easily cleaned surface finish is applied or attached. Materials of manufacture for swimming pools and spas shall be capable of fulfilling the design, installation, and intended use requirements in these rules. The materials of manufacture, components and accessories used in public spas shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Plumbing. All plumbing shall be sized, installed, and maintained according to applicable state regulations and/or local plumbing codes. Written evidence shall be provided from a licensed plumbing contractor or the plumbing inspector, as required by the health authority, of compliance with the plumbing code. 
(2)  Electrical systems. All electrical wiring, equipment, and installation including the grounding of pool components shall conform with the national, state and local electrical codes. Written evidence shall be provided from a licensed electrical contractor or electrical inspector, as required by the health authority, of compliance with all electrical codes. 
(3)  Re-circulation and treatment systems and other components. All re-circulation and treatment system equipment and all other components such as filters, recessed automatic surface skimmers, ionizers, ozone generators, heaters, disinfection feeders, and chlorine generators must be tested and approved using the current NSF Standard Number 50, "Circulation System Components and Related Materials for Swimming Pool, Spas/Hot Tubs." If standards do not exist for a specific product, the manufacturer must work with NSF or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or other approved agency to develop such standards to the approval of the health authority. Written evidence shall be provided from the designing engineer that all re-circulation and treatment systems and all components used in the installation meet these standards. 
(4)  Material surfaces. All material surfaces that come in contact with the user shall be finished so that they do not constitute a cutting, pinching, puncturing or abrasion hazard under casual contact and intended use. All materials shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. 
(5)  Compatibility. Combinations of different materials shall be chemically and mechanically compatible for their intended use and environment. 
(h)  Roofs or canopies over pools or spas shall be constructed so that water run-off does not drain into the pool or spa. 
(Code 1992, § 18-23; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-62. - Dimensional design. 
(a)  Limits . No limits are specified for the shape of swimming pools, spas or recreational water park attractions except that consideration shall be given to shape from the standpoint of safety and circulation of the water. 
(1)  There shall be no protrusions, extensions, means of entanglement or other obstructions in the swimming area which can cause the entrapment or injury of the user. 
(2)  There shall be construction tolerances allowed on all dimensional designs. Overall length, width and depth in the deep end of a swimming pool may vary plus or minus three inches. All other overall dimensions in a swimming pool and in a spa may vary plus or minus two inches, unless otherwise specified. The designed waterline shall have a maximum construction tolerance at the time of completion of the work of plus or minus one-fourth inch for pools and spas with adjustable weir surface skimming systems and of plus or minus one-eighth inch for pools and spas with non-adjustable surface skimming systems. 
(3)  The size of pools shall be governed by the requirements of the activities for which the installation is intended. 
(b)  Walls . Walls shall not be greater than 11 degrees from plumb for a minimum depth of two feet nine inches from the waterline in deep areas or two feet three inches in the shallow areas. Below these depths the wall may be radiused to join the floor. 
(c)  Floor slopes . Floor slopes in pools shall, at a minimum, be in compliance with the following: 
(1)  All slopes shall be uniform. 
(2)  The slope of the floor from the shallow end wall towards the deep end shall not exceed one foot in 12 feet to the point of the first slope change. 
(3)  The point of the first slope change shall be defined as the point at which the floor slope exceeds one foot in 12 feet and shall not occur at a depth greater than five feet. 
(4)  The slope of the floor from the point of the first slope change to the deep end shall not exceed one foot in three feet. Such slopes are not intended to provide any less water depth than those specified if the pool is intended for diving. 
(5)  Transitional radius from wall to floor where floor slopes join the wall shall comply with the following: 
a.  The radius shall have its center no less than two feet nine inches below the waterline in deep areas, or two feet six inches in the shallow area. 
b.  The radius shall be tangent at the point where the radius either meets the wall or the floor. 
c.  The radius shall be at least equal to or greater than the depth of the pool minus the vertical wall depth measured from the waterline (or tolerance allowed in subsection (b) of this section, minus three inches to allow draining to the main drain. 
(radius) minimum = pool depth - vertical wall depth - three inches) 
(d)  Water depths . Water depths at the shallow end of the swimming area shall be a maximum of three feet six inches except for racing pools which must have a minimum depth of three feet six inches. 
(1)  The beginners' area of a pool shall be visually set apart from, but may be adjoined to, the shallow area and shall not adjoin the deep area. 
(2)  The transition point or point of slope change of the pool from the beginners' area to the shallow area and from the shallow area to the deep area and at the points of separation of diving, slide and amusement areas shall be visually set apart with a rope and float line, depth markers and a four inch minimum width row of floor tile, painted line or similar means of a color contrasting with the bottom. In diving pools with a constant slope, the shallow area shall be visually set apart from the deep area with a rope and float line, depth markers and a four inch minimum width row of floor tile, painted line or similar means of a color contrasting with the bottom. The health authority may waive the need for a rope and float line in swim-out areas or similar construction where deemed necessary. 
(e)  Diving areas . Diving areas in pools shall conform to the minimum water depths, areas, slopes and other dimensions shown in subsection (f) of this section. If a wall exists, then it shall conform with the 3:1 slope in the point D dimension and the L 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 dimensions. 
(1)  When diving equipment is installed, it shall conform to the specifications set forth in section 14-63(g) and shall be located in the diving area of the pool so as to provide the minimum dimensions as shown in subsection (f) of this section. 
(2)  The tip of the diving equipment shall be located at point A, which is the reference point of all other dimensions. 
(3)  There shall be a completely unobstructed clear vertical distance of 13 feet above any diving board measured from the center of the front end of the board. This area shall extend horizontally at least eight feet behind, eight feet to each side and 16 feet ahead of point A. 
(4)  Public pools with diving facilities in excess of three meters in height or pools designed for platform diving shall comply with the dimensional design requirements of FINA, U.S. diving, national federation of state high school associations (NFSHSA), or similar authority. 
(f)  Minimum dimensions for diving portion of pools . 
(1)  A diagram showing points where dimensions are measured is attached as Exhibit "A" with said Exhibit "A" being incorporated into this division by this reference hereto. Note that the shallow portion of the pool is not shown. 
(2)  Minimum dimensions for points given in diagram (1). 

 
L2, L3, and L4 combined represent the minimum distance from the tip of board to pool well opposite diving equipment. 
NOTE: Placement of boards shall observe the following minimum dimensions. With multiple board installations minimum pool widths must be increased accordingly. 

 
(g)  Offset ledges . When provided, offset ledges shall fall within 11 degrees from plumb starting at the junction of the pool wall and waterline and shall have a slip-resistant surface. The outer two inch edge shall be painted a contrasting color. The maximum width shall be eight inches. The typical allowable dimensions are based on the depths shown in Exhibit "B" with said Exhibit "B" being incorporated into this division by this reference hereto. 
(h)  Underwater seat benches . Underwater seat benches in pools, when provided, shall have a maximum horizontal seat bench depth of 20 inches below the waterline, be visually set apart by having the outer two inches of each seat painted in a contrasting color, have a slip-resisting surface, and shall be located fully outside of the required minimum diving water envelope if the pool is intended for use with diving equipment. Underwater seat benches shall be permitted in the deep end of the pool only if they are either completely recessed, shaped to be compatible with the shape of the pool wall, or in a corner of the pool. 
(i)  Maximum user load and pool size . Maximum user load at all public pools except spas, shall be in accordance with Table 1 below. Tables 2(a) and (b) are to be used only to establish the minimum pool size allowable: 
(1)  The user load shall be the maximum number of people allowed in the swimming pool at one time. Use of the table in calculating the bathing load shall be cumulative. 

 
(2)  Maximum bathing load per number of living or dwelling units shall be used only to establish the minimum pool size allowable. The use of these tables in calculating the bather load shall be cumulative. These tables do not apply to spas. 
a.  Swimming pools with transient bathers. 

 
b.  Swimming pools with non-transient bathers. 

 
(3)  The maximum user load in a spa at one time shall not exceed one person per nine square feet of surface area. 
(j)  Wading pool water depth . Wading pools shall be separate and physically set apart from beginning or shallow water areas of swimming pools by at least six feet of deck. Where a wading pool is adjacent to any deep water area, a minimum four foot high barrier shall be installed separating the two pools. 
(1)  Wading pools shall have a maximum water depth of 24 inches. The water depth at the perimeter shall not exceed 18 inches. Water depths may be reduced from the above maximums and brought to zero at the most shallow point. 
(2)  Walls in wading pools shall be vertical or within 11 degrees of vertical except for the lower six inches which shall be radiused to the floor. Walls shall not extend more than six inches above the waterline at any point. 
(3)  Floors of wading pools shall be uniform, sloped to drain with a maximum slope of one foot in 12 feet. 
(k)  Spa water depth . The maximum water depth in a spa shall be four feet measured from the waterline. Exceptions may be made for spas designed for a special purpose. 
(1)  Multi-level seating in a spa may be provided, but the maximum water depth of any seat or sitting bench shall be 28 inches measured from the waterline. 
(2)  The spa shall be provided with a suitable handhold around its perimeter in areas where water depths exceed three feet six inches. Handholds shall be provided no further apart than four feet and may consist of any one or a combination of the following options: 
a.  Coping, ledges, radiused flanges or decks along the immediate top edge of the spa shall provide a suitable slip-resisting handhold located not more than 12 inches above the waterline; 
b.  Ladders, steps or seat ledges; or 
c.  A secured rope or railing at or not more than 12 inches above the waterline. 
(3)  The slope of the floor in a spa shall not exceed one foot in 12 feet vertical to horizontal. 
(Code 1992, § 18-24; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-63. - Decks and deck equipment. 
(a)  These requirements shall be for decks and deck equipment used by users and shall apply at the time of construction. 
(1)  Decks shall be designed and installed in accordance with the engineering practices required in the area of installation. This includes the design and quality of subbase when required, concrete mix design, reinforcing, joints, etc. 
(2)  Decks, ramps, coping and similar step surfaces shall be slip-resisting and easily cleanable. 
(3)  Special features in or on decks such as markers, brand insignias or similar features shall conform to this division. 
(4)  Risers for steps for the deck shall be uniform and have a minimum height of 3¾ inches and a maximum height of 7½ inches. The minimum tread depth shall be ten inches. 
(5)  Excavation areas shall be adequately compacted when they support the decks. 
(6)  The deck, including coping, shall have a minimum four feet width of continuous, unobstructed walking area maintained at all times. 
(7)  A minimum four foot deck width shall be provided on the sides and rear of any diving equipment. A deck clearance of 24 inches shall be provided around any other deck equipment that is 36 inches or less in height above the deck. A deck clearance of 36 inches shall be provided around all other deck equipment. 
(8)  A four foot minimum, continuous unobstructed deck, which may include the coping, shall be provided around at least 50 percent or more of a spa. 
(9)  The minimum slope of the decks shall be one-eighth inch per one foot. 
(10)  The maximum voids between adjoining concrete slabs, and/or between concrete slabs and expansion joint material, shall be three-sixteenths inch of horizontal clearance with a maximum difference in vertical elevation of one-fourth inch. 
(11)  Construction joints where pool coping meets decks shall be watertight and shall not allow water to pass to the ground beneath. 
(12)  The areas where the decks join the pool and spa coping shall be designed and installed so as to protect the coping and its mortar bed from damage as a result of reasonable movement of adjoining decks. 
(13)  Joints in decks shall be provided to minimize the potential for cracks due to a change in elevations, separation of surfaces or movement of the slab. 
(14)  The areas where the decks joins concrete work shall be protected by expansion joints to protect the pool adequately from the pressures of relative movements. 
(15)  Decks shall be edged, have a radius, or be otherwise relieved to eliminate sharp corners. 
(16)  Decks shall be sloped to effectively drain either to perimeter areas or to deck drains. Drainage shall remove pool and spa splash water, deck cleaning water and rain water without leaving standing water. 
(17)  Site drainage shall be provided so as to direct all perimeter deck drainage as well as general site and roof drainage away from the pool. When required, yard drains shall be installed to prevent the accumulation or puddling of site water in the general area of the decks and related improvements. 
(18)  If used, an open pit or leaching design for backwash sump purposes shall be located so that it falls completely below adjacent decks and fully outside a line projected 45 degrees downward and away from such decks, or shall be designed to accommodate local soil conditions and the volume of backwash as represented in Exhibit "C" with said Exhibit "C" being incorporated into this division by this reference hereto. 
(19)  Circulation system piping, other than that integrally included in the manufacture of the pool or spa, shall be subject to an induced static hydraulic pressure test (sealed system) at 50 pounds per square inch (psi) for at least 30 minutes or longer as determined by the health authority. This test shall be performed before the deck is poured and the pressure shall be maintained through the deck pour. 
(20)  Valves installed in or under any decks shall provide a minimum ten inches diameter access cover and valve pit to facilitate servicing. 
(21)  A hose bib and a vacuum breaker shall be provided for washing down the entire deck area. 
(22)  The deck area will be kept clean of all trash and debris. 
(b)  Entry/exit. All pools except spas, shall have at least two means of entry/exit located so as to serve both ends of the pool. These shall consist of ladders, stairs or recessed treads, or a walking entry and may be used in combination. All treads shall have slip-resisting surfaces. 
(1)  Where water depths are 24 inches or less at the pool wall, such areas shall be considered as providing their own natural mode for entry/exit. 
(2)  For pools or water areas over 30 feet in width, both sides of the deep portions of the pool shall have entries/exits provided. 
(3)  A means of entry/exit for the shallow end shall be located between the shallow end wall and the cross section at point C, while a means of entry/exit for the deep end shall be between the deep end wall and the cross section at point B as shown in section 14-62(f). 
(4)  A means of entry/exit shall be provided at a minimum of every 75 linear feet of pool wall or fraction thereof. 
(5)  Stairs, ladders and recessed treads shall be located so as not to interfere with racing lanes if applicable. 
(c)  Pool stairs. The design and construction of protruding and recessed pool stairs shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Step treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal depth of ten inches and a minimum unobstructed surface area of 240 square inches. 
(2)  Risers at the centerline of the treads shall have a maximum uniform height of ten inches, with the bottom riser height allowed to vary from two inches to not more than ten inches. 
(3)  Each set of stairs shall be provided with at least one handrail to serve all treads and risers. Handrails shall conform to the following: 
a.  Handrails, if removable, shall be installed in such a way that they cannot be removed without the use of tools. 
b.  The leading edge of handrails facilitating stairs and pool entry/exit shall be no more than 18 inches plus or minus three inches, horizontally from the vertical plane of the bottom riser (where applicable). 
c.  The outside diameter of handrails shall be between one inch and 1 9/10 inches. 
(4)  Underwater seats, benches or swim-outs may be provided as part of the stairs or recessed treads. 
(d)  Pool ladders. The design and construction of pool ladders shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Pool ladders shall be made entirely of corrosion-resisting materials. 
(2)  Ladders shall provide two handholds or two handrails. 
(3)  Below the water level, there shall be a clearance of not more than six inches nor less than three inches between any ladder tread edge, measured from the pool wall side of the tread and the pool wall. 
(4)  The clear distance between ladder handrails shall be a minimum of 17 inches and a maximum of 24 inches. 
(5)  There shall be a uniform height between ladder treads, with a seven inch minimum distance and a 12 inch maximum distance. 
(6)  Ladder treads shall have a minimum horizontal depth of 1½ inches. 
(e)  Recessed treads. The design and construction of recessed treads in the pool wall shall conform to the following. 
(1)  Recessed treads at the centerline shall have a uniform vertical spacing of 12 inches maximum and seven inches minimum. 
(2)  The vertical distance between the pool coping edge, deck or step surface and the uppermost recessed tread shall be a maximum of 12 inches. 
(3)  Recessed treads shall have a minimum depth of five inches and a minimum width of 12 inches. 
(4)  Recessed treads shall drain into the pool to prevent the accumulation of dirt. 
(5)  Each set of recessed treads shall be provided with a set of handrails/grabrails/handholds to serve all treads and risers. 
(f)  Spa entry/exit. Spas shall have a means of entry/exit at a minimum of every 50 feet or portion thereof, where water depths are greater than 24 inches. 
(1)  Subsections (d) and (e) of this section shall apply to ladders and recessed treads in spas. 
(2)  Spas shall be equipped with at least one handrail (or ladder equivalent) for each 50 feet of perimeter or portion thereof, to designate the point of entry and exit. 
a.  Handrails shall be installed in such a way that they cannot be removed without the use of tools. 
b.  The leading edge of a handrail in the spa shall be no more than 18 inches plus or minus three inches horizontally from the vertical plane of the bottom riser (where applicable). 
c.  The outside diameter of handrails shall be between 1 9/10 inches. 
(3)  The design and construction of spa steps and seat benches, where used, shall conform to the following: 
a.  Step treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal depth of ten inches for a minimum continuous width of 12 inches. Step treads shall have slip-resisting surfaces. 
b.  Riser heights shall not be greater than 12 inches. Where the bottom tread serves as a bench or seat, the bottom riser may be a maximum of 14 inches above the spa floor. 
c.  The first and last risers need not be uniform but shall comply with riser height requirements as noted above. The first (top) riser is measured from the finished deck. 
d.  Intermediate risers, those between the first and last risers, shall be uniform in height. 
e.  Each set of steps shall be provided with at least one handrail to serve all treads and risers. 
f.  The outer two inch edge of each step shall be painted a contrasting color. 
(g)  Supports for diving equipment. Supports, platforms, stairs, and ladders for diving equipment shall be designed to carry the anticipated loads. Stairs and ladders shall be of corrosion-resisting material, easily cleanable and with slip-resisting tread. 
(1)  All diving stands higher than 21 inches measured from the deck to the top butt end of the board shall be provided with stairs and/or a ladder. Step treads shall be self-draining. 
(2)  Platforms and diving equipment of one meter or higher shall be protected with guard rails which shall be at least 30 inches above the diving board and extend to the edge of the pool wall. All platforms or diving equipment higher than one meter shall have guard rails which are at least 36 inches above the diving board and extend to the edge of the pool wall. 
(h)  Diving equipment. Diving equipment shall be designed for swimming pool use and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(1)  Diving equipment manufacturers shall provide installation instructions and specifications with each unit. 
(2)  A label shall be permanently affixed to the diving equipment or jump board and shall include: 
a.  Manufacturer's name and address; 
b.  Board equipment length; 
c.  Identification as to diving or jump board; and 
d.  Fulcrum-setting specifications (if applicable). 
(3)  Diving equipment shall have slip-resisting tread surfaces. 
(4)  Diving equipment shall be permanently anchored to the pool deck. The edge of the board at the tip end shall be level with the water surface. The tip end of the board over the pool water surface may be higher than the butt end of the board. 
(5)  Maximum board height over the water shall have plus three inches tolerance. 
(6)  The maximum construction tolerance of the tip of the board from point A as shown in section 14-62(f) shall be plus or minus three inches. The diving equipment shall be in compliance with section 14-62(e). 
(i)  The requirements of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) Standard for Swimming Pool Slides as published in the Code of Federal Regulations, 16 CFR 1207, shall be used for standards relating to swimming pool slides. Installation and use instructions shall be provided with each unit by the manufacturer. 
(j)  Play structures and other equipment shall be governed by other appropriate authorities such as building codes, CPSC, and amusement ride regulations. 
(Code 1992, § 18-25; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-64. - Circulation systems. 
(a)  A circulation system consisting of pumps, piping, return inlets and suction outlets, filters and other necessary equipment shall be provided for complete circulation of water through all parts of the pool. 
(1)  The equipment for a swimming pool shall be of adequate size to turnover the entire pool water capacity at least once every six hours unless otherwise specified in subsection (a)(3) of this section. The equipment for a spa shall be of adequate size to turnover the entire spa water capacity at a minimum of once every 30 minutes. This system shall be designed to give the proper turnover rate based on the manufacturer's recommended maximum pressure flow of the filter in clean media condition of the filter. 
(2)  In pools other than those listed in subsection (a)(3) of this section, built prior to December 31, 2000, the turnover rate must be at least once every eight hours. Upon rehabilitation of a pool which includes piping and/or circulation equipment changes, or by January 1, 2003, whichever is sooner, a six-hour turnover rate will be met if possible as determined by the health authority. 
(3)  Turnover rates for pools by type: 

 
(4)  Timing devices will be allowed for the purpose of turning off the circulation system during times when a pool is not being used. Timing devices must be set to provide at least one complete turnover immediately prior to the pool reopening. 
(5)  Water clarity shall be maintained. (Clarity is a function of proper filtration and maintenance of proper chemical operational parameters.) When standing at the pool's edge at the deep end, the main drain covers or a standard black and white disc shall be clearly visible. When standing at a spa's edge, the deepest portion of the spa floor shall be visible in a still condition. 
(6)  Circulation system components which require replacement or servicing shall be accessible for inspection, repair, or replacement and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(7)  Where equipment sizing falls within the scope of NSF International testing, materials and equipment used in the circulation system shall comply with the appropriate requirements of NSF International Standard 50. 
(8)  Pool and spa equipment shall be properly supported to prevent damage from misalignment, settlement, etc. The equipment shall be mounted so as to minimize the potential for the accumulation of debris and moisture, following manufacturer's instructions. 
(b)  Water velocity. The water velocity in the pool or spa piping shall be a minimum of five feet per second, but shall not exceed ten feet per second for discharge piping (except for copper pipe where the velocity should not exceed eight feet per second), and a minimum of four feet per second, but not exceed six feet per second for suction piping, unless summary calculations are provided to show that the greater flow is possible with the pump and piping provided. Pool and spa piping shall be sized to permit the rated flows for filtering and cleaning without exceeding the maximum head of the pump. 
(1)  The pump shall be sized to deliver the required flow rate against the total system head involved. 
(2)  A wading pool shall have a separate circulation system of adequate size to turnover the entire pool water capacity at least once every two hours. 
(c)  Piping and fittings. The circulation system piping and fittings shall be nontoxic, shall be considered to be process piping and shall be of material able to withstand operating pressures and operating conditions. 
(1)  Pool and spa piping subject to damage by freezing shall have a uniform slope in one direction equipped with valves for adequate drainage. Pool and spa piping shall be supported at sufficient intervals to prevent entrapment of air, water or dirt. Provision shall be made for expansion or contraction of pipes. 
(2)  Equipment shall be designed and fabricated to drain the pool or spa water from the equipment, together with exposed face piping, by removal of drain plugs and manipulating valves, or by other methods. Refer to manufacturer's recommendations for specific information on draining the system. 
(d)  System condition. Gauges shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  A pressure or vacuum gauge or other means of indicating system condition shall be provided in the circulation system in an easily readable location. 
(2)  A flow meter measuring the rate of flow through the filter system with an appropriate range readable in gallons per minute (GPM) and accurate within ten percent actual flow shall be provided. The flow indicator shall be capable of measuring from one-half to at least 1½ times the design flow rate. The gauge shall be located after the filtering equipment and in such location on the return line, so as to measure the total amount of water returning to the pool according to the manufacturer's installation specifications. 
(e)  Water clarity and chemistry. The circulation system shall be capable of maintaining water clarity and water chemistry requirements and shall operate 24 hours per day, except when an automatic timing device is installed that will allow at least one complete turnover, immediately prior to beginning the next period of operation. 
(f)  Instructions. Operation and maintenance instructions shall be provided for the circulation system. 
(Code 1992, § 18-26; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-65. - Filters. 
(a)  Design. Filters shall be designed so that after cleaning per manufacturer's instructions, the system can provide the water clarity noted in section 14-64(a)(5). 
(1)  Filter sizing shall be per NSF International Standard 50 with the specific maximum flow rates per surface area based on media used. 
(2)  Filters shall be designed so that filtration surfaces can be inspected and serviced. 
(b)  Internal pressure. On pressure-type filters, a means shall be provided to permit the release of internal pressure. 
(1)  Any filter incorporating an automatic internal air release as its principal means of air release shall have lids which provide a slow and safe release of pressure as a part of its design. 
(2)  Any separation tank used in conjunction with any filter tank shall have a manual means of air release or a lid which provides a slow and safe release of pressure as it is opened as a part of its design. 
(c)  Instructions. Pressure filters and separation tanks shall have operation and maintenance instructions permanently installed on the filter or separation tank and shall include a precautionary warning statement not to start up the system after maintenance without first opening the air release and proper reassembly of the filter and separation tank. The statement shall be visible and noticeable within the area of the air release. 
(d)  Piping. Piping furnished with the filter shall be of suitable material capable of withstanding 1½ times the working pressure. The suction piping shall not collapse when there is a complete shutoff of flow on the suction side of the pump. 
(e)  A sight glass shall be installed on the waste discharge line of pressure filters so that the progress of filter washing can be observed. 
(Code 1992, § 18-27; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-66. - Pumps and motors. 
(a)  Sizing. A pump and motor shall be provided for circulation of the pool and spa water. Performance of all pumps shall meet or exceed the conditions of flow required for filtering and cleaning (if applicable) the filters against the total dynamic head developed by the complete system. Where applicable, pumps shall comply with the NSF International Standard 50, or Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 1081. 
(b)  Strainer or screen. With all pressure filter systems, a cleanable strainer or screen shall be provided upstream of the circulation pumps to remove solids, debris, hair, lint, etc. 
(c)  Pumps and motors shall be accessible for inspection and service. 
(d)  Safe operation. The design and construction of the pumps and component parts shall provide safe operation. 
(e)  Pump seal. Where a mechanical pump seal is provided, components of the seal shall be corrosion-resisting and capable of operating under conditions normally encountered in pool operation. 
(f)  Capability. Motors shall be capable of operating the pump under full load with a voltage variation of plus or minus ten percent from the nameplate rating. If the maximum service factor of the motor is exceeded (at full voltage), the manufacturer shall indicate this on the pump curve. 
(g)  Overload protection. All motors shall have thermal or current overload protection, either built in or in the line starter, to provide locked rotor and running protection. 
(h)  When the pump is below the waterline, valves shall be installed on permanently connected suction and discharge lines, located in an accessible place outside the walls of the pool, where they shall be readily and easily accessible for maintenance and removal of the pump. 
(i)  Pressure or vacuum gauges shall be installed on all public pools and spas. 
(1)  The vacuum gauge shall be installed after the filter and before the pump, as close to the pump return inlet as possible while still maintaining an accurate reading. 
(2)  The pressure gauge shall be installed downstream from the pump on the face piping ahead of the filter or on top of the filter in the area of greatest filter pressure. 
(Code 1992, § 18-28; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-67. - Return inlets and suction outlets. 
(a)  Location. Return inlets and suction outlets shall be provided and arranged to produce a uniform circulation of water and maintain a uniform disinfectant residual throughout the pool or spa. Where skimmers are used, the return inlets shall be located so as to help bring floating particles within range of the skimmers. 
(1)  A swimming pool shall have a minimum of two return inlets regardless of pool size. The number of return inlets shall be based on two inlets per 600 square feet of pool surface area or one inlet every 15 feet of perimeter or fraction thereof, whichever is greater. Return inlets from the circulation system shall be designed so as not to constitute a hazard to the user. 
(2)  All pools shall be provided with at least two main drain suction outlets in the lowest point of the pool floor. The spacing of the main drains shall be at least five feet, but not greater than 20 feet on centers nor more than 15 feet from each side wall. 
(3)  All spas shall have a minimum of two suction outlets provided for each pump in the suction outlet system separated by a minimum of three feet or located on two different planes; i.e., one on the bottom and one on the vertical wall, or one each on two separate vertical walls. These suction outlets shall be plumbed such that water is drawn through them simultaneously through a common line to the pump. 
(b)  Suction outlets shall be provided with a cover that has been tested and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory and comply with ANSI/ASME A112.19.8M-1987, suction fittings for use in swimming pools, wading pools, spas, hot tubs and whirlpool bathtub appliances. 
(c)  Net openings in each floor outlet covering or grating shall be at least four times the area of the discharge pipe and provide sufficient area so that the maximum velocity of the water passing the grate will not exceed 1½ feet per second. 
(1)  The width of openings in grating shall be not less than one-eighth inch and not more than one-half inch. 
(2)  The pool or spa shall not be operated if the outlet grate is missing, broken or secured in such a way that it can be removed without the use of tools. 
(d)  Entrapment avoidance. If the suction outlet system, such as a filtration system, booster system, automatic cleaning system, solar system, etc., has a single suction outlet, or multiple suction outlets which can be isolated, each suction outlet shall protect against user entrapment by as many of the following as necessary: 
(1)  An anti-entrapment device installed immediately upstream of the pump; 
(2)  An anti-vortex cover; 
(3)  A 12 inch by 12 inch grate or larger; or 
(4)  Other means. 
(e)  Where provided, the vacuum cleaner fittings shall be located in an accessible positions at least six inches and no greater than 18 inches below the minimum operating water level or as an attachment to the skimmers. 
(Code 1992, § 18-29; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-68. - Surface skimmer systems. 
(a)  A surface skimming system shall be provided on all swimming pools and spas and shall be designed and constructed to skim the pool or spa surface when the water level is maintained within the operational parameters of the system's rim or weir device. Surface skimming devices shall comply with NSF International Standard 50. 
(b)  Skimming devices shall be designed and installed so as not to constitute a hazard to the user. 
(c)  Automatic surface skimmers. Where automatic surface skimmers are used as the sole overflow system in pools, at least two surface skimmers shall be provided for the first 500 square feet or fraction thereof of the water surface area and one skimmer shall be provided for each additional 500 square feet of surface area. In spas, one skimmer shall be provided for each 100 square feet of surface area. Nominal recessed areas such as stairs, swim-outs, spas, etc., shall not be considered in the calculation. When skimmers are used, they shall be located to maintain effective skimming action over the entire surface of the pool or spa. 
(d)  Perimeter surface skimmer (gutter). Where a perimeter type surface skimming system is used as the sole surface skimming system, this system shall extend completely around the perimeter of the pool except at steps or recessed ladders. The lip of the gutter shall be level and shall be designed to serve as a handhold for bathers. The perimeter surface skimming system shall be connected to the circulation system with a system surge capacity of not less than one gallon for each square foot of pool surface or 2½ gallons for each square foot of spa surface. 
(e)  The hydraulic capacity of the overflow system shall be capable of handling 100 percent of the circulation flow. 
(Code 1992, § 18-30; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-69. - Lighting and electrical requirements. 
(a)  Artificial lighting shall be provided for all indoor and outdoor pools and spas. Lighting shall be adequate to illuminate the entire swimming pool enclosure without glare. All installations shall comply with local building code requirements. Ground-fault interrupters must be provided. Lighting in dressing rooms, sanitary facilities, equipment rooms and concessions shall comply with local code requirements. 
(1)  For outdoor pools used for night swimming and all indoor pools and spas, a minimum of 30 foot candles shall be maintained at the surface of pool and deck areas where underwater lighting is utilized. A minimum of 50 foot candles shall be maintained at the surface of pool and deck areas where underwater lighting is not utilized. More light may be required as deemed necessary by the health authority and/or by other codes which apply. 
(2)  Where underwater lighting is used, the following rules shall apply: 
a.  For public pools under 800 square feet of pool surface area, a minimum of 500 watts of underwater lighting is required. 
b.  For all public pools 800 square feet or larger of surface area, at a minimum, 1½ watts per square foot of surface area is required. The lighting shall be evenly spaced around the pool to prevent glare. 
c.  In all diving pools and all pools over 1,000 square feet with diving areas to 12 feet in depth, two watts per square foot of surface area is required. In all pools with diving wells deeper than 12 feet, it is required to provide at least three watts per square foot of surface area, within the diving well. 
(3)  For outdoor pools, when not being used for night swimming or recreation, a minimum of ten foot candles shall be maintained at the surface of pool and deck areas. Motion detector type lights are acceptable. 
(b)  No switches, starters, panel boards or similar electrical equipment shall be located in areas readily accessible to bathers while in the pool or on the designated deck area. 
(c)  No overhead wiring shall pass within 20 feet (horizontal distance) of the pool enclosure. No electrical outlets shall be located within ten feet of the pool edge. 
(Code 1992, § 18-31; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-70. - Heaters. 
(a)  Sizing. A heater will be properly sized according to the volume of water, square footage of surface area and manufacturer's recommendations. 
(b)  Water temperature. The owner/operator shall routinely check the in-pool or in-spa water to ensure that the temperature does not exceed 104° F. If adjustments are necessary, those adjustments shall be performed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions or by a qualified technician. A thermometer shall be available to measure the temperature of the water. It may be attached or floating or available to the operator at all times. 
(c)  Installation. The heaters shall be installed in accordance with all federal, state and local codes as well as the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(1)  Support. The heater shall be installed on a surface with sufficient structural strength to support the heater when it is full of water and operating. The heater shall be level and not able to move after plumbing, gas and/or electrical connections are completed. 
(2)  Ventilation. Fossil fuel heaters shall have adequate ventilation in order to assure proper operation. 
(3)  Make up air. Make up air shall be sufficient for proper operation. 
(Code 1992, § 18-32; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-71. - Air blower and induction systems. 
(a)  Entry devices. This rule pertains to all devices and systems which induce or allow air to enter the spa either by means of a power pump or passive design. 
(b)  Air intake source. Air intake sources shall not induce water external to the spa unit, dirt or contaminants, into the spa. 
(c)  Make up air. When installing an air blower within an enclosure or indoors, adequate ventilation is a necessity. The air induction system shall be installed in accordance with any applicable codes and the manufacturer's recommendations for air openings to the enclosure. 
(d)  Accessibility. The air blower shall be accessible for inspection and service. 
(e)  Air passages. Integral air passages shall be pressure tested at the time of manufacture to provide structural integrity to a value of 1½ times the intended working pressure. 
(Code 1992, § 18-33; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-72. - Water supply. 
(a)  The water supply for all pools, spas, showers, lavatories, drinking fountains and any other uses in conjunction with the pool shall be adequate in quantity and shall comply with all requirements of the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977 and the "Rules for Safe Drinking Water" promulgated by the department of natural resources. The water supply serving the pool which may come from a variety of sources, shall meet the requirements of section 14-74 before the user uses the pool. 
(b)  No direct mechanical connection shall be made between the potable water supply and the swimming pool, chlorinating equipment or the system of piping for the pool, unless it is protected against backflow and back-siphonage in a manner approved by the health authority or through an air gap meeting the latest American National Standards Institute Standard A112.1.2 or other equivalent means approved by the health authority. 
(c)  An over-the-rim spout, if used, shall be located under a diving board, adjacent to a ladder or otherwise properly shielded so as not to create a hazard. Its open end shall have no sharp edges and shall not protrude more than two inches beyond the edge of the pool. 
(d)  Backwash water may be discharged into a sanitary sewer through an approved air gap or into an approved subsurface disposal system or by other means approved by the health authority. 
(Code 1992, § 18-34; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-73. - Disinfectant equipment and chemical feeders. 
(a)  Disinfectant equipment and chemical feeders, hereafter referred to jointly as "equipment," shall comply with the requirements of NSF International Standard 50. The disinfection equipment shall be capable of precisely introducing a sufficient quantity of an approved disinfecting agent to maintain the appropriate recommended guidelines as outlined in section 14-74. 
(1)  Every pool and spa shall be required to have at least one unit of disinfectant agent equipment in compliance with subsection (a)(2) of this section. Additional units may be required to maintain chemical and physical parameters of the pool water. 
(2)  The pool or spa water shall be continuously disinfected by a disinfecting agent that imparts an easily measured residual. The disinfecting agent used shall be subject to field testing procedures that are simple and accurate. Gaseous chlorine, chlorine compounds, bromine compounds or other bactericidal agents shall be acceptable when meeting the disinfectant level parameters outlined in section 14-74. Other bactericidal agents not outlined in section 14-74 may be used if the Health Authority can be shown test results that show the agent to be an adequate bactericide for swimming pool and/or spa use. A test kit for these other agents must be supplied to the health authority by the manufacturer or the pool owner. Bactericidal agents shall be registered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(3)  Any apparatus, device, or equipment that discharges water into the pool or that uses water from the pool as part of the operations of that device, shall either use only water that has been filtered and disinfected immediately prior to being discharged into the pool or shall have a separate disinfection system for the device. This includes, but is not limited to, slides, fountains, water wheels, "mushrooms," squirt guns, etc. Any water being discharged into the pool water shall have at least the same level of disinfection that is required for the type of pool that the device is in, as listed in section 14-74. 
(b)  Chemical feeders. The installation and use of chemical feeders shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Chemical feeders must be installed downstream from the filter and heater. 
(2)  If the chemical feeder is equipped with its own pump, it shall be installed so it introduces the gas or solution downstream from the heater and, if possible, at a position lower than the heater outlet fitting. 
(3)  Chemical feed pumps shall be wired so they cannot operate unless the filter pump is running. If the chlorinator has an independent timer, the filter and chemical feed pump timers shall be interlocked. 
(c)  Elemental (gaseous) chlorine. Chlorine in the gas form may be used. 
(1)  Users of gas chlorine must be trained as to the proper procedures for handling chlorine and as to appropriate emergency procedures. 
(2)  Gas chlorination equipment shall be located so that equipment failure or malfunction will have minimum effect on evacuation of pool patrons in an emergency. 
(3)  Gas chlorine feeders (chlorinators) shall be activated by a booster pump using re-circulated water supplies via the re-circulation system. The booster pump shall be interlocked to the filter pump to prevent feeding of chlorine when the re-circulation pump is not running. 
(4)  The chlorinator, cylinders of chlorine and associated equipment shall be housed in a reasonably gas-tight and corrosion-resisting housing having a floor area adequate for the purpose. Cylinders shall always be stored in an upright position and properly secured so they cannot tip over if bumped. 
(5)  All enclosures shall be located at or above ground level. The enclosure shall be provided with a motor-driven exhaust fan capable of producing at least one air change per minute. This fan must be located at the lower part of the enclosure and there must be louvers of good design near the top of the enclosure for admitting fresh air. A warning sign, stating "chlorine gas" shall be posted on the doors. Doors to the chlorine room shall open away from the pool and be equipped with a viewing window located so that the chlorinator and the inside of the enclosure can be clearly seen prior to entering. 
(6)  Electrical switches for the control of artificial lighting and ventilation systems shall be on the outside of the enclosure adjacent to the door. 
(7)  Facilities shall include a scale suitable for weighing the cylinders. 
(8)  Connections from the cylinders to the system depend on the type of chlorinator to be used and shall comply with the chlorinator manufacturer's recommendation. 
(9)  An automatic chlorine leak detector and alarm shall be installed in the chlorinator room. 
(10)  Respirators approved by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) shall be provided for protection against chlorine. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations require training and maintenance programs for respirators. 
(11)  Containers may be stored indoors or outdoors. Full and empty cylinders shall be segregated and appropriately tagged. Storage conditions shall: 
a.  Minimize external corrosion; 
b.  Be clean and free of trash; 
c.  Not be near an elevator or ventilation system; and 
d.  Be away from elevated temperatures or heat sources. 
(12)  A specific person shall be made responsible for chlorination operations and shall be trained in the performance of routine operations including emergency procedures, leak control procedures, and maintain current documentation of their training in proper respirator use. 
(13)  Chlorine cylinders must be handled with care. Valve protection caps and valve outlet caps shall be in place at all times except when the cylinder is connected for use. Cylinders must not be dropped and shall be protected from falling objects. Cylinders shall be used on a first-in, first-out basis. New, approved washers shall be used each time a cylinder is connected. 
(14)  A safety wall chart shall be posted in or near the chlorine enclosure and a second chart in the pool office near the telephone. The telephone number of the chlorine supplier shall be shown on this chart. 
(15)  Pool personnel shall be informed about leak control procedures. 
(16)  As soon as a container is empty, the valve shall be closed and the lines disconnected. The outlet cap shall be applied promptly and the valve protection hood attached. The open end of the disconnected line shall be plugged or capped promptly to keep atmospheric moisture out of the system. 
(d)  Training. Personnel responsible for the operation of the disinfection agent equipment shall be properly trained in the operation of that equipment, the procedure for performing and interpreting the necessary chemical field tests and the appropriate emergency procedures. 
(e)  Test kits. Every pool shall be supplied with an accurate and reliable testing kit capable of measuring any agent that is introduced into the water of the pool, for the determination of pH, FAC, TAC if chlorine is used, bromine or other chemical disinfectant residuals, cyanuric acid (if used), total alkalinity, calcium hardness, copper and silver (if a copper or copper/silver ionization unit has been installed). The health authority shall, upon request, be supplied a field testing kit for any agents introduced into the water supply. If a field testing kit is not available, the agent cannot be introduced until standards for testing have been established by, and written approval has been obtained from, the health authority. The Orthotolidine test (OTO) shall be unacceptable since it cannot distinguish FAC and TAC. 
(f)  Daily record. A daily record will be kept of all chemical testing and temperatures recorded for all spas and self inspections performed. 
(Code 1992, § 18-35; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-74. - Chemical operational parameters. 
The chemical operational parameters in swimming pool or spa water shall not exceed the maximum level or be lower than the minimum level given in the following parameters. Where no minimum or maximum is given, additional information is within this division to assist the pool operator. 

 
(Code 1992, § 18-36; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-75. - Specific safety features. 
(a)  Handholds. A public pool shall be provided with a suitable handhold around its perimeter in areas where depths exceed three feet six inches. Handholds shall be provided no further apart than four feet and shall consist of any one or a combination of the items listed below: 
(1)  Coping, ledge or deck along the immediate top edge of the pool which provides a slip-resisting surface of at least four inches minimum horizontal width and located at or not more than 12 inches above the waterline; 
(2)  Ladders, stairs or seat ledges; or 
(3)  A railing placed at or not more than 12 inches above the waterline. 
(b)  Rope and float line. A rope and float line shall be provided within one foot of and on the shallow side of the break in grade between the shallow and deep portions of the swimming pool, with its position marked with visible floats at not greater than seven foot intervals. 
(1)  The rope and float line shall be securely fastened to wall anchors of corrosion-resisting materials and of the type which shall be recessed or have no projection that will constitute a hazard when the line is removed. 
(2)  The line shall be of sufficient size and strength to offer a good handhold and support loads normally imposed by users. 
(c)  Depth markers for swimming pools. Depth of water in feet shall be plainly and conspicuously marked at or above the waterline on the vertical pool wall and on the top of the coping or edge of the deck or walk next to the pool. The word or abbreviation for "feet" must be specified. 
(1)  Depth markers on the vertical pool wall shall be positioned to be read from the water side. 
(2)  Depth markers on the deck shall be within 18 inches of the water edge and positioned to be read while standing on the deck facing the water. 
(3)  Depth markers shall be slip-resisting. 
(4)  Depth markers shall be installed at the maximum and minimum water depths and at all points of slope change. 
(5)  Depth markers shall be installed at intermediate increments of water depth not to exceed two feet, nor spaced at distances greater than 25 foot intervals. 
(6)  Depth markers shall be arranged uniformly on both sides and both ends of the pool. 
(7)  Depth markers on irregularly shaped pools shall designate depths at all major deviations in shape as well as conform to the foregoing subsections. 
(8)  Depth markers shall have a four inch minimum height. Numbers shall be of contrasting color to the background on which they are applied, and the color shall be of a permanent nature. 
(d)  Depth markers for spas. Public spas shall have permanent depth markers with numbers a minimum of four inches high plainly and conspicuously visible from all obvious points of entry and in conformance with subsections (d)(1) through (d)(6) of this section and be in accordance with ANSI/UL 969 "Marking and Labeling Apparatus." 
(1)  There shall be a minimum of two depth markers per spa, regardless of spa size or shape. 
(2)  Depth markers shall be spaced at no more than 25 foot intervals and shall be uniformly located around the perimeter of the spa. 
(3)  Spas shall have the maximum water depth clearly marked on the deck wall. 
(4)  Depth markers shall be positioned on the deck within 18 inches of the water line. 
(5)  Depth markers shall be positioned to be read while standing on the deck facing the water. 
(6)  Depth markers in or on the deck surfaces shall be slip-resisting. 
(e)  Clock. All public facilities shall have a clock which is visible to spa users. 
(f)  Water temperature. The maximum temperature in a spa shall not exceed 104° F (400° C). 
(1)  The spa operator shall be provided with an accurate thermometer (plus or minus one degree F tolerance) and shall periodically check to ensure that the maximum temperature does not exceed 104° F. 
(2)  A means to determine the spa temperature with a plus or minus one degree F tolerance shall be provided to the user. 
(g)  Lifeguards. All owners, managers, or lifeguards, if provided, in charge of, or working at, public swimming pools, spas or recreational water parks shall be responsible for the supervision and safety of the pool, spa or recreational water park. 
(1)  If lifeguards and safety assistants are provided, they shall be qualified as lifeguards by holding current, nationally recognized certifications in lifeguarding, adult/child/infant CPR and first aid. 
(2)  If lifeguards are provided, their lifeguard certification, CPR and first aid certificates or photocopies thereof shall be maintained at the facility and be available to the health authority for inspection. 
(h)  Lifesaving equipment. All public swimming pools shall have lifesaving equipment conspicuously and conveniently on hand at all times. Lifesaving equipment for special purpose pools may be exempted from this requirement or the requirements will be provided as deemed necessary by the health authority. The following will be provided: 
(1)  A light, strong pole not less than 12 feet long, including a body hook. 
(2)  A minimum one-fourth inch diameter throwing rope as long as 1½ times the maximum width of the pool or 50 feet, whichever is less, to which has been firmly attached a ring buoy with an outside diameter of approximately 15 inches or a similar flotation device which is U.S. Coast Guard approved, shall be provided. 
(3)  A telephone which is hard wired and affixed, with posted names and phone numbers of the nearest available police, fire, ambulance service and/or rescue unit, and/or 911 if available. 
(i)  Barriers. All outdoor swimming pools and spas shall be provided with a barrier. 
(1)  The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be four inches measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be four inches. 
(2)  Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four inch diameter sphere. 
(3)  Solid barriers which do not have openings such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints. 
(4)  Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1¼ inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1¼ inches in width. 
(5)  Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four inches. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1¼ inches in width. 
(6)  Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 1¼ inch square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to no more than 1¼ inches. 
(7)  Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than 1¼ inches. 
(8)  Access gates shall comply with the requirements of subsections (i)(1) through (i)(7) of this section also and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches from the bottom of the gate: 
a.  The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least three inches below the top of the gate; and 
b.  The gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than one-half inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism. 
(9)  There shall not be direct access from any dwelling into the pool enclosure. 
(10)  Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure and the means of access is a ladder or steps then: 
a.  The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access; or 
b.  The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of this section. 
When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed any opening created shall not allow the passage of a four inch diameter sphere. 
(11)  Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures and equipment from being used to climb the barriers. 
(12)  A spa with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F1346, "Performance Specification for Safety Covers and Labeling Requirements for All Covers for Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs" shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. Swimming pools with safety covers shall not be exempt from the provisions of this document. 
(j)  Warning/safety signs for swimming pools. Signs shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  The words "no diving" shall be permanently visible at the edge of the deck for water five feet or less. Placement should conform to that outlined for depth markers in subsections (c)(1) through (c)(8) of this section. 
(2)  Where no lifeguard is on duty, a sign shall be placed in clear view at or near the entrance to the pool and shall state in clearly legible letters at least four inches high "Warning—No Life Guard on Duty." 
(3)  The same sign in subsection (j)(2) of this section or an additional sign will state the following rules in clearly legible letters at least two inches high: 
a.  Unattended solo bathing is prohibited. 
b.  Children shall not use pool without an adult in attendance. 
c.  No glass articles allowed in or around pool. 
d.  No food, drink or wrappers shall be permitted within ten feet of the swimming pool or spa. 
e.  No running or rough play allowed. 
f.  No spitting, spouting of water or blowing nose in pool. 
g.  No "cut-offs" or "exposed" diapers allowed. 
h.  Only one bather at a time allowed on diving board. 
i.  Diving area must be clear of other patrons before diving is permitted. 
j.  No swimming allowed during heavy rain or when lightning and thunder can be seen or heard. 
(k)  Warning/safety signs for spas. Signs shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Signage which states safety, emergency and operational aspects of the spa, shall be prominently located. As a guide, for the language and layout of the safety signs reference ANSI Z 535 series of standards for Safety Signs and Colors and ANSI/UL 1563 1987 "Standards for Electric Hot Tubs, and Associated Equipment." 
(2)  Warning/safety signs for spas shall be in clear view of the spa and prominently displayed. Signs shall state the spa's address, the location of the nearest telephone with references that emergency telephone numbers are posted at the location. These emergency telephone numbers shall include the name and phone number of the nearest available police, fire, ambulance service and/or "911" if available. Signs shall include, but not be limited to the following messages. 
a.  Risk of fetus damage. Hot water exposure limitations vary from person to person. Pregnant women and small children should not use spa prior to medical consultation. 
b.  Risk of drowning. Other persons suffering from heart disease, diabetes, high or low blood pressure and other health problems should not enter the spa without prior medical consultation and permission from their doctor. 
c.  Risk of drowning. Do not use the spa while under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drugs that cause sleepiness, drowsiness or raise/lower blood pressure. 
d.  Risk of drowning. Use caution when bathing alone. Overexposure to hot water may cause nausea, dizziness and fainting. Lower water temperatures are recommended for extended use (exceeding ten to 15 minutes) and for young children. 
e.  Risk of drowning. Do not allow the use of or operate spa if the suction fitting is missing, broken or loose. 
f.  Risk of child drowning. Unsupervised use by children is prohibited. 
g.  Risk of injury. Before entering, check spa temperature before each use. The spa temperature should not exceed 104° F. If spa temperature exceeds 104° F, do not enter spa. 
h.  Risk of injury. Enter and exit slowly. 
i.  Risk of injury. Keep all breakable objects out of the spa area. 
j.  Risk of shock. Never place electrical appliances (telephone, radio, TV., etc.) within five feet of the spa. 
k.  Risk of shock. The spa shall not be operated during severe weather conditions, e.g., electrical storms, tornadoes, etc. 
(l)  In all swimming pools built prior to December 31, 2000, which have floor slopes greater than that allowed in this division or which have other construction variance to this division, the health authority will require a warning sign stating the possible hazard, to be posted in public view. 
(m)  Obstructions and entrapment avoidance. There shall be no obstructions that can cause the user to be entrapped or injured. Types of entrapment can include but not be limited to such things as wedge or pinch-type openings and rigid, non-giving cantilevered protrusions. 
(n)  No less than one drinking fountain shall be provided and available to users at the pool site. 
(o)  A minimum of one rinse shower shall be provided on the pool deck of all public pools and spas with bather loads of 50 or less. An additional rinse shower shall be provided for each additional 100 bathers. 
(Code 1992, § 18-37; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-76. - Dressing facilities. 
Adequate dressing facilities, for pools, spas and recreational water parks should be provided unless these facilities are provided in connection with the general development for other purposes and are of adequate capacity and number and in close proximity to the pool. Handicapped accessible dressing and sanitary facilities shall be designed and provided in accordance with state or local requirements and can be included as part of the total number of toilets, shower heads, lavatories, etc., required herein. 
(1)  Dressing facilities, when provided, shall be provided with separations for each sex with no interconnection. The rooms shall be well-lighted, drained, ventilated and of good construction with impervious materials. They shall be developed and planned so that good sanitation can be maintained throughout the building at all times. 
(2)  Partitions between portions of the dressing room area, screen partitions, shower, toilet and dressing room booths shall be of durable material not subject to damage by water and shall be designed so that a waterway is provided between partitions and floor to permit thorough cleaning of the walls and floor areas with hoses and brooms. 
(3)  When dressing facilities are provided a minimum of two shower heads shall be provided for the first 100 bathers of each sex. One additional shower head for each sex shall be added for each additional 50 male or female users. These showers, when provided, may be used in place of the deck showers. However, the use of deck showers will not be substituted for the above dressing facility showers. 
(4)  Floors of the dressing facility shall be free of joints or openings and shall be continuous throughout the areas. Floors shall have a slip-resisting surface that shall be relatively smooth to ensure complete and ease in cleaning. Floor drains shall be provided and floors shall be sloped not less than one-fourth inch per foot toward the drains to ensure positive drainage. 
(5)  An adequate number of three-fourths inch hose bibs shall be provided for flushing down the dressing facility interior. 
(6)  Lavatories. Lavatories and toilets shall be provided for all public pools and spas. The minimum criteria for lavatories and toilets for public pools shall be based upon the maximum bathing load as established. 
a.  All public pools shall provide one toilet, one lavatory and one urinal for the first 50 male users. One additional toilet, lavatory and urinal shall be provided for each additional 150 male users or major fraction thereof. 
b.  All public pools shall provide two toilets and two lavatories for the first 50 female users. One additional toilet and lavatory shall be provided for each additional 100 female users or major fraction thereof. 
c.  All spas shall provide at least one toilet and lavatory for each sex. 
d.  Soap dispensers for providing either liquid or powdered soap shall be provided at each lavatory. The dispenser shall be of all metal or plastic type with no glass permitted in these units. 
e.  At least one paper towel dispenser or hand blow dryer shall be provided for every three lavatories. 
f.  An unbreakable mirror shall be provided over each lavatory. 
g.  Toilet paper holders shall be provided at each toilet combination. 
h.  Soap, paper towels and toilet tissue shall be provided in all dispensers. 
i.  Fixtures shall be installed in accordance with local plumbing codes and shall be properly protected against back-siphonage. 
j.  Fixtures shall be designed so that they may be readily and frequently cleaned and disinfected. Frequent cleaning and disinfecting shall not cause damage. 
k.  At least one trash receptacle will be available in toilet areas. 
(Code 1992, § 18-38; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-77. - Recreational water parks and special purpose pools. 
(a)  Deviation from requirements. A recreational water park attraction may deviate from the requirements of this Code if and to the extent: 
(1)  An exception from this Code is necessary to accommodate the special use of the facility; and 
(2)  The design and construction of the attraction are within the limits of sound engineering practice and present no health or safety hazard. 
(b)  Zero-depth pools. 
(1)  The water supply for a zero-depth pool must, at all times, meet the requirements relating to water quality set forth in section 14-74. 
(2)  The zero-depth pool must be equipped, at its lowest point, with an un-valved drain of sufficient capacity and design to prevent the accumulation of water in the pool. 
(3)  For zero-depth-entry pools, the floor slope shall be at a 15 to one or gentler slope. 
(4)  Zero-depth pools must be located at the shallow end of deeper water swimming pools and must be separated from them by at least six feet of deck or by a separate barrier or fence meeting the requirements of this Code. 
(c)  Wading pools. 
(1)  Wading pools must be located at the shallow end of the main pool and must be separated from it by a separate barrier or fence meeting the requirements of this Code. 
(2)  Underwater lights are prohibited in wading pools. 
(d)  Water slides. 
(1)  A water slide must consist of one or more flumes, falling-entry pools or slide run-outs, a pump reservoir, and facilities for the disinfection and chemical treatment of the water. 
(2)  The structural design of a water slide and the materials used in its construction must conform with generally accepted structural engineering practices and must provide a sound, durable structure that will safely sustain all the dead loads, live loads, liquid hydrostatic and earth pressures encountered. 
(3)  Any components or accessories of a water slide that come into contact with bathers must be assembled, arranged and finished so that their external surfaces and edges do not present an injury hazard to the skin of users under casual contact. 
(4)  The owner of a water slide and the registered engineer who designs the slide are responsible for the safe design and construction of the entire facility. 
(5)  Flumes. 
a.  Each flume of a water slide must be water-tight. Its surfaces must be inert, nontoxic, smooth and easily cleaned. 
b.  If a tube-type flume is used, it must be designed or ventilated to prevent a hazardous concentration of toxic disinfectant fumes under all circumstances of operation. 
c.  All curves and turns in a flume must be: 
1.  Designed so that the impact of users with the walls of the flume does not present a hazard; and 
2.  Banked so that the forces on the bathers keep them safely inside the flume under all foreseeable circumstances of operation. Bathers must not become airborne. 
d.  In curved sections of a flume, the design of the wall of the flume must cause the outward thrust of the body of the bather to be dissipated towards the centerline of the flume. 
e.  All slopes in a flume must be designed so that the speed of the bathers does not reach a point at which a safe equilibrium of dynamic forces cannot be maintained on any curve or turn in the flume. 
f.  In sections of a flume where bathers can stop, provision must be made by design or modification to prevent bathers from falling out of the flume. 
g.  The construction, dimensions and methods of mechanical attachment of a flume must provide a smooth and continuous surface through the entire length of the flume. Any misalignment of joints in a sectional flume must not exceed one-eighth inch. 
h.  The walls of any flume must be designed so that the continuous and combined action of hydrostatic, dynamic and static loads, as well as normal environmental deterioration do not damage the flume bed to the extent of creating a structural failure that presents a hazard of injury to users or that requires frequent patch repairs that may weaken the structural integrity of the flume. 
(6)  Flume exit. 
a.  The exit of any flume must be designed to ensure that bathers enter the falling-entry pool or slide run-out at a safe speed and angle of entry. 
b.  If a slide has two or more flumes and there is a point of intersection between the centerlines of any two flumes, the distance between that point and the point of exit for each intersecting flume must not be less than 20 feet, or 30 feet if any user exits a flume at high speed. 
(7)  Exit into falling-entry pool: If users exit the flume of a water slide into a falling-entry pool. 
a.  The flume must be horizontal and perpendicular to the wall of the pool at the point of exit. 
b.  The flume must be designed with an exit system that provides for safe entry into the falling-entry pool or slide run-out with an exit grade for the last ten feet, that does not exceed ten percent. Present practices for safe entry include a water backup, a deceleration distance, and body attitude control. Other methods are acceptable as long as safe exit velocities and proper body attitudes are assured under normal use. 
c.  The flume exit must be flush with the vertical wall of the pool at the point of exit and not more than two inches above, nor less than six inches below, the normal operating level of the pool. 
d.  The distance between: 
1.  The side wall of the pool and that portion of the flume exit nearest the wall must be not less than five feet at the point of exit; 
2.  The centerline of the flume and the centerline of any adjacent flume must not be less than six feet at the point of exit; 
3.  The point of exit and the side of the pool opposite the bathers as they exit, excluding any steps, must not be less than 20 feet, if the flume ends above or below the normal operating water level of the pool. 
(8)  Falling-entry pools. 
a.  If a splash pool is used at a water slide, it must be located at the base of the slide. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the water depth in a falling-entry pool at the end of the flume must be a minimum of 3½ feet from the normal operating water level to the floor. This depth must be maintained for a distance of not less than 20 feet from the point of exit from the flume or other falling-entry feature, or not less than 30 feet if the point of exit is even with the normal operating water level. The health authority may waive these requirements if a special exit system is used that ensures a safe exit from the flume and safe entry to the falling-entry pool. 
c.  Beyond the area of level floor required above, in the area of the pool opposite the point of exit from the flume or other falling-entry feature, the floor of the falling-entry pool may have a constant slope upward of not more than one foot in seven feet. 
d.  If steps are provided instead of exit ladders or step holes with handrails, a handrail must be provided at the steps opposite the point of exit from each flume or falling-entry feature. 
(9)  Decks. A deck must be provided along the exit side of the falling-entry pool and along one or more of the other sides of the pool. The pump and reservoir must be accessible by a deck not less than three feet wide. 
(10)  Means of access. 
a.  A concrete walkway, steps, stairway or ramp must be provided between the falling-entry pool and the top of the flume. 
b.  The walkway or other means of access must: 
1.  Not retain standing water; 
2.  Conform to the structural requirements of the local building code; 
3.  Not be less than four feet wide; 
4.  Be provided with handrails; 
5.  Have a slip-resistant surface; and 
6.  Be separated from the flume by a physical barrier that is located far enough from the flume to prevent it from being contacted by users of the flume. 
(11)  Slide run-outs. 
a.  Slide run-outs, if used, must have an exit opening or step, unless one or both of the walls of the run-out are not more than 12 inches in height. 
b.  Slide run-outs must be designed with adequate length and water depth and sloped so as to bring the user to a safe stop. 
(12)  Pump reservoirs. 
a.  Pump reservoirs used in water slides must have sufficient volume to contain not less than two minutes of combined flow from all water treatment and flume pumps or must contain enough water to ensure that the falling-entry pool will maintain a constant water depth. 
b.  The interior of pump reservoirs must be water-tight with a hard trowel or equivalent, slip-resistant finish. 
c.  Pump reservoirs must be accessible only to authorized persons. Intakes to the slide pump must be designed to allow cleaning without danger of trapping the operator. 
(13)  Control of water. 
a.  A surge-free automatic water makeup system with a manual override must be provided and constructed so that the normal operating water level of the falling-entry pool is maintained at all times. An approved backflow prevention device must be provided. 
b.  The velocity of water at the weir or inlet grate must not exceed 1½ feet per second. 
c.  The slide or other falling-entry feature may not be used if the main drain of the falling-entry pool is not clearly visible from the deck with the flume water turned off. 
(14)  Posting notice of prohibited conduct. The operator of a water slide or other falling-entry feature shall post one or more warning signs at the entrance to the facility. Each sign must state that the following types of conduct are prohibited within the facility: 
a.  Running, standing, kneeling, rotating, tumbling or stopping in any flume or tunnel. 
b.  Horseplay. 
c.  Diving or flipping while exiting from a flume. 
d.  Use of the slide while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
e.  Use of the flume by more than one person at a time. 
f.  Failure to obey the instructions of the pool attendant or lifeguard. 
g.  Failure to keep hands inside the flume while using the slide. 
h.  Failure to leave the falling-entry pool promptly after exiting from the slide. 
i.  The possession of any glass, bottle or food in or near any pool. 
j.  Entry into an area of grass or other vegetation. 
k.  The possession of any toy or can. 
l.  The use of any clothing on the slide other than the usual swimmer. 
m.  Wearing any bracelet, watch or other jewelry. 
n.  Failure to shower before using the slide. 
(15)  Precautions for safety. 
a.  At all times while a water slide is open for use, an attendant must be on duty at each falling-entry pool or run-out. The attendant shall serve as the safety director of the slide. In that capacity, the attendant shall control crowds, keep bathers moving through the pool or run-out in an orderly fashion, and control any unsafe behavior in the lower flumes, in the pool or run-out, or on the decks at the base of the slide. 
b.  At all times while the slide is open for use, an attendant must be on duty at each entrance to a flume. The attendant shall control bathers near the entrance, regulate the departure of each bather down the slide and control any unsafe behavior in the upper flumes. 
c.  Radio communication, or other means of communication acceptable to the health authority, must be provided between the flume entry attendant and the splash pool or slide run-out attendant. 
d.  Each water slide must have a means to allow the flume entry attendant to monitor the slide exit. 
(e)  Activity pools. Amusement devices used in activity pools must be designed and maintained so that their surfaces are smooth, nontoxic and easily cleanable. The devices must not pose a safety or health hazard to users and must not interfere with circulation or disinfection of the water. 
(f)  Wave pools. 
(1)  The generation of waves more than three feet in height in a wave pool, regardless of the depth of the pool, must not continue for more than 15 minutes at a time. 
(2)  The wave pool must not be used if the main drain is not clearly visible from the deck with the wave generating equipment turned off. 
(3)  Bathers must gain access to the wave pool at the shallow or beach end. The sides of the pool must be protected from unauthorized entry into the pool by the use of a fence or other comparable barrier. 
(4)  Wave pools must be provided with handholds at the static water level. These handholds must be self-draining and must be installed so that their outer edge is flush with the pool wall. The design of the handholds must ensure that body extremities will not become entangled during wave action. 
(5)  Life jackets must be provided free for use by bathers who request them. 
(6)  Each permanent station for pool attendants and lifeguards must be provided with a clearly labeled and readily accessible emergency shut-off switch for the control of the wave action. 
(7)  An audible warning system must be provided to alert bathers of the beginning of wave generation. 
(8)  Step holes and handrails must be provided at one or more locations along the wall of the wave pool. The step holes and handrails must extend down the wall so they will be accessible during wave generation at the lowest water level. The distance between the handrail and the wall must not exceed six inches. 
(g)  Child amusement lagoons. Amusement devices used in child amusement lagoons must be designed and maintained so that their surfaces are smooth, nontoxic and easily cleanable. The devices must not pose a safety or health hazard to bathers and must not interfere with circulation or disinfection of the water. 
(h)  Watercourse rides. 
(1)  Handrails, steps, stairs, and booster inlets for watercourse rides must not protrude into the watercourse. 
(2)  The watercourse must not be narrower than 12 feet and not deeper than 3½ feet. 
(3)  An approved method of exit must be provided at least every 200 feet along the watercourse. 
(4)  A deck must be provided along at least one side of the watercourse. 
(5)  The design velocity of the water in a watercourse ride must not exceed two miles per hour. 
(Code 1992, § 18-39; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-78. - Food service. 
(a)  Food service facilities shall comply with provisions of O.C.G.A. title 26, ch. 2, art. 14 (O.C.G.A. § 26-2-370 et seq.) and the rules and regulations adopted thereunder. 
(b)  Eating, drinking and smoking shall not be permitted within the waters of the pool, spa or recreational water park but are permitted on the deck area at a distance of at least ten feet horizontally away from the water's edge. 
(c)  Food and beverages shall only be served in non-breakable containers. 
(d)  Covered trash containers shall be provided where food and/or beverages are available and allowed to be consumed. 
(Code 1992, § 18-49; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-79. - Operation and management. 
All swimming pools and spas covered by this division shall be maintained under the supervision and direction of a properly trained operator who shall be responsible for the sanitation, safety and proper maintenance of the pool and all physical and mechanical equipment and records. 
(1)  Training for the operator can be obtained by completion of the national swimming pool foundation's certified pool/spa operator's course or state or local training course, if available or similar course as approved by the state department of human resources, division of public health, environmental health section. 
(2)  Upon completion of any swimming pool or spa, the manager and his operators shall be given complete written and oral instructions by the builder as well as operational guidance of the pool, all equipment and the maintenance of the swimming pool water. 
(3)  The bathing load limit shall be observed by the management. The maximum number of users to be allowed in a pool at one time shall be based on section 14-62(i) in this division. 
(Code 1992, § 18-41; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Sec. 14-80. - Compliance procedures. 
(a)  A swimming pool, spa or recreational water park shall not operate until such time as the appropriate application has been submitted to the health authority, on the prescribed forms provided and the valid operating permit has been issued by the health authority. 
(b)  Suspension or revocation. The health authority shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke permits for failure to comply with the provisions of this division. When an application for a permit is denied or the permit previously granted is to be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder thereof shall be afforded notice and hearing as provided in O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 5, art. 1 (O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq.). If an application is denied or a permit is suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit must be notified in writing, specifically stating any and all reasons why the action was taken. The purpose of these procedures is to state the minimum actions to be taken to fulfill the obligation of the health authority in assuring compliance with the regulations when the continued operation of a swimming pool, spa or recreational water park presents a substantial and imminent health hazard to the public or when a swimming pool, spa or recreational water park is in flagrant or continuing violation of this division. Suspension is effective upon service of a written notice thereof, and operation must cease immediately. The notice must state the basis for the suspension and advise the permit holder of the right to a preliminary hearing on request within eight working hours. If requested, the preliminary hearing will be held by an experienced supervisory level employee of the health authority not directly involved in the suspension. The rules of evidence will not apply, but both the health authority and the permit holder may present witnesses, records and argument. The hearing official will be authorized immediately to rescind or modify the suspension or to continue the suspension with or without conditions. If the suspension is not rescinded, the permit holder will have the right on request to an evidentiary hearing. If a hearing is not requested, upon correction of all violations, the owner may request an inspection to reinstate permit. 
(1)  Items that are considered substantial and imminent health hazards include the following: 
a.  During operation, disinfectant levels are less than the minimum given in section 14-74. If the level of the disinfectant used is not given in section 14-74, the disinfectant must be approved and kept at levels determined necessary by the health authority. 
b.  During operation, the pH is less than the minimum or more than the maximum levels allowed in section 14-74. 
c.  The pump, automatic disinfectant equipment or other equipment necessary for continuous filtration and disinfection of the swimming pool, spa or recreational water parks attraction is not working. 
d.  The water turbidity is such that the main drain cover or a standard black and white disc laying on the bottom of the deepest portion of the pool cannot be seen. 
e.  Other hazards as determined by the health authority. 
(2)  All other violations of items on the inspection report will be corrected as deemed appropriate by the health authority. 
(3)  In lieu of suspension or revocation of a permit, a swimming pool, spa or recreational water park attraction may be allowed to voluntarily close until such time as the violations are corrected. 
(c)  Notice of hearing. For the purpose of this division, a notice of hearing is properly served when delivered in person or by registered or certified mail to the owner or authorized agent of the swimming pool, spa or recreational water park. 
(d)  A swimming pool, spa or recreational water park shall not be placed in operation initially until appropriate inspections show compliance with the requirements of this division with no items violated on the inspection report. 
(e)  The health authority shall inspect the swimming pool, spa, or recreational water park for compliance. Swimming pools, spas, or recreational water parks which open on or after April 1 and which close on or before October 31 shall be inspected at least once during the period of operation. All other swimming pools, spas, or recreational water parks shall be inspected at least twice each year. Additional inspections may be made as determined necessary by the health authority. The pool or spa operator shall receive a copy of the inspection and place it in a location protected from the weather in public view as designated by the health authority. 
(f)  Representatives of the health authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any swimming pool or spa facility or property of any recreational water park at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this division. Should access be denied, an inspection warrant may be obtained as authorized in O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 5, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 31-5-20 et seq.). 
(g)  Enforcement. The administration and enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be as prescribed in O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq.). 
(h)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1992, § 18-42; Ord. No. 2000-16, § 2, 10-26-2000) 
Secs. 14-81—14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BODY ART STUDIOS 

Sec. 14-111. - Authority. 
The legal authority for these rules is O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 16-5-71.1, 16-12-5, and 31-3-4 and O.C.G.A title 31, chs. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq.) and 40 (O.C.G.A. §§ 31-40-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-126), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-112. - Purpose. 
The body art studios and body artist rules are adopted for the purpose of establishing reasonable standards for individuals performing body art procedures and the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards are designed to promote the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving body art services. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-127), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-113. - Exemptions 
These rules shall not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.) or a technician acting under the direct on-site supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-128), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-114. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to these rules. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in these rules shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Antibacterial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria which is approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by the FDA. 
Bio-hazard means any infectious agents or parts thereof presenting a real or potential risk to the well-being of humans or other species, directly through infection or indirectly through disruption of the environment. 
Board of health means the county board of health or its duly authorized representatives. 
Body art means the practice of physical body alteration by permitted establishments and by licensed operators using techniques including, but not limited to, the following: body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. Body art does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by the Georgia State Medical Board, which shall not be performed in a body art studio. Body art does not include the painting of the skin with tempura or temporary, non-indelible inks, paints, or dyes. Body art does not include piercing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp ear piercing systems. 
Body art studio means any permanent building or structure in a planned commercial center on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business permit or license, wherein a body artist performs body art. 
Body art studio permit means the authorization granted by the county board of health to the owner to operate a body art studio. Such permit is the property of the county board of health. 
Body artist means any person who performs body art. 
Body piercing means puncturing or penetration of the skin or mucosa of a person with any sharp instrument and/or the insertion of jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening. 
Cosmetic tattooing means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa. Cosmetic tattooing shall include permanent cosmetics, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology, and micro-pigment implantation. 
Currently licensed health care professional means those professionals licensed by the state to perform health care services and includes, but is not limited to, licensed physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurse (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
Department means the department of public health of the state. 
Disinfection means a process that eliminates many or all pathogenic microorganisms, with the exception of bacterial spores, from inanimate objects. High level disinfection can be expected to destroy all microorganisms, with the exception of high numbers of bacterial spores. Intermediate level disinfection inactivates mycobacterium tuberculosis, vegetative bacterial, most viruses, and most fungi. Low level disinfection can kill most bacteria, some viruses, and some fungi. Guideline for Environmental Infection Control in Healthcare Facilities: Recommendation of CDC and the Healthcare Injection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC); U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2003). 
Easily cleanable means composed of readily accessible, non-absorbent material, and of such constitution, finish, and fabrication that residue may be completely removed by non-mechanical low friction methods. 
EPA means the environmental protection agency. 
Instrument means any hand piece, needle, needle bar, sharp, device, or other object that is used or may come into contact with a client or may be exposed to bodily fluids during a body art procedure. 
Owner means the person, partnership, corporation, association, or any other form of business organization that owns, maintains, or controls a body art studio and who is responsible for the operation of the studio. 
Parlor means the actual room of the body art studio where the body artist performs procedures. 
Sanitary means free of visible debris, residue, or contamination, and with reduced microbial contaminants. 
Sanitized means an effective antimicrobial treatment by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals or other suitable method on surfaces for enough time to reduce the microbial count to a sanitary level. 
Scarification means the act of creating designs out of scar tissue by cutting the skin or branding it with heated metal. 
Sharps means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts to the skin or tissue. 
Single-use means an instrument or article which is reasonably anticipated to come into direct contact with blood and compromised tissue surfaces during its intended use. Such articles are not to be used on more than one customer or client for any reason and must be disposed of after use as soon as possible, without posing risk of contamination or exposure to the body artist, the client, or the surrounding environment. 
Standard precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health Care and Public Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23,1989, Vol. 38, Bi.S-6; "Recommendation for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures," in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8; and "Recommendations for Prevention and Control of HCV Infection and HCV Related Chronic Disease" in MMWR, October 16, 1998, Vol. 47, No. RR-19. These methods of infection control require the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and other blood borne pathogens. Precautions include, but are not limited to, hand washing, gloving, masks, protective eye wear and/or other protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles and other sharp instruments when contact with blood or bodily fluids containing blood is anticipated. Standard precautions apply to blood, all body fluids, secretions, and excretions, excluding sweat, regardless of whether or not they contain visible blood, non-intact skin, and mucous membranes. Standard precautions include universal precautions. In the event that the CDC or other primary reference or regulatory authority publishes materials or amends regulations applicable to this definition, this definition shall be deemed amended to include the latest versions of these documents, regulations, and recommendations. 
Sterilization means the reduction of microbial life at an order of ten log six using equipment capable of delivering full efficacy to all surfaces within the unit chamber, including tubes, lumens, cracks, or other obscured surfaces, including those inside packaging. 
Sterilizer means an autoclave certified to meet medical standards and which performs the act of sterilization as defined herein. 
Sterilizer indicator means a device designed to give visual verification that sterilization temperature has been achieved during the sterilization process. 
Suspension means the piercing of human tissue or skin with hooks or other piercing apparatuses for supporting or bearing weight, either human or object. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa and includes the definition of tattoo as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1(1) and as may hereafter be amended. The term "tattoo" also includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
Wash means cleansing the skin with warm water and antibacterial soap and drying with single-use towels. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-129), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-115. - Scope of rules. 
(a)  All permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the board of health, the department, and state law. 
(b)  The requirements of these rules shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, and regulatory provisions of local, state, or federal law and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-130), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-116. - Body art studio owner. 
(a)  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 40 (O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1 et seq.), along with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and along with the applicable rules of the county board of health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes and rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)  Prior to being granted a body art studio permit, the body art studio owner shall adopt and submit to the local health authority a written statement of policies and procedures of the body art studio showing compliance with the following: 
(1)  No person under the age of 18 shall perform body art procedures on individuals unless under the direct on-site supervision of a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.). 
(2)  Body artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
(3)  No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is or reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other stimulants or depressants, or is of unsound mind or body. 
(4)  No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art studio. 
(5)  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of 18 except by a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.) or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such physician or osteopath with the written consent of a parent or guardian. 
(6)  No body piercing procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of 18 without written consent and proof of valid state issued identification of a parent or guardian. A copy of the consent form and proof of identification shall be maintained in the client's record. The parent or guardian must be present when the piercing procedure is performed. 
(7)  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on any person within one inch of any part of the eye socket of such person. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-131), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-117. - Body art studio permit. 
(a)  The owner of each body art studio shall obtain a valid body art studio permit from the county board of health prior to beginning operation. Body art studios shall renew their permit annually in accordance with sections 14-118 and 14-119. 
(b)  The permit is the property of the county board of health. 
(c)  To be eligible for a new body art studio permit or a renewal permit, a body art studio must be in compliance with all of the requirements of these rules. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to practice body art procedures unless such procedures are performed in a body art studio operating under a valid body art studio permit issued by the county board of health. 
(e)  The holder of a body art studio permit shall only hire, employ, or use individuals to perform body art who have complied with the applicable requirements of this article. 
(f)  The body art studio permit shall be displayed on the premises and conspicuously displayed in public view. Permits shall not be defaced or altered in any manner. A body art studio shall not post a reproduction of a permit unless the board of health has marked it "Duplicate." 
(g)  All body art studio permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
(h)  The body art studio permit shall be returned to the county board of health environmental health section if it is suspended or revoked within seven days. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-132), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-118. - Application for body art studio permit. 
(a)  The application for a body art studio permit or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be made on forms provided by the county board of health. 
(b)  Any application for a new body art studio permit or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be sworn to by the applicant as true and correct. 
(c)  At least 30 days prior to the anticipated date of opening, the owner of a new body art studio shall submit an application to the county board of health for a body art studio permit to operate under these rules. 
(d)  The application for a body art studio shall include: 
(1)  A scaled drawing of the studio, including the location of all furnishings and equipment; 
(2)  A zoning certification obtained from the appropriate jurisdiction (the applicant shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, safety, fire, and other local codes and requirements); 
(3)  A copy of the certificate of occupancy for the studio; 
(4)  A complete description of all body art services which will be provided in the body art studio; 
(5)  The full or legal name under which the body art studio is conducted; 
(6)  The address of the body art studio; 
(7)  If the owner leases the location, the name and current address of the landlord; 
(8)  The name and home address of the owner; if the owner of the body art studio is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the owner is a corporation, the date and place of incorporation and the name and address of its registered agent in the state; or if the owner is any other type of association, the names of the principals of the association; 
(9)  A list containing the full names and home addresses of all employees and staff who will be working in the body art studio; 
(10)  A copy of the written statement and policies and procedures of the body art studio in accordance with section 14-116 of these rules; 
(11)  An acknowledgement signed by the owner acknowledging that the owner has read and understands these rules; and 
(12)  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the board of health. 
(e)  The applicant shall submit a non-refundable plan review fee as set by the county board of health and approved by the board of commissioners of the county. The plan review fee shall be waived for any body art studio that is open for operation prior to the adoption of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-133), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-119. - Application for renewal. 
(a)  At least 30 days prior to the expiration of a body art studio permit, the owner shall submit an application to the county board of health environmental health section for a renewal of the body art studio permit. 
(b)  The application shall include an updated drawing of the body art studio according to section 14-118. 
(c)  The application shall also include all information as described in section 14-118(d)(5)—(d)(12). 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-134), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-120. - Issuance of body art studio permits and fees. 
(a)  The county board of health may issue a body art studio permit to an owner after determining that the studio is in compliance with the requirements of chapter 40 of title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  A body art studio shall submit an application for a new body art studio permit when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The studio is remodeled, renovated, or expanded; 
(2)  There is a change in the legal ownership of the body art studio; or 
(3)  An existing facility is moved or relocated. 
(c)  Body art studio permits shall automatically expire on December 31st of each year. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a body art studio permit, the owner must pay the applicable permit fee. Body art studio permit fees shall not be prorated. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued to any owner to perform body art procedures in any area of the unincorporated portion of the county that is zoned for any type of residential use by the county's zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-135), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-121. - Denial, suspension, or revocation of body art studio permit. 
(a)  Upon recommendation or official action of the board of health, a body art studio permit issued pursuant to any provision of this article may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the board of health, and considered null and void, if: 
(1)  The application for a body art studio permit contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  The premises covered by the permit are found to be in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, or other state or federal law; 
(3)  The studio is determined to be a threat or nuisance to public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  The owner or body artist violated the provision of this Code; or 
(5)  Violations of the conditions of the permit are committed. 
(b)  After a body art studio permit has been revoked, a valid permit shall not be issued until all violations have ceased and all changes, alteration, additions, or improvements comply with all requirements of this Code as determined by the county board of health. 
(c)  No body art studio permit shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article, the same applicant requesting a permit has been denied a permit based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
(d)  As required by O.C.G.A. § 31-40-4, any person substantially affected by any final order of the board of health denying, suspending, revoking, or refusing to grant or renew any permit provided under this Code may secure review by appeal to the county board of health in accordance with the hearing requirements of O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-136), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-122. - Application to existing businesses. 
The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body art studios whether the studios were established before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body art studio in business on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six months of the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-137), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-123. - Body art not allowed in mobile, transitory facilities. 
Body art shall not be allowed to occur in automobiles, mobile, transitory, or other non-fixed facilities. Such non-fixed facilities include mobile homes, tents, recreational vehicles, and trailers. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-138), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-124. - Body art studio minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  The body art studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained so as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers and staff. 
(b)  The body art studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the procedure adequate privacy from observers. The parlor shall be separate from the waiting room. 
(c)  Insects, vermin, and/or rodents shall not be present in any part of the body art studio. Effective measures shall be taken by the body art studio owner to prevent the breeding or presence of insects, vermin, and/or rodents on the premises. 
(d)  The body art studio shall have adequate mechanical ventilation in compliance with current state and local building codes. 
(e)  Walls and ceilings of parlors and equipment storage rooms shall be painted or covered in a manner to ensure that the surface is easily cleanable. All paint and coverings shall be light in color. 
(f)  Parlor floors and equipment storage room floors shall be constructed of nonabsorbent material to ensure that the surface is easily cleanable. Floors in the parlor and equipment storage room shall not be covered by carpet or wood. 
(g)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility with a self-closing door and exhaust fan shall be made accessible to customers. Such facilities shall be separate from the parlor. 
(h)  The body art studio shall be equipped with facilities to enable effective hand hygiene. This sink or sinks must be easily accessible, at the discretion of the board of health, to all body artists and shall be separate from the restroom. It shall also provide hot and cold water under pressure through a mixing valve with no aerator, and with foot or wrist actuated controls. These facilities shall be for the use of the body artist for sanitizing his hands and preparing the customers for body art procedures. This area shall be supplied with dispensed soap, an antibacterial solution, single use towels, and a clean and maintained fingernail brush. 
(i)  An equipment washing sink shall be provided in the studio, distinct from the hand sinks and shall be located in the equipment handling and assembly area. This sink shall meet National Safety Foundation (NSF) standards. 
(j)  Parlors, equipment storage areas, and equipment handling and assembly areas shall have sufficient light to enable the body artist to properly do work and see all contamination. This shall be approved by the county board of health. 
(k)  Parlors shall not be used as corridors for access to other rooms. 
(l)  A water heater capable of heating water to 100 degrees Fahrenheit shall be provided. The size and capacity of such water heater shall be approved by the county board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-139), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-125. - Body art studio furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishing of the body art studio shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and shall be intact and functional. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single-use articles, carbon, stencils, jewelry, studs, and other supplies shall be provided for each body artist and shall be designed, manufactured, and maintained in a sanitary manner so as to protect contents from contamination, such as blood and bodily fluids. 
(c)  Appropriate furnishings shall be provided for each parlor. 
(d)  Surfaces of all worktables, chairs, and furnishings shall be constructed of material that is smooth, non-absorbent, easily cleanable, and corrosion resistant. 
(e)  Furnishings shall be sanitized with an anti-bacterial solution after each procedure. 
(f)  Eating or drinking by anyone is prohibited in the parlor where a body art procedure is performed, except as required to ensure the health and safety of the body artist and/or client. 
(g)  Smoking is prohibited in the body art studio. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-140), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-126. - Body art studio supplies. 
(a)  Single-use sterile supplies shall be in an uncompromised, sterilized condition at the time of their use, either by processing in a unit that meets the requirements for a sterilizer as defined herein, or be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These supplies shall be stored in an area separate from chemical supplies and toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials applied to human skin including, but not limited to, ink, stencils, and single-use piercing needles shall be from single-use containers and shall be disposed of after each use, except those instruments approved for sterilization by the board of health. 
(c)  Jewelry supplies used in a body art studio shall consist of a material rated by the American Society for Testing Materials or the International Standards Organization as being suitable for permanent surgical implant, such as stainless steel, gold, platinum, titanium, niobium, or dense, low porosity plastic such as Tygon or PTFE. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with standards must be available for inspection on request of the board of health. The jewelry shall also be smooth surfaced and scratch free. 
(d)  Only single-use sterile gauze shall be used. 
(e)  Antibacterial ointment shall be dispensed in a manner that prevents contamination of the antibacterial ointment container. For example, a single use tongue depressor may be used to dispense the ointment and then discarded. 
(f)  Single-use articles shall not be used on more than one client or customer for any reason. These articles must be disposed of after use, or as soon as possible, without posing risk of contamination or exposure to the body artist, the client, or the surrounding environment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-141), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-127. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  Dyes and pigments shall be dispensed into single-use containers. 
(b)  All dyes and pigments shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
(c)  After tattooing each individual, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use container shall be discarded, along with the container, into a covered trash receptacle that can be operated without the use hands. This container shall be lined with a bag that is leak resistant. 
(d)  In preparing dyes and pigments to be used by a body artist, only non-toxic sterile single-use materials shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-142), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-128. - Sterilization. 
(a)  Instrument cleaning . 
(1)  All non-disposable instruments shall be sterilized after each use according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(2)  Employees shall wear heavy-duty, multi-use, waterproof gloves while cleaning instruments. 
(3)  Used instruments shall be soaked in an EPA approved disinfectant until cleaning can be performed. The solution shall be changed as recommended by the solution manufacturer. 
(4)  Instruments shall be disassembled for cleaning. 
(5)  All instrument components shall be cleaned, either manually or in an ultrasonic cleaner, using the appropriate cleaning agent specific to the type of cleaning performed. 
(b)  Instrument packaging . 
(1)  Employees shall properly wash hands and don clean gloves before packaging or wrapping instruments. 
(2)  Instruments shall be wrapped or packaged with a sterilizer indicator on each package. 
(3)  All packages shall be labeled with the time and date of sterilization. Packages shall no longer be considered sterile if the integrity of the package is damaged or if the date of sterilization exceeds six months. 
(c)  Instrument sterilization . 
(1)  The sterilizer shall be designed and labeled as a medical instrument sterilizer. 
(2)  The operator's manual for the sterilizer shall be available on the premises and the sterilizer shall be operated according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(3)  The sterilizer shall be cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(4)  A sterilizer log shall be maintained for the studio and made available for inspection by the county board of health and the customer. The log shall be kept for a minimum of one year. The log shall contain the following documentation for each load: 
a.  A description of instruments contained in the load; 
b.  The date of sterilization and time, if more than one load is processed in a single day; 
c.  The sterilizer cycle time and temperature; 
d.  Indication of proper sterilization of instruments, as indicated by the appropriate color change of the sterilizer indicator on each package. The indicator used shall be compatible with the sterilization process being used; 
e.  Any action taken when appropriate color indicator change did not occur; and 
f.  Maintenance log, including: 
1.  Date of service; 
2.  Sterilizer model and serial number; 
3.  Sterilizer location; 
4.  Name of person requesting service; 
5.  Description of malfunctions; 
6.  Name of person performing maintenance; 
7.  Description of services and parts replaced; 
8.  Results of biologic validation and testing; and 
9.  Signature and title of person acknowledging completed work. 
(d)  Sterilization monitoring . 
(1)  Sterilizer monitoring shall be performed at least once a month, unless more frequent monitoring is specified by the manufacturer, or after 40 hours of usage, whichever comes first, by using a commercial biological monitoring (spore) system. 
(2)  All biological indicators shall be analyzed by a laboratory that operates under FDA guidelines and is independent of the studio, with reports sent to the studio. 
(3)  Biological indicator test results shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of one year and must be available for inspection by the county board of health. Upon notification of a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function. The owner shall cease use of the sterilizer immediately upon receipt of the positive report and notify the county board of health with written documentation explaining corrective actions. If this sterilizer is the only means of sterilization of equipment, then the studio will cease operations immediately. The studio shall be allowed to re-open when a biological indicator test has three consecutive negative results. The studio shall have the option to purchase and install a new sterilizer in order to re-open prior to the receipt of the test results on the previous sterilizer or use all single-use items. 
(e)  Instrument storage. 
(1)  Hands shall be washed and gloved prior to handling sterilized instruments. 
(2)  After sterilization, the instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean area, reserved for storage of sterilized instruments. 
(f)  Single-use items. If the body art studio operates using only pre-sterilized, single-use instruments and supplies, a sterilizer is not required. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-143), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-129. - Disinfection of the body art studio. 
(a)  Each body art studio shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(b)  The owner shall develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination, plus any tasks or procedures to be performed daily. This written schedule shall be based on the types of surfaces to be cleaned, the types of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the body art studio. Adherence to the schedule must be documented on a weekly basis to be appended to a maintenance log. This log shall be available for review by the county board of health during normal hours of operation and to the general public upon request. Violation of proper maintenance and documentation thereof will be grounds for immediate closure or suspension of the owner's body art studio permit. 
(c)  All work surfaces shall be disinfected with an EPA approved disinfectant at the beginning of each work day, after completion of body art procedures on each individual, and at the end of each work day. 
(d)  All protective coverings such as plastic wrap, barrier films, and aluminum foil shall be removed after each body art procedure and shall be placed in a covered trash receptacle that can be operated without the use of hands. These barriers shall be replaced with unused protective coverings. These barriers shall also be considered single-use products. 
(e)  Reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated shall be decontaminated on a daily basis with a current EPA approved disinfectant. When contamination is visible, receptacles shall be cleaned and decontaminated immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-144), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-130. - Disposal of wastes. 
(a)  All disposable instruments are considered bio-hazardous and must be disposed of as bio-hazardous material. All bio-hazardous waste must be disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding bio-hazardous waste. Needles, razors, and other sharp instruments shall be placed in puncture resistant, closed containers immediately after use and shall be stored in closed cabinets or drawers at the end of each workday. 
(b)  Contaminated needles shall not be bent, broken, or their structure otherwise compromised. 
(c)  Sharps waste shall be safely discarded in a rigid and puncture resistant waste container that is leak proof on the sides and bottom with a self-closing lid. These containers shall be labeled with the international bio-hazard symbol and the word "Bio-hazard." All sharps waste shall be removed and disposed of by a company that will dispose of it in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding bio-hazardous waste. 
(d)  Bio-hazardous non-sharps waste shall be discarded in a bio-hazard bag. Waste shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding bio-hazardous waste. 
(e)  All other non-hazardous disposable waste shall be placed in lined, easily cleanable containers with tight fitting lids to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(f)  All other non-hazardous disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of so as to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste material. 
(g)  Self-closing waste containers designed to be operated without the use of hands and lined with plastic bags manufactured specifically for waste containers shall be located within each parlor and restroom and shall be emptied at least once per day into a commercially approved dumpster. This dumpster must be picked up and emptied by a commercial contractor at least once per week. 
(h)  All sewage, including liquid waste, shall be disposed of by a public sewage system or by a sewage system constructed and operated according to the applicable provisions of the Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-145), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-131. - Client records. 
(a)  The owner shall maintain a written detailed client record that describes the body art procedures administered on each client. These records shall be kept on file for three years after the procedure. Client records shall be immediately made available for inspection within seven days of request. 
(b)  The client records shall be created prior to any body art procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name, signature, address, proof of age, body art procedure to be performed, date, design, its precise location upon the body, and the name of the body artists performing or assisting in the procedure. The client record shall also describe whether any complications or incidents arose during the procedure and detail what action was taken to resolve the incident. A copy of a valid state issued photo ID (a driver's license, U.S. Military ID card) must be obtained from the client and maintained with the client's record. 
(c)  Each client shall be provided with an informed consent statement that fully explains the procedure and each client shall be required to sign the informed consent statement prior to receiving any body art procedure. The informed consent statement signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client record, with a copy given to the customer. 
(d)  A "disclaimer of liability" form promulgated by the owner shall also be signed by the client prior to receiving any body art procedure. A copy of the "disclaimer of liability" signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client's record, with a copy given to the client. 
(e)  The client record shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs at the time the body art procedure is performed. 
(f)  The client record shall also contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he has received, read, and understood a copy of an after-care procedures form. 
(g)  The client has the right to request and receive their entire client record. If the client's record is available on the premises of the body art studio, then the record shall be made available immediately upon request. If the record is not available on the premises, then the client's request for the client record must be fulfilled within five business days. 
(h)  Client records shall not be accessible to anyone except authorized employees of the body art studio. 
(i)  Client records shall be disposed of in a manner that will not disclose any personal information of the client. For example, client records may be shredded then discarded in a waste receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-146), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-132. - Body art studio inspection. 
(a)  The premises of any body art studio and all records required to be maintained under these regulations shall be available for review and examination by the board of health and properly identified representatives of the county at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with these rules. 
(b)  The owner shall be responsible for having an employee with knowledge of the studio's records on duty at the body art studio during all hours of operation. 
(c)  Studio inspections shall be performed at least two times annually. Additional studio inspections shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of these rules. Each inspection will carry an inspection fee to be set by and approved by the county board of health. 
(d)  A copy of the most recent inspection report shall be posted in public view, in an un-obscure manner, within 15 feet of the main door, five to seven feet off the floor, and shall be approachable within one foot. 
(e)  If an individual becomes aware of a licensed body art studio that is in violation of the Code, or other state or federal law, they may contact the county board of health. The alleged violation will be investigated at the discretion of the board. The name, address, telephone number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless required to be disclosed by law. 
(f)  If an individual becomes aware of an unlicensed individual or facility that performs, or has performed body art procedures, they may contact the board of health. The alleged unlicensed individual or facility will be investigated at the discretion of the board of health. The name, address, telephone number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless required to be disclosed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-147), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-133. - Access. 
(a)  Representatives of the board of health, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any body art studio at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections and review of pertinent records to determine compliance with this Code. 
(b)  If a person denies access to the board of health, the board of health shall: 
(1)  Inform the person that: 
a.  The permit holder is required to allow access to the board of health; 
b.  Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of a body art studio permit to operate; and 
c.  If access is denied, an inspection warrant, issued by the appropriate authority to order access, may be obtained according to law; and 
(2)  Make a final request for access. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-148), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-134. - Body art studio personnel. 
(a)  All persons performing body art in the unincorporated portion of the county shall only perform such body art procedures in a validly permitted body art studio. 
(b)  Body artist shall obtain and maintain current certifications in emergency first-aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training except where the body artist is a currently licensed health care professional. All certifications must be renewed at a minimum of every two years unless a more frequent time period is specified by the licensing agencies. 
(c)  The above certifications must be obtained within 60 days of the body artist's employment. 
(d)  The body artist must obtain a physical examination by a licensed physician within 30 days prior to employment or the initial application for a body artist permit. Each body artist must obtain from the physician a certificate certifying that the body artist is free of any communicable disease. This examination must be conducted yearly. 
(e)  All body artists and any employee that has the potential to come in contact with any bodily fluids shall be required to obtain the Hepatitis B vaccination. 
(f)  The owner shall maintain a file on all employees who perform body art procedures. Such files shall be available for inspection by properly identified representatives of the board of health during normal hours of operation. The file shall contain: 
(1)  Report of physical examination; 
(2)  Evidence of current emergency first-aid; CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training; and 
(3)  The home address and home telephone number of each employee. 
(g)  The owner of a body art studio shall only hire, employ, or use individuals who have complied with these rules. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-149), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-135. - Body artist permit. 
(a)  No person may perform body art without first obtaining a body artist permit. Body artist shall renew their permit annually. 
(b)  A body artist permit shall not be eligible for renewal unless all requirements of these rules are met. 
(c)  The body artist permit shall be displayed in the body artist's parlor. 
(d)  All body artist permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
(e)  A body artist permit shall be returned to the board of health environmental health section if it is suspended or revoked. 
(f)  Proof of current certification in emergency first-aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training shall be required within 60 days of issuance of a body artist permit. Otherwise, the body artist permit will be suspended until this training is completed, not to exceed 60 days. If the requirements are not met within this sixty day suspension, the body artist permit will be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-150), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-136. - Application for a body artist permit. 
(a)  Each body artist shall submit to the board of health environmental health section an application for a body artist permit. 
(b)  The application for a body artist permit shall be made on forms provided by the board of health and shall not be considered accepted unless complete in all respects, including the payment of any fees required. Application fees shall be set by the county board of health. 
(c)  Application for a body artist permit shall include the following information concerning the body artist: 
(1)  Full legal name; 
(2)  All aliases; 
(3)  Copy of a valid driver's license or valid state issued photo identification; 
(4)  Home address; 
(5)  Gender; 
(6)  Mailing address; 
(7)  Home phone number; 
(8)  Training and/or experience; 
(9)  Evidence of current certifications; and 
(10)  Physician report of physical examination and Hepatitis B vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-151), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-137. - Issuance of body artist permit and fees. 
(a)  The county board of health environmental health section may issue a body artist permit to an individual after determining that the individual is in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 40 (O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1 et seq.), with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  Body artist permits shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a body artist permit, the body artist must pay the applicable permit fee. Body artist permit fees shall not be prorated. 
(d)  At least 30 days prior to the expiration of a body artist permit, the body artist shall submit an application for the renewal to the county environmental health section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-152), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-138. - Application to existing body artist. 
The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body artists, whether the body artist began performing body art before or after the effective date of these rules. Anybody artist established on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six months of the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-153), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-139. - Denial, suspension, or revocation of body artist permit. 
(a)  Upon recommendation or official action of the board of health, a body artist permit issued pursuant to any provision of this article may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the board of health, and considered null and void, if: 
(1)  The application for a body artist permit contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  The body artist violated the conditions of the permit; or 
(3)  The body artist committed any violation of this article. 
(b)  After a body artist permit has been revoked, a valid permit shall not be issued until all violations have ceased and the body artist complies with all requirements of this article as determined by the board of health. 
(c)  No body artist permit shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article, the same applicant requesting a permit has been denied a permit based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
(d)  As required by O.C.G.A. § 40-31-4, any person substantially affected by any final order of the board of health denying, suspending, revoking, or refusing to grant or renew any permit provided under this Code may secure review by appeal to the county board of health in accordance with the hearing requirements of O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1, and as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, §1(6-154), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-140. - Body artist temporary permits. 
(a)  No person may perform body art without first obtaining a body artist permit. 
(b)  The body artist permit shall be displayed in the body artist's parlor or in public view. 
(c)  A body artist permit shall be returned to the board of health environmental health section if it is suspended or revoked. 
(d)  Proof of current certification in emergency first-aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training shall be submitted in conjunction with a body artist temporary permit application. 
(e)  Application for a body artist temporary permit shall include the following information concerning the body artist: 
(1)  Full legal name; 
(2)  All aliases; 
(3)  Copy of a valid driver's license or valid state-issued photo identification; 
(4)  Home address; 
(5)  Gender; 
(6)  Mailing address; 
(7)  Home phone number; 
(8)  Training and/or experience; 
(9)  Evidence of current certifications; and 
(10)  Physician report of physical examination and Hepatitis B vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, §1(6-155), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-141. - Issuance of body artist temporary permit and fees. 
(a)  The county board of health environmental health section may issue a body artist permit to an individual after determining that the individual is in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 40 (O.C.G.A. § 31-40 et seq.), with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a body artist permit, the body artist must pay the applicable permit fee. 
(c)  A temporary permit for a body artist will be valid seven days from the issuance date. 
(d)  This permit is transferable, with the exception that, the body artist will notify the county board of health when a location change from one body art studio is made to another body art studio. 
(e)  A body artist that obtains a body artist temporary permit shall comply with sections 14-138 and 14-139. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-156), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-142. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall tattoo the body of an individual who is under 18 years of age, unless the person performing the tattoo procedure is a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.), or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath in compliance with O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 9 (O.C.G.A. § 31-9-1 et seq.). 
(b)  No person shall pierce the body, with the exception of ear lobes, of any person under the age of 18 for the purpose of allowing the insertion of earrings, jewelry, or similar objects into the body, unless the minor's legal parent, custodian, or guardian with proper identification is present and signs a written consent form provided by the body art studio. The consent form must indicate the methods and parts of the minor's body upon which the body art procedure is performed. 
(c)  No person shall tattoo the body of any person within one inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person. 
(d)  No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is, or reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other stimulants or depressants, or is of unsound mind or body. 
(e)  No person shall obtain the services provided in a body art studio by misrepresentation of age in any place where body art procedures are performed. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any body artist to perform any acts of scarification and/or acts of suspension in the body art studio. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-157), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-143. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or entity to violate any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  No person shall be allowed to perform body art procedures unless that person is employed by a body art studio and holds a current body artist permit. No person shall be allowed to perform body art procedures outside the confines of a validly permitted body art studio. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a body artist to be under the influence of any alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
(d)  Except as specified in subsection (d)(1) of this section, no animals of any kind shall be allowed inside a body art studio. 
(1)  Live animals may be allowed in the following situations if the contamination of clean equipment, parlors, single-use articles, or any other items that may be used in a body art procedure cannot result: 
a.  Decorative fish in aquariums; 
b.  Patrol dogs accompanying police or security officers; 
c.  In areas that are not used for any equipment storage or equipment cleaning and preparing areas; 
d.  Service animals that are controlled by the disabled employee, person, or trainer of such animal, if a health or safety hazard will not result from the presence or activities of the service animal. 
(e)  An owner of a body art studio shall be deemed responsible for any act, omission, or violation of this article committed by any body artist in said studio, working upon studio premises, or performing body art procedures for the owner as an independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-158), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-144. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Body artists shall follow standard precautions. 
(b)  All hand and/or arm jewelry worn by a body artist that may impede in the procedure or have sharp edges that may compromise the integrity of the gloves shall be removed prior to the start of the body art procedure. 
(c)  Prior to performing body art on each client, the body artist shall ensure that his fingernails are closely trimmed and shall perform proper hand washing. This includes thoroughly washing and scrubbing hands with warm water and antibacterial soap, using an individual hand brush that is clean and in good repair. The hands shall then be dried by single-use towels. 
(d)  Prior to the start of the body art procedure, the body artist shall inspect his hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Single-use medical gloves shall be worn during the body art procedure. They shall be donned in such a fashion that their integrity is not compromised. The gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the procedure, if the gloves become soiled, torn, punctured, or the integrity of the glove is compromised. The body artist shall perform hand hygiene before donning and after removing each set of gloves. 
(e)  Each body artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron, or smock. 
(f)  Body artists who are experiencing symptoms of illness including, but not limited to, diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, or skin infections shall refrain from performing body art procedures. 
(g)  Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each body artist for the entire day and/or night operation. 
(h)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area of the body where the body art procedure will be performed. 
(i)  All items that come in contact with a client's skin shall be single-use and disposed of after the procedure. 
(j)  All sharps used in body art procedures shall be sterile at the time of the procedure. 
(k)  All fixtures and equipment contaminated with blood shall be cleaned with an approved sanitizer, for example, a ten percent bleach solution made fresh daily or as often as needed to maintain appropriate sanitizer concentration. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-159), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-145. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Prior to placing a tattoo design on the client's skin, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede the body art procedure shall be removed. 
(b)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved area. 
(c)  If a paper stencil is used by a body artist for transferring the design to the skin, the stencil shall be single-use and disposable. 
(d)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use sterile instrument only. 
(e)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(f)  After the area has dried, a layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied. 
(g)  After the application of the antibacterial ointment, a bandage or other protective barrier shall be applied to the tattoo. 
(h)  The client shall be given written and oral instructions on how to care for the tattoo during the healing process. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-160), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-146. - Procedures specific to body piercing. 
(a)  Before piercing the skin of a client, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede the procedure shall be removed. 
(b)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved area prior to the procedure being performed. 
(c)  The client shall then be given both written and oral instructions on how to care for the piercing during the healing process. 
(d)  A facility that limits its piercing practice to the piercing of the lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp piercing systems shall be exempt from regulatory requirements of this article. Compliance with the requirements for this exemption may be verified by inspection at the option of the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-161), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-147. - Compliance. 
(a)  A body art studio shall operate in compliance with these rules and with a valid body art studio permit issued by the county board of health. 
(b)  A body artist shall perform body art procedures in compliance with these rules and with a valid body artist permit issued by the county board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-162), 10-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-148. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be in accordance with chapter 5 of title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq.). 
(b)  The board of health may refuse to grant a permit for the operation of anybody art studio which does not fulfill the minimum requirements of the rules and regulations and may revoke a permit which has been issued and invoke other sanctions if a studio violates any of these rules and regulations. Before any order is entered refusing a permit applied for or revoking a permit, the applicant or permit holder shall be offered an opportunity for a hearing before the county board of health as provided in article 1 of chapter 5 of title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq.). The notice of refusal or revocation shall contain directions on how a hearing may be requested. 
(c)  The board of health is empowered to institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violations of an applicable provision of title 31 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or of these rules and regulations. 
(d)  Any person or entity violating any provision of this regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, or upon entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere thereto, shall be punished by a fine, not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a term not more than 60 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  Owners shall be responsible for ensuring agents and employees fully comply with the provisions of these regulations and shall be liable for any violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2013-16, § 1(6-163), 10-24-2013) 
Secs. 14-149—14-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

Sec. 14-250. - Applicability. 
These rules will have application in all except the following cases: 
(1)  Any facility or system under the jurisdiction of and regulated by the department of natural resources or its successor; 
(2)  Any public or community sewage treatment system; 
(3)  Other shared jurisdiction by memoranda of agreement or other agreements. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-950), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-251. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Absorption field means a configuration of absorption trenches installed in a portion of land and used for the absorption and final treatment of sewage. 
Absorption line means a pipe line of perforated pipe laid in an absorption trench to serve as a conduit for sewage effluent. 
Absorption trench means an excavation in which an absorption line is laid. 
Absorption trench bottom and side soil area means the total interface of bottom and side soil area with undisturbed soils of all absorption trenches in an absorption field and occurring horizontally and downward from the point of distribution into the soil, expressed in square feet. 
Aggregate means washed gravel or washed stone meeting the state department of transportation standards for hardness or other materials approved by the department and shall be one-half inch to two inches in diameter. 
Alternative on-site sewage management system means any approved on-site sewage management system which differs in design or operation from the conventional or chamber septic tank system or privy. 
Approved or approval means compliance with applicable specifications or criteria developed or accepted by the department. 
Auxiliary system means a system to serve a portion of a residence, a pool house or other adjunct facility. 
Bedroom means any room that is designed primarily for sleeping purposes, as shown on the building plan. 
Black water means wastewater generated by water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks and garbage disposals. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a building drainage system inside the walls of a building, which receives the discharge from soil, waste or other drainage systems and conveys the discharge to the building sewer. 
Building sewer means that part of the horizontal piping of a building drainage system beyond the building drain which receives the discharge from the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, on-site sewage management system, or other disposal. 
Central on-site sewage management system means an on-site sewage management system serving more than one building, business, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. 
Chamber septic tank system means a septic tank and a chamber system as defined in this section. 
Chamber system means a system of chambers with each chamber being a molded polyolefin plastic, arch shaped, hollow structure with an exposed bottom area and solid top and louvered sidewall for infiltration of effluent into adjoining bottom and sidewall soil areas. Chambers may be of different sizes and configurations to obtain desired surface areas. 
Community subsurface treatment system means any system which treats primarily domestic wastewater other than those serving single-family residences or nondomestic sewage systems. 
Conventional septic tank system means any septic tank and conventional system as defined in this section, but does not include alternative or experimental systems. 
Conventional system means a traditionally used system that is composed of perforated pipe surrounded by gravel or stone masking for the infiltration of effluent into adjoining bottom and side soil areas. 
County board of health means the Fayette County board of health established by the O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1, or its designee. 
Department means the department of human resources of the State of Georgia or its designee. 
Distribution device means a watertight structure which receives sewage effluent from a septic tank, dosing tank, or other sewage retention device and distributes it in equal portions to two or more absorption lines. 
Dosing tank means an approved watertight tank, located after a septic tank or other sewage retention device, to receive and retain sewage effluent, and so equipped as to discharge sewage effluent intermittently to a distribution device, either by pump or by siphon. 
Experimental on-site sewage management system means any on-site sewage management system proposed for testing and observation, and provisionally approved for such purposes by the department, but which has not been fully proven under field use. 
Failure means an on-site sewage system in such a condition that it constitutes a public hazard by inadequate treatment and/or disposal of sewage. 
Filter means an approved device that removes solids or other materials from the effluent that could cause failure of an on-site sewage management system. 
Floodplain means a generally flat plain or depression susceptible to being flooded from any source, including small and intermittent watercourses and coastal areas subject to intermittent tidal action. 
Gray water means wastewater generated by water-using fixtures and appliances, excluding water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks, and garbage disposals. 
Grease trap means a device in which the grease content of sewage is intercepted and congealed, and from which grease may be skimmed or otherwise removed for proper disposal. 
Individual water supply system means a system of piping, pumps, tanks, or other facilities, utilizing groundwater to supply a single-family dwelling. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership, or for development, or both, and shall not include any part of the right-of-way of a street or road. 
Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems means the technical handbook currently adopted and periodically updated which is used by the department in the implementation of this article and is available for inspection at the appropriate state office in Atlanta or at local health departments. The Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems and its provisions are herein adopted unless inconsistent with other provisions of law or regulation and are hereafter referred to as the "manual" or "Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems." 
Mobile home park means a parcel of land developed for subsequent rental or lease for placement of two or more mobile homes. 
On-site sewage management system means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system serving one or more buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences, or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. Such term shall include, without limitation, conventional and chamber septic tank systems, privies, and experimental and alternative on-site management systems which are designed to be physically incapable of a surface discharge of effluent that may be approved by the department. 
Percolation coefficient means the ratio of trench bottom area to percolation time; it is expressed as the allowable rate of sewage application in gallons per square foot per day. 
Percolation rate means the time, expressed in minutes per inch, required for water to seep into saturated soil at a constant rate. 
Percolation test means the method used to measure the percolation rate of water into soil as described in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
Physical development means development which includes, but is not limited to, site preparation, erection of a structure, road construction, well construction, or installation of on-site sewage management systems. 
Privy means a structure (and necessary appurtenances) used for the sanitary disposal or storage of human wastes without the aid of water carriage; the term does not include chemical, composting, portable, or incinerator toilets. 
Public water supply system means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily, at least 60 days out of the year. 
Septage means a waste that is a fluid mixture of partially treated or untreated sewage solids, liquids and sludge of human or domestic waste, present in or pumped from septic tanks, malfunctioning on-site sewage management systems, grease traps or privies. 
Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to effect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Sewage means and includes human excreta, all water-carried wastes, and liquid household waste from residences or commercial and industrial establishments. 
Sewage treatment system means a system that provides primary treatment and disposal, including absorption field components, devices and appurtenances intended to be used for disposal of sewage by soil absorption, but does not include a conventional or chamber septic tank system. The system shall be designed to be physically incapable of a surface discharge of effluent. 
Sinkhole means a depression in the land surface, generally in a limestone region, which communicates or has the potential to communicate with a subterranean passage developed by solution; typical sinkholes can be broad, closed basin-like features or steep-sided dropouts, or variants thereof. 
Site means the location where the absorption field will be installed to include replacement area. 
Soil classifier means a person who holds at least a Bachelor of Science degree from an accredited college or university with a major in agronomy, soil science, or related field, as approved by the soil classifiers certification advisory committee. Must have completed a minimum of 15 semester hours or 25 quarter hours in approved soil science courses including a course in pedology and have four years or more of fulltime experience as a soil classifier/soil scientist actively mapping, identifying and classifying soil features, and interpreting the influence of soil features on soil uses. Certification shall be in accordance with guidelines published in the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Any person who holds a valid certificate of registration as a geologist issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 19 (O.C.G.A. § 43-19-1 et seq.), or who holds a valid certificate of registration as an engineer issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 15 (O.C.G.A. § 43-15-1 et seq.) and is practicing within his or her area of engineering competency may register with the department as a soil classifier. 
Subdivision means any division of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, building sites, mobile home sites, or other divisions, resulting in any single lot of less than three acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or legacy, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided, provided; however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of previously platted lots or portions thereof where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots conform to the standards of these rules. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels, all of which are three acres or more in size with minimum width of 150 feet for a distance sufficient to provide an adequate area for the placement of structures and improvements including wells and approved installation of approved on-site sewage management systems. 
Well means an excavation or opening into the ground by which groundwater is sought or obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-951), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-252. - System and permit required; application; requirements. 
(a)  On-site sewage management system required. Where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available, the owner, lessee or agent thereof of every building, residence or property, designed, used or intended to be used for human occupancy or congregation, shall provide an approved on-site sewage management system sufficient for persons normally expected to use or frequent the building, residence or other property for two hours or more. Connection shall be made to a public or community sewage treatment system when such system is available within 200 feet of the property line, or available in a public right-of-way abutting the property. Where a public or community sewage treatment system is to be constructed, or an existing public or community sewer is to be extended to serve a lot, or an approved on-site sewage management system is to be used, the building sewer shall be installed so that it will ensure gravity flow at a self-cleaning velocity throughout. If an existing on-site sewage system fails, immediate connection shall be made to a public or community sewerage system if such a system is available. Any facility that produces a waste stream with BOD5 (biochemical oxygen demand) and TSS (total suspended solids) higher than 200 mg/l shall be required to pretreat the waste to reduce the BOD5 and TSS to 200 mg/l or below before disposal through a conventional or chamber septic tank system. 
(b)  On-site sewage management system construction permit required. No person may begin the physical development of a lot or structure thereon, where an on-site sewage management system will be utilized, nor install an on-site sewage management system or component thereof without having first applied for and obtained from the county health department a construction permit for the installation. 
(1)  Application for such a construction permit shall be made in writing on forms provided by the county board of health. The county board of health shall approve or disapprove such application within 20 days after the receipt of a completed application. The application shall include: 
a.  Name and address of the owner and the applicant, if other than the owner; 
b.  Location of property; 
c.  Plans and specifications including location and design of the proposed on-site sewage management system including surface and subsurface drainage and piping; 
d.  Nature of the facility to be served; 
e.  Location of all water supplies, geothermal systems, or other utilities and trash pits on or off the lot, which will bear upon the location of the on-site sewage management system; 
f.  Number of bedrooms in the dwelling, or the number of persons to be served in other types of establishments, or other sewage flow or water usage data; 
g.  Soil characteristics, including soil types and capabilities, frequency and evaluations of seasonal high groundwater tables, occurrence of rock and other impervious strata; 
h.  Signature of the owner or agent applying for permit; and 
i.  Any additional information deemed necessary to determine the suitability of the site. 
(2)  The county board of health may waive submission of part of the information required for the application, provided the board deems that such information is available from previously submitted subdivision or mobile home park data, or from other sources. The information must be sufficient to make an adequate appraisal of the acceptability of the proposed lot for the installation of an on-site sewage management system. 
(3)  Repairs, replacement, or additions to existing systems must be permitted and inspected. 
(4)  Any person preparing to modify a lot for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit for the installation of an on-site sewage management system shall submit plans showing the type and extent of modifications. No modifications shall be carried out prior to the approval of the plans by the county board of health. Such approval shall be in accordance with the provisions of the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  Requirements for on-site sewage management system construction permit issuance or denial. On-site sewage management system construction permits shall be issued only after a site inspection by the county board of health shows favorable findings relative to absorption rates, soil characteristics, groundwater, rock, and any other factors which would affect the acceptability of the lot. No construction permit for an on-site sewage management system shall be issued prior to the approval of the public water supply system, where a public water supply system is to be utilized. Lot suitability and approval is to be determined by the criteria established by the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Lots shall be sized according to the regulations of the county board of health. The county board of health may deny or revoke an on-site sewage management system construction permit upon finding the lot unsuitable or for failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of these rules. Such denial shall be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-1, 31-5-2, 31-5-3, 31-5-4, 31-5-5 and 31-5-6. On-site sewage management construction permits shall remain valid for not more than 12 months from the date of issue. 
(1)  Issuance of a construction permit for an on-site sewage management system, and subsequent approval of same by representatives of the county board of health, shall not be construed as a guarantee that such systems will function satisfactorily for a given period of time; furthermore, said representatives do not, by any action taken in affecting compliance with these rules, assume any liability for damages which are caused, or which may be caused, by the malfunction of such system. 
(2)  On tracts or parcels of land of three acres or more, the conventional or chamber septic tank system may be utilized where the percolation rate does not exceed 120 minutes per inch. All other conditions must comply with the requirements of the regulations for on-site sewage management systems. 
(d)  Inspections. No person may backfill or use an on-site sewage management system until final inspection has been made by the county board of health to determine compliance with the provisions of the construction permit issued under subsection (c) of this section and written approval has been issued by the county board of health. 
(1)  A copy of the final inspection of an on-site sewage management system shall be provided to the owner, builder, developer or agent, whichever is appropriate. 
(2)  Grading, filling, digging trash pits or other landscaping or construction activities on the lot subsequent to final inspection by the county board of health which may adversely affect the on-site sewage management system shall render the approval void. Removal or alteration of system components after final inspection by the county board of health shall render the approval void. 
(e)  Design limits for conventional or chamber septic tank systems. To provide for the maintenance of sanitary conditions through the proper functioning of a conventional or chamber septic tank system for a reasonable period of time, no such system may be installed, constructed, or used, having a septic tank design capacity of less than 1,000 gallons or greater than 10,000 gallons, or where the total length of absorption trenches required would exceed 3,000 linear feet, or where the total absorption trench bottom area required would exceed 9,000 square feet. 
(f)  Submission of plans, specifications, and soil data. Plans, specifications, soil data and, if required, absorption test data, submitted to the county board of health for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit to install an on-site sewage management system, which will produce a sewage flow in excess of 2,000 gallons per day, shall bear the registration number and signature of a registered professional engineer, certified and registered under the laws of the state. The county board of health may accept plans, specifications, soil data, and absorption test data for facilities with sewage flow of 2,000 gallons or less per day, when prepared in accordance with these rules, from any person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the county board of health that they have sufficient knowledge of on-site sewage management system design. 
(g)  Soil data acceptability for individual lots. Soil evaluations shall be conducted by individuals meeting the requirements established in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(h)  Soil data or design certification required. The soil classifier, engineer, geologist or other professional approved by the department shall be required to attach to any soil evaluation submitted to the county board of health a copy of a current in force liability insurance certificate with limits of liability of no less than one million dollars. Soil evaluation reports submitted in compliance with the requirements established by the soil survey report checklist in section C of the department's manual shall be deemed sufficient and shall be accepted. The county board of health shall issue on-site sewage management system permits on sites deemed suitable by soil evaluations conducted in accordance with requirements established by the checklist in section C of the department manual. In the event that the county board of health finds that the soil evaluation is deficient, it shall notify the person or entity that submitted the evaluation in writing by mail within three business days stating all deficiencies and all measures needed to correct deficiencies. Engineer designs submitted in compliance with the requirements established by the engineered site plan checklist in section F of the department's manual and submitted with a copy of current in-force liability insurance certificate with limits of liability of no less than $1,000,000.00 shall be accepted by the county board of health. Engineer designs shall be evaluated within 20 days of submission and a written determination of said evaluation shall be mailed to the submitter within three business days of the findings by the county board of health. If the engineer design is rejected, the county board of health shall so notify the submitter listing the deficiencies found, the measures needed to correct the deficiencies and of the submitter's right to appeal the county's decision. 
(i)  On-site sewage management system notice required. In the event an on-site sewage management system, alternative system or soil fill installation is installed, notice shall be delivered to the owner of such property and in the event of new construction homes or commercial buildings, notice must be delivered to new owner, by the homebuilder/contractor, at the time of conveyance on such property stating the type of installation, design and maintenance needs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-952), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-253. - Sewers. 
(a)  Size of sewers. Sewers connecting component parts of on-site sewage management systems shall be of sufficient size to serve anticipated flow conditions. 
(b)  Sewers. All solid pipe and fittings used in an on-site sewage management system, beginning at the house, shall be NSF International schedule 40 PVC or equivalent and shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter. Sewers under driveways or similar areas of load or impact shall be of material capable of withstanding anticipated loads or installed so as to provide protection from crushing. 
(c)  Construction. Sewers, other than perforated pipe or drain tiles used in absorption fields, shall be laid with sealed, watertight, root-resistant joints. Such sewers shall be laid on a firm foundation, shall not be subject to settling, and shall be installed on a grade that will ensure a self-cleaning velocity. Where on-site sewage management systems are used, and where installation of building drains and building sewers is not covered by duly adopted local plumbing codes, or in the absence of a local plumbing code and/or plumbing inspections, the county board of health may verify the adequacy and acceptability of all or any portion of the building sewer or the building drain. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-953), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-254. - Septic tanks. 
(a)  Minimum design and construction. Septic tanks shall provide a minimum of 24 hours of retention and shall be designed and constructed to equal or exceed minimum design and construction criteria established by the department as published in the current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. After the effective date of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived, any person seeking approval of septic tanks to be used in on-site sewage management systems shall submit detailed plans and specifications for tank manufacture and other information as may be required by the department. Manufacturers and suppliers may be subject to periodic inspection, and approval by the county board of health or the department. Both the inlet and outlet tees shall be ASTM 3034 rated or equivalent. In addition, an approved filter shall be installed on the outlet end of the septic tank in compliance with the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(b)  Location. No septic tank shall be installed less than 50 feet from existing or proposed wells/springs, sinkholes, or suction water lines, and tanks shall be located downgrade from wells or springs if physically possible; less than 25 feet from lakes, ponds, streams, watercourses, other impoundments; less than ten feet from pressure water supply lines, or less than ten feet from a property line. No septic tank shall be installed less than 15 feet from a drainage ditch or embankment. Septic tanks shall be installed so as to provide ready access for necessary maintenance. Normally, the distance a septic tank should be located from a building foundation is at least ten feet but, lesser distances may be allowed by the county board of health. The county board of health, after site inspection, may require greater separation distances than cited here in due to unusual conditions of topography, or other site configuration; subsurface soil characteristics and/or groundwater interference. 
(c)  Capacity. The liquid capacity of septic tanks for single-family dwellings shall be 1,000 gallons for one, two, three or four bedrooms, and 250 additional gallons for each bedroom over four. Septic tank capacity shall be increased by 50 percent where garbage grinders are to be used. Auxiliary systems serving single-family residences or other facilities shall be based on the maximum daily flow. 
(d)  Compartmented tanks. Two compartment tanks shall be required. The first compartment shall be at least two-thirds the liquid capacity of the tank. 
(e)  Tanks in series. The county board of health may approve the installation of two septic tanks placed in series provided that the capacity of the first tank is at least 1,000 gallons and at least equal to the capacity of the second tank. When tanks in series are used, they shall be connected with a sealed sewer line, and all sewage shall initially enter the first tank. 
(f)  Foundation and backfill. Septic tanks will be constructed or installed level, on a foundation that will prevent settling; backfill shall be placed so that a stable fill results and undue strain on the tank is avoided. Earth backfill shall be free of voids, large stones, stumps, broken masonry, or other such materials. A minimum earth cover of six inches over the tank is recommended. With proper documentation, the county board of health may approve less cover. All openings and manholes shall be constructed so as to prevent the entrance of surface water. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-954), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-255. - Distribution devices and dosing tanks. 
(a)  Minimum design and construction of distribution devices. Distribution devices shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(b)  Minimum design and construction of dosing tanks. Where required, dosing tanks shall be designed, constructed, and installed in accordance with the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-955), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-256. - Absorption fields. 
(a)  Absorption area. The absorption area shall be based upon the anticipated volume of treated sewage and upon the characteristics of the soil in which absorption fields are to be located as specified in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Soil characteristics and other related data, including percolation tests, may be required by the county board of health. Absorption areas shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Aggregate; 
(2)  Nonaggregate; and 
(3)  Other. 
(b)  Prior approved systems. Any prior approved system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-2-7(a)(4) is approved for installation according to manufacturer's recommendation. 
(c)  Location. No absorption field will be constructed less than 100 feet from existing or proposed wells, springs or sinkholes; less than ten feet from water supply lines and buildings with basements and less than five feet from buildings without basements, other structures, drives and property lines; less than 15 feet from an embankment or trash pits, nor less than 50 feet from the normal water level of any impoundment, tributary, stream, or other body of water, including wetlands. If the water supply line crosses or comes within ten feet of the absorption field the water supply line shall be installed at least 12 inches above the top of the aggregate layer of the absorption line and shall be encased in a single length of larger diameter water pipe. No absorption field shall be installed in areas where groundwater, soil characteristics or adverse geological formation may interfere with the absorption or effective treatment of sewage effluent. 
(d)  Minimum design and construction for absorption fields. Absorption lines and absorption trenches shall be designed and installed in accordance with the minimum design and installation criteria established in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-956), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-257. - Privies. 
Privies shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-957), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-258. - Alternative on-site sewage management systems. 
Alternative on-site sewage management systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. The department shall maintain a list of approved alternative on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-958), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-259. - Experimental on-site sewage management systems. 
Any limitations to the use of experimental on-site sewage management systems shall be decided by the department's technical review committee. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-959), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-260. - Septage removal and disposal. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall engage in the removal or disposal of the contents of septic tanks, pit privies, or other on-site sewage management or experimental systems without having first applied for and obtained from the department or county board of health a septage removal permit, renewed annually, for such activities. The application for such septage removal permit shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by the department or the county board of health at least ten days prior to engaging in such activities. The application shall include but not be limited to: the business name and address; name and address of the applicant; the manner by which such contents are to be removed, transported and given final disposal; and such other documentation as may be required by the county board of health, including evidence that septage removed and transported will be accepted at approved disposal sites. The permit shall be subject to suspension and revocation for failure to comply with the requirements of these regulations or the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(b)  Pumping and disposal methods. Approved methods of pumping and disposal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be: discharge to a public or community sewage treatment system for treatment in a wastewater treatment plant, treatment at separate septage handling facilities, or direct land application. Pumping and disposal shall be in accordance with the requirements of the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  Vehicle identification. The name and address of the person or firm engaging in the removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems and the permit number shall be lettered on both sides of each vehicle used for septage removal purposes. Letters and numerals shall not be less than two inches in height and shall be readily visible. 
(d)  Vehicle maintenance. Every vehicle used for removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be equipped with a watertight tank or body and properly maintained. Liquid wastes shall not be transported in open bodied vehicles. All pumps, hose lines, valves and fittings shall be maintained so as to prevent leakage. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-960), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-261. - Grease traps. 
(a)  Grease traps required. Grease traps shall be required for commercial or industrial establishments with on-site sewage management systems where it is determined by the county board of health that the amount of grease introduced into the system is in excess of 50 mg/l. 
(b)  Grease trap design. Plans and specifications for grease traps shall be submitted to the county board of health for approval. The county board of health shall review the grease trap design in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Effluent from grease traps shall be disposed of in a septic tank and not directly discharged to the absorption field. Grease traps shall be located, installed and constructed so that the temperature of the sewage will be reduced to permit congealing or separation of grease, and easy access for cleaning is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-961), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-262. - Sewage flow. 
The design sewage flow of an on-site sewage management system shall be determined from the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. The daily sewage flow may be determined by the department after due consideration of data submitted by the owner or his agent on design criteria. Calculations will be made on the basis of peak flow and not on long term averages. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-962), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-263. - Subdivision and mobile home parks. 
(a)  Pre-development review. It is recommended that developers considering subdivision or mobile home park development, where public or community sewage treatment systems will not be available, seek a predevelopment review by the county board of health prior to developmental improvements. A predevelopment report which indicates disapproval or tentative approval may be obtained by submitting a boundary plat including: 
(1)  A vicinity map; 
(2)  A topographic map; 
(3)  A preliminary soil study conducted in compliance with the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(b)  Proposals and plans required. The following information is required for subdivision and mobile home park proposals: 
(1)  A boundary plat drawn to a reasonable scale which includes: 
a.  A vicinity map; 
b.  Proposed lots and streets including lot identification, dimensions, building lines and square footage of lots; 
c.  A topographic map depicted in two-foot contour intervals. Lesser contour intervals may be approved by the county board of health if the slope is sufficiently steep; 
d.  A soil map and soil descriptions based on a high intensity soil study conducted in compliance with the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems; 
e.  The location of all present and proposed wells, water systems, watercourses, floodplains, sewage systems, structures, rights-of-way, utilities, stormwater drainage systems and easements on the property and within 100 feet outside the perimeter of the property; and 
f.  The name, registration number and seal of the professional surveyor or engineer that prepared the development plan. 
(2)  A completed subdivision analysis record on forms provided by the department. 
(3)  A copy of the following documents issued by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources: 
a.  The land disturbance activity permit issued by either the environmental protection division or the local issuing authority. For the purposes of this section, the term "issuing authority" means the governing authority of any county or municipality, which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 by the director of the environmental protection division; 
b.  A letter of approval to begin construction of a public water supply system and approving the source of the water supply where a public water supply system is to be utilized; and 
c.  For a development which will result in the disturbance of more than five acres a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) submitted to the environmental protection division to be covered under NPDES permit GAR100000 for the discharge of stormwater associated with construction activity. 
(c)  Approval required. No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a lot or lots in a subdivision or mobile home park until written approval of plans for water supply and sewage disposal has been obtained from the county board of health. This approval constitutes general acceptance of all lots, except those lots excluded, for development with on-site sewage management systems. (Excluded lots may receive further consideration based on additional information.) 
(d)  Limits on use of on-site sewage management systems for subdivision and mobile home parks. Approval of subdivisions and mobile home parks utilizing on-site sewage management systems shall not be granted: 
(1)  When a public or community sewage system is available within 500 feet of the subdivision or mobile home park. 
(2)  When soil maps, descriptions, and reports compiled by a registered soil classifier indicate that soil conditions prohibit safe development of on-site sewage management systems. 
(3)  Prior to receipt of a letter from the environmental protection division approving the plans to construct the public water supply system and approving the source of the water supply where a public water supply system is to be utilized. 
(e)  Construction permits. Construction permits for on-site sewage management systems shall be issued in accordance with section 14-252(b)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-963), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-264. - Subdivision, mobile home park water and sewage. 
(a)  Subdivision and mobile home park water supply. Connection to a public water supply system shall be required if available within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision or mobile home park. 
(b)  Subdivision and mobile home park percolation tests. Where required for planning purposes and determination of the general absorptive capacity of soils, the number of percolation tests to be made shall be one per lot, in the area where absorption fields are to be located. Before construction of on-site sewage management systems, individual lots within the proposed development shall comply with section 14-263. 
(c)  Subdivision and mobile home park test bores. Where required for planning purposes, test bores to determine groundwater elevations and subsurface rock formations shall be made at locations, in numbers and at depths to be determined by the department or county board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-964), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-265. - Certification and decertification of septic tank contractors, inspection personnel, pumpers, soil classifiers and maintenance personnel. 
(a)  Certification required. Individuals performing services related to site approval, the design, location, installation, inspection and maintenance of an on-site sewage management system, must be certified by the department. 
(1)  Guidelines defining certification qualifications for septic tank contractors, inspection personnel, pumpers, soil classifiers and maintenance personnel shall be established by the department and shall be published in the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. The guidelines shall be based on education, experience, testing and performance. 
(2)  The department shall write a protocol for decertification of persons certified under the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Certification shall be required every two years and shall be based on meeting continuing education requirements. 
(b)  Fee. The department shall adopt a fee schedule for the certification and recertification of the persons listed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-965), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-266. - Maintenance and operation. 
(a)  Prohibited discharge. No person shall allow the unapproved discharge or spillage of sewage, nor shall an on-site sewage management system be used or maintained in such a manner that will allow the seepage or discharge of effluent from such system to the ground surface, to a watercourse, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm sewer, water well, abandoned well, lake, stream, river, estuary, groundwater, or other body of water. 
(b)  Maintenance. The property owner shall be responsible for properly operating and maintaining the on-site sewage management system to increase the life expectancy and prevent failure. Maintenance of the system shall be in accordance with the criteria established in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Where an on-site sewage management system is proposed to serve facilities under separate ownership, a contract to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the system signed by all owners, shall exist as a precondition to the issuance of a permit for the construction of an on-site sewage management system. 
(c)  Additives. No strong bases, acids or organic solvents shall be used in the operation of an on-site sewage management system. 
(d)  Existing system evaluations. If a performance evaluation of an existing system is conducted, the evaluation shall be performed in accordance with the procedure established in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(e)  Variances. The county board of health may grant variances in the cases of hardship where existing systems are malfunctioning. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-966), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-267. - Enforcement. 
The administration and enforcement of this article shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. ch. 31-5. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-967), 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 14-268. - Standards for nonconventional on-site sewage management systems. 
(a)  The department shall review absorption field products that differ in design from the conventional on-site sewage management system. The following standards will be used to determine equivalency to the conventional on-site sewage management system: 
(1)  The design infiltrative surface is the wetted trench bottom area. 
(2)  Due to the combined effects of compaction, contact area and fines associated with gravel aggregate, the effective infiltrative surface area is reduced by an estimated 50 percent. 
(3)  The minimum amount of effective trench bottom infiltrative surface area per linear foot shall be equivalent to the conventional 36-inch wide gravel system. 
(4)  Sidewall area shall not be considered for design reduction. The minimum amount of effective sidewall infiltrative surface area per linear foot shall be equivalent to the conventional 36-inch-wide gravel system. 
(5)  The minimum storage volume required for a system shall be equivalent to the conventional 36-inch-wide gravel system. 
(6)  The design absorption area required is based on the most hydraulically limiting soil horizon that comes into contact with the infiltrative surface of the sidewall, trench bottom and for a distance one foot below the absorption trench bottom. 
INFILTRATION AREA FOR CONVENTIONAL 36-INCH-WIDE GRAVEL TRENCH ABSORPTION 

 
(b)  Prior approval. Lots approved for development based on a reduction in absorption trench length up to 50 percent shall continue to be approved and permitted for up to a 50 percent reduction in absorption trench length provided the lot is part of a recorded plat or part of a preliminary development plan submitted to the county board of health within one year of rule adoption. Preliminary plans must include as a minimum: proposed lots and streets with lot identifications, lot dimensions and square footage; a topographic map with watercourses and floodplain identified; a level 3 soil report; the location of the water supply system, rights-of-way, easements and utilities; and the name, registration number and seal of the professional surveyor or engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1(5-968), 11-14-2013) 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. title 16; destruction or damaging of any county building or its appurtenances or furniture, O.C.G.A. § 36-9-11; nuisances, O.C.G.A. title 41. 

Article V. - Film Permits 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Regulation of wells. 
(a)  Abandoned wells. All abandoned individual, nonpublic, public, irrigation, and industrial wells shall be filled, sealed, and plugged by a water well contractor licensed by the state water well standards advisory council. 
(b)  Operating wells. All wells other than abandoned wells shall be completely covered. 
(Code 1983, § 11-16; Code 1992, § 12-1; Ord. No. 91-17, 9-26-1991) 
State Law reference— Abatement of hazard from abandoned well or hole, recovery of costs, use of county funds, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-14. 
Sec. 16-2. - Trespassing. 
(a)  Trespassing prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass onto or enter upon county property, other than a designated county park or a building provided for public service during regular operating hours. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Any person found in violation of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and/or 60 days' imprisonment for the first offense; each offense thereafter shall cause a fine to be issued, within the discretion of the court, of not less than that issued for the first offense. 
(Code 1992, § 12-3; Ord. No. 92-12, 6-3-1992) 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq. 
Sec. 16-3. - Sale of handguns. 
Criminal history background check required. A mandatory criminal history background check shall be performed by the sheriff's department upon any person desirous of purchasing a handgun. The fee for this background check shall be set by the board of commissioners. Such fee shall be amended from time to time by the board of commissioners as they may see fit. The fee amount shall be tendered in cash, certified check or cashier's check at the commencement of the background check. 
(Code 1992, § 12-4; Ord. No. 94-01, 2-24-1994) 
State Law reference— Background checks, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-171 et seq. 
Sec. 16-4. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  Unlawful act; exceptions. It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm within the confines of the county, except in the protection of a person's life or property: 
(1)  Within 100 yards of a public roadway; 
(2)  Within 200 yards of the dwelling house of another; 
(3)  Within 200 yards of a county or other municipal or licensed recreation area; and 
(4)  In such a manner as to endanger another's life, limb or property. 
The discharge of shotguns under the foregoing conditions shall be permitted in any residential zone provided the parcel of land being used is ten acres or larger in size and OO buckshot or smaller ammunition is used in the shotgun. The discharge of rifles, pistols or shotguns under the foregoing conditions is permitted within any residential zone, A-R (agricultural-residential) zone or any planned unit development zoning district which has been specifically approved for a planned retreat or lodge provided the parcel of land being used is 25 acres or larger in size. 
(b)  Permit process. Whenever any event involving the discharging of firearms is to occur, such as recreational/fundraising events or competitions, at any site other than a site zoned A-R or an approved planned retreat or lodge as defined in this section, a permit must be issued prior to the holding of the event. Applications for permits shall be submitted to the enforcement officer in charge of the county marshal's department. Approval or denial of each permit shall be within the discretion of the marshal's department. The permit fee shall reflect the cost of review by the marshal's department. The specific fee amount is available from the marshal's department and is subject to change from time to time with consent from the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 12-5; Ord. No. 94-18, §§ 1, 2, 10-19-1994; Ord. No. 94-19, § 1, 10-27-1994; Ord. No. 95-08, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-1995) 
Sec. 16-5. - Yard trimmings disposal. 
(a)  Yard trimmings defined. Yard trimmings are defined as leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations (Ga. EPD Solid Waste Rules—Chapter 391-3-4.01). 
(b)  Disposal prohibited; alternative. Yard trimmings shall not be placed into the county landfill after June 30, 1995. The county will provide an area appropriate for stockpiling for periodic processing into compost or mulch. 
(c)  Duty to separate. Beginning July 1, 1995, yard trimmings will be separated from any other waste by residents, businesses and/or commercial haulers using the county facilities prior to, or upon arrival at the facility. 
(d)  Disposal of processed waste. Processed waste is the property of the county and may be used by the county for its own purposes. Should the county be unable to use all of the processed waste, the county may dispose of the surplus to the public in a way it deems appropriate. 
(e)  Tabulation. Yard trimmings will be weighed when brought to the facility. Processed waste will be weighed when leaving the facility. Weights shall be tabulated and credited toward the county's solid waste disposal rate reduction goal. 
(f)  Cost. The fee levied for yard trimmings waste brought to the facility shall be set from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(g)  Violators. Violators of this section will be refused the services of the county solid waste handling facilities. 
(Code 1992, § 12-6; Ord. No. 94-20, 11-16-1995; Ord. No. 95-04, § 1, 2-15-1995) 
Sec. 16-6. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  No person shall remain, loiter or prowl in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity, after having been ordered to clear such place by a law enforcement officer. 
(b)  No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any other person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health, or whereby the property of another is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(c)  No person shall endanger the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats or abusive conduct. 
(d)  No person shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another. 
(e)  No person shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(f)  No person shall jostle, roughly crowd or push any person in any public place. 
(g)  No person shall use "fighting words," or loud and boisterous language, directed towards another so as to create a breach of the peace potentially dangerous to the safety of persons or property. 
(h)  No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way or place so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public way or place when ordered by a law enforcement officer. 
(i)  No person shall disrupt the actions which tend to incite a breach of the peace, the activities of any house of worship, hospital, home for the elderly, school, court, county commission chambers. 
(j)  No person shall interfere, by acts of physical obstruction, another's pursuit of a lawful occupation or activity. 
(k)  No person shall throw bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, missiles, or any other debris on public property or private property without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2013-18, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 16-7. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remain, loiter or prowl in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  The circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. 
(2)  The person is observed flipping or pulling door handles on vehicles and/or doors of vehicles or property that does not belong to him and said person does not have written permission allowing said activity with regard to said vehicle or property. 
(c)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requested the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. 
(d)  No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. No. 2013-18, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 16-8. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language. 
(Ord. No. 2013-18, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 16-9. - Social hosts. 
(a)  Statement of Intent. Having found that alcohol is a contributing factor in many risky behaviors and crimes committed by persons under the age of 21, and having found that persons under the age of 21 often possess or consume alcoholic beverages at social gatherings held at private residences or upon private property under the control of persons over the age of 21, known as "social hosting", the board of commissioners of Fayette County, Georgia finds that it is in the interests of the public safety and welfare of the citizens of Fayette County, Georgia to prohibit social hosting. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage shall mean alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid, solid, or gas containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, or beer. 
(2)  Gathering shall mean an assembled group of three or more non-related persons, at least one of whom is under the age of 21 years old. 
(3)  Related persons shall mean persons that live together in a household or persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or other legal construct. 
(4)  Responsible person shall mean any person who is in legal or actual possession or control of any private property where a gathering takes place, regardless of whether such person has actual title to the property, including but not limited to: the property owner, renter, or lessee; the person in charge of the property; or the person who organized the gathering on the property. 
(c)  Violation. No responsible person, as defined herein, shall allow a gathering to take place if a person under 21 years of age at the gathering obtains, possesses, or consumes any alcoholic beverage and the responsible person knows or should have known that a person under 21 years of age has obtained, possessed, or consumed any alcoholic beverage at said gathering. 
(1)  Said responsible person shall be deemed to know or should have known of the gathering, if: 
a.  The gathering takes place within the structure where the responsible person is located, and the presence of alcohol is reasonably detectable; or 
b.  The gathering takes place within sight of the responsible person, and the presence of alcohol is reasonably detectable; or 
c.  The gathering takes place within a reasonable hearing distance of the responsible person, and the presence of alcohol is reasonably detectable; or 
d.  The responsible person actually knows of the gathering taking place anywhere on property under his/her control, and the presence of alcohol is reasonably detectable. 
(2)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if a responsible person (a) gives timely notice to a law enforcement official of the discovery of alcohol at the gathering or (b) supervises the activities of persons under the age of 21 at the event and prohibits and prevents access to alcoholic beverages by any person under the age of 21. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates this section shall be required to appear at court to answer said charge. The punishment imposed upon conviction shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or six months' imprisonment or both, provided the judge shall probate not less than 120 days of any sentence imposed, except as otherwise provided by general law, and shall not exceed the maximum punishment specified herein. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in jail. 
(2)  Any person who is found guilty of violating this section shall be punished as follows: 
a.  For the first offense, up to six months imprisonment all of which may be probated, and a fine up to $500.00, and community service up to ten hours, and mandatory participation in a victim impact panel, and participation in an alcohol education class at the court's discretion. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 60 days in jail. 
b.  For the second offense, up to six months imprisonment all but 24 hours may be probated, and a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $750.00, and community service up to 20 hours, and mandatory participation in a victim impact panel, and participation in an alcohol education class at the court's discretion. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 59 days in jail. 
c.  For the third and subsequent offenses, up to six months imprisonment all but 30 days may be probated, and a fine of no less than $1000.00, and community service up to 200 hours, and mandatory participation in a victim impact panel, and participation in an alcohol education class at the court's discretion. In the event a sentence is revoked, a defendant shall not serve more than 30 days in jail. 
(3)  Any person who is found guilty of violating this section, and serious bodily injury or death resulted from the occurrence of the gathering, shall be sentenced to the maximum allowable jail time of 60 days (Fayette County Code §1-7, O.C.G.A. §36-1-20). 
(Ord. No. 2014-4, § 1, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-10, § 1, 9-10-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-04, § 1, adopted March 11, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as § 12-10. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 16-9. 
Secs. 16-10—16-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 

Sec. 16-35. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the Fayette County Noise Control Ordinance. 
(Code 1992, § 12-27; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 4-14-2005) 
Sec. 16-36. - Declaration of policy. 
The problem of noise in unincorporated Fayette County has been observed by the board of commissioners and county staff. It has been documented by complaints in the marshal's department. The board of commissioners finds that it is necessary to minimize said noise to protect the citizens of the county from the physiological and psychological dangers of excessive noise and to promote the public health, safety and welfare as well as to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes the use, value and enjoyment of property; and the quality of the environment. 
(Code 1992, § 12-28; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 4-14-2005) 
Sec. 16-37. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the words, terms and phrases which follow shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Generally, all definitions in all applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) S1.1-1994, Acoustical Terminology or its successor body shall be applicable. 
Administrator means the chief marshal for the Fayette County Marshal's Department. 
Ambient sound level means the background level of all sound in a given district area independent of the specific source being measured. 
Commercial agriculture means the production of livestock or agricultural commodities and the offering of the livestock and agricultural commodities for sale. 
Construction means any site preparation, clearing, grading, assembly, erection, demolition, substantial repair, alteration or similar action taken upon any public or private property or any structure attached hereto. 
Day or daytime, for the purposes of this article, shall be the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekends. 
dB(A) is a unit of measurement which describes the sound level measured, using the "A" weighting scale which reflects the response characteristics of the human ear to sound. Said unit is also known as a decibel. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Equipment means any stationary, mobile, self-powered, or portable device or any part thereof capable of generating sound. 
Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle. 
Impulsive sound is a sound which has a peak sound level lasting less than one second and which is short compared to the frequency of the sounds occurrence, the onset of the sound is abrupt, the decay is rapid, and the peak value exceeds the ambient level by more than ten dB(A). 
Land use the land use categories shown in section 16-38 of this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Fayette County Zoning Ordinance. Residential classification shall include all residential uses defined in the Fayette County Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to Agricultural Residential (A-R). The commercial classification shall include all commercial uses defined in the Fayette County Zoning Code. The industrial classification shall include all industrial uses defined in the Fayette County Zoning Ordinance. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which relies on an engine, motor, or similar apparatus for propulsion and is used primarily for transporting persons or property upon land. 
Muffler means a device designed to dissipate sound emitted by an internal combustion engine, receiving exhaust gas from the engine, or for the purpose of introducing water to the flow of the exhaust gas from the engine. 
Night or nighttime, for the purposes of this article shall be the hours between and including 9:01 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. on weekdays, and between 10:01 p.m. and 8:59 a.m. on weekends. 
Noise means the intensity, duration and character of sound from any and all sources. 
Periodic sound is a sound having a sound level which varies repetitively with a period of one minute or less, which has a peak value of more than five dB(A) above the minimum value. 
Person means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, company, society, political subdivision, or any other entity, public or private. 
Property means an interest or aggregate of rights in land which is guaranteed and protected by law including a leasehold interest. 
Property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface and its vertical extension, which separates the real property of one or more persons from that of others. In the case of separate tenancies or ownerships which share a common wall, floor, or ceiling, the term "property boundary" means the edge of the wall, floor, or ceiling which is on the side of the receiving tenancy or ownership. 
Public disturbance noise means any sound which, because of its random or infrequent occurrence, is not conducive to measurement under the quantitative standards established in this article; and which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, or endangers or damages personal or real property, or annoys, disturbs or perturbs any reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or is specifically included in those listed in section 16-39. 
Public highway means the entire width between the right-of-way lines of every roadway publicly maintained by the state or any county or city, when any part of the right-of-way is generally open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel as a matter of right. 
Pure tone component means sound having the following qualities: A one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone that exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by five dB for center frequencies of 500 Hz and above, by eight dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz, and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz. For example, the sound made by a siren often meets the definition of a "pure tone component." 
Receiving property means property within which sound originating beyond its property boundary is received. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including, but not limited to duration, intensity and frequency. 
Special construction vehicle means any vehicle which is designed and used primarily for grading, paving, earthmoving, and other construction work; which is not designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property on a public highway; and which is only incidentally operated or moved over the highway. 
Temporary construction site means any location where site clearing, construction of plat improvements, or construction or remodeling of a structure, facility, improvement, or other feature attached to the land occurs including roadway, bikeway, trail, sidewalk, or other similar construction, repair, or improvement. 
Warning device means any device intended to provide public warning of potentially hazardous, emergency or illegal activities, including but not limited to a burglar alarm or vehicle backup signal, but not including any fire alarm. 
Water craft means any contrivance powered by an internal or external combustion engine used or capable of being used as a means of transportation or recreation on water. Water craft includes aircraft taxiing on water, but excludes aircraft in the act of actual landing or takeoff. 
Weekday means any day Monday through Friday which is not a legal holiday as defined by state law. 
Weekend means Saturday and Sunday or any legal holiday as defined by state law. 
(Code 1992, § 12-28; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 4-14-2005) 
Sec. 16-38. - Quantitative standards for sound. 
(a)  Unlawful sounds. Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued, or for any person in possession of property to allow to originate from the property, sound which intrudes into the property of another person and exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels established in this article; or for any person to operate upon any public highway any motor vehicle or any combination of motor vehicles under any conditions of grade, load, acceleration or deceleration in such manner as to exceed the maximum permissible sound levels established in this article for the category of vehicle. 
(b)  Maximum permissible sound levels. Measurement of sound levels from all sources except motor vehicles on public roads, shall be made at or within the property boundary of the receiving property. Maximum permissible sound levels for districts within unincorporated Fayette County, expressed in dB(A)'s, are: 
DISTRICT OF NOISE SOURCE 

 
(c)  Modifications to maximum permissible sound levels. The maximum permissible sound levels established in this article are altered by the sum of the increases and reductions in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and this subsection (c): 
(1)  Sounds of short duration may exceed the maximum permissible sound levels by a total of not more than 15 minutes in any one-hour period, when comprised of one or any combination of the following: 
a.  Five dB(A) for a total of 15 minutes; 
b.  Ten dB(A) for a total of five minutes; or 
c.  Fifteen dB(A) for a total of 1½ minutes. 
(2)  At night, as defined in this article, the maximum permissible sound levels are reduced by five where the receiving property lies within a residential district of the county, except for sound sources exempted under by this article. 
(3)  For any source of sound which is periodic, has a pure tone component, or is impulsive, the maximum permissible sound levels are reduced by five dB(A) in addition to the reduction set forth in subsection (b) of this section, at night, as defined in this article, where the receiving property lies within a residential district of the county, except for sound sources exempted by this article. 
(d)  Maximum permissible sound levels for motor vehicles. Measurement of motor vehicle sound levels shall be made at a distance of 50 feet from the center of the lane of travel at the posted speed limit, by measurement procedures established by the state commission on equipment. Maximum permissible sound levels for motor vehicles, expressed in dB(A)s, are: 

 
(Code 1992, § 12-29; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 4-14-2005) 
Sec. 16-39. - Specific public disturbance noise prohibitions. 
In addition to the general prohibitions set forth above, it is unlawful for any person to cause, suffer, allow or permit any of the following sounds. 
(1)  Sounds occurring at any time of day or night and resulting from the following causes: 
a.  Animals and birds. Sounds resulting from the owning, possessing, keeping or harboring of any animal for frequent or for a continued duration, which unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of persons in any residential districts, except sounds emanating from farm animals in zones where farm animals are allowed and except the keeping or harboring of animals in commercial kennels, noncommercial kennels, animal shelters, veterinary hospitals, pet shops, and grooming parlors which are operating in conformance with a valid business license and, where necessary, have obtained a disturbance permit. 
b.  Exhausts. Sounds resulting from the use of unmuffled exhaust systems on motor vehicles, off-road vehicles and recreational watercraft. 
c.  Vehicle repair in residential areas. Sounds which are frequent, repetitive or continuous and are made in connection with starting, repairing, operating or testing of motor vehicles, off-road vehicles, or internal combustion engines and which in a manner that interfere with the peace and comfort of persons in any residential district. 
d.  Motor vehicle horns. Sounds resulting from vehicle horns for purposes other than public safety or warning. 
e.  Schools, churches, courts, hospitals, and similar. Sounds which are loud and raucous and are made within 1,000 feet of any school, institution of learning, church, court, hospital, sanitarium, nursing or convalescent facility, while the same are in use, and which unreasonably interfere with the workings or use of such facility, or which disturb the peace, comfort, or repose of persons therein; provided, conspicuous signs be posted which indicate the nature of the institution. 
f.  Loudspeakers and amplifiers. Sounds created by the use of any sound amplifier whether mounted upon vehicle or not, for the purpose of broadcasting, advertising or attracting of attention to relay information to any party about any business or activity, unless, a disturbance permit for said sound amplification has been obtained from the board of commissioners. Ice cream vendors whose sole method of sale is from a moving vehicle shall be exempted from this subsection (1)f. 
g.  Instrument. Sounds created through the use of a musical instrument, sound amplifier, or other device capable of producing or reproducing sound, including but not limited to television and radios, of sounds heard as comprehensible music rhythms or felt: 
1.  Within any residence except the residence from whence the noise originate; or 
2.  Outdoors in a commercial, or residential district at a distance of 75 feet or more from the noise source. Such sounds include band sessions, automobile sound systems, and electronic sound reproduction equipment whether the source of the sound is stationary, portable, or in a motor vehicle. 
h.  Hawkers and peddlers. Sounds which result from the selling of anything or otherwise attracting or attempting to attract attention for any reason by outcry or use of a drum or other instrument or devise within residential areas, except at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar public entertainment events which are appropriately licensed. 
(2)  Nighttime sounds in residential districts. Sounds resulting from the following activities are determined to be public disturbance noises when they occur at night which are received on property in any residential district. 
a.  Tools. Operation within any residential district of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, blower, fan, garden tool or similar device, except devices engaged in emergency work specifically exempted by this article. 
b.  Equipment. Operating or permitting someone to operate any internal combustion powered equipment. 
c.  Construction. Construction activity, including blasting, unless a disturbance permit has been obtained. 
d.  Idling. The operation or idling, for more than ten minutes at a time, of stationary trucks weighing in excess of 10,000 pounds GVWR, except vehicles engaged in emergency work and specifically exempted from application of this article. 
e.  Bells. The sounding of bells, chimes or carillons. 
f.  Sound production devices. The creation by use of a musical instrument, whistle, human voice, sound amplifier, or other devices capable of producing or reproducing sound, of loud and raucous sounds which emanate frequently, repetitively or continuously from any building, structure, vehicle or property, such as sounds originating from a band session, automobile sound system or social gathering. 
(Code 1992, § 12-30; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 4-14-2005) 
Sec. 16-40. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Sounds exempt at all times. The following sounds are exempt, at all times, from the maximum permissible sound levels established in this article. 
(1)  Sounds originating from aircraft in flight and sounds which originate at airports and are directly related to flight operations. 
(2)  Sounds created by the operation of equipment or facilities of surface carriers engaged in interstate commerce by railroad. 
(3)  Noises resulting from the use of any emergency equipment and vehicle necessary for law enforcement or for the health, safety and welfare of the community, when said equipment or vehicle is used for these purposes. 
(4)  Noises created by safety, protective, and warning devices, where noise suppression would defeat the safety purpose of the device. 
(5)  Sounds caused by pigs, cattle, horses, sheep, goats, poultry and similar in agricultural zoning districts where said animals are permitted to be harbored, or kept. 
(6)  Sounds created by the discharge of firearms in the course of lawful hunting activities in areas where permitted. 
(7)  Sounds originating from persons holding a permit for parades and other public events. 
(8)  Sounds originating from motor vehicle racing events at existing, facilities authorized by the county. 
(9)  Sounds created by construction equipment, including special construction vehicles, at temporary construction sites, provided the receiving property is located in a commercial or industrial district. 
(10)  Sounds originating from forest harvesting, silviculture, or commercial agriculture, provided these uses are conducted in compliance with all applicable regulations. 
(11)  Sounds created by back-up beepers, provided that at night these sounds shall not be allowed to exceed the noise level necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(12)  Activities necessary for clean-up and site protection when weather conditions create an emergency. 
(13)  Activity necessary for construction or repair projects, which for reasons of public safety require that the work be done at night, provided that a single neighborhood is not impacted for longer than four weeks and that those persons residing adjacent to the street which is to be worked on shall receive notice of the project at least one week in advance of the beginning of work. 
(14)  Sounds created by or incident to the use of a public sporting arena, stadium or recreation field, which exists incidentally to a school (public or private), or political subdivision and is used for its intended uses. 
(b)  Sounds exempt during daytime hours. The following sounds are exempt, during daytime hours, from the maximum permissible sound levels established in this article. 
(1)  Sounds created by construction equipment, including special construction vehicles, at temporary construction sites. 
(2)  Sounds created by bells, chimes, or carillons not operating for more than five minutes in any one hour. 
(3)  Sounds created by powered equipment which is engaged in temporary or periodic maintenance or repair of residential property. 
(4)  Sounds created by the installation or repair of essential utility services. 
(5)  Sounds created by the discharge of firearms in zones where allowed or at a rifle range either indoor or outdoor, which is sited, developed and operated in accordance with all laws applicable to such activity. 
(6)  Sounds created by aircraft engine testing and maintenance. 
(c)  Sounds exempt during nighttime hours. The following sounds are exempt from the nighttime reduction provisions of this article. 
(1)  Sounds originating from electrical substations and transmission lines. 
(2)  Sounds originating from stationary equipment used in the conveyance of water by a utility. 
(3)  Sounds created by the discharge of firearms by law enforcement or similar organizations during training exercises and in zones where allowed or at a rifle range either indoor or outdoor, which is sited, developed and operated in accordance with all laws applicable to such activity, or firearm discharge by said organizations in the line of duty. 
(Code 1992, § 12-31; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 4-14-2005) 
Sec. 16-41. - Disturbance permits. 
(a)  Any person who wishes to obtain an exemption from any provision of this article may apply in writing to the administrator for a disturbance permit. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00 and such information and data as the administrator may require including but not limited to reports and documents showing noise levels customarily generated by the proposed activity and proposed means for controlling such noise. 
(b)  The marshal's department shall conduct an investigation and make a recommendation to the board of commissioners within 30 days of the receipt of the application. 
(c)  Upon consideration of the application and accompanying documentation the board of commissioners may issue a permit exempting the applicant from the application of the provisions of this article as specified in the permit for a period not to exceed 15 days if the application demonstrates the following: 
(1)  The noise occurring or proposed to occur does not endanger public health, safety, or welfare; and 
(2)  In considering the relative interests of the applicant, other owners or possessors of property likely to be affected by the noise, and the general public the permit is warranted; and 
(3)  One of the following circumstances is demonstrated: 
a.  The activity or noise source is temporary in nature and cannot be accomplished in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this article. 
b.  There is no reasonable economic or technological alternative mean, as determined by the board of commissioners in its sole discretion, currently known or available for the adequate prevention, abatement or control of the noise involved. 
c.  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the noise-producing activity in order to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  When issuing the permit, all conditions regarding the proposed use shall be written on the face of the permit including, but not limited, the effective date, restrictions on time of day, location on the lot, days of the week, and total hours of use per week. 
(e)  Any permit granted pursuant to this section may be extended upon submission and issuance of a new application for permit for an additional 15 day period, provided good cause is shown. 
(Code 1992, § 12-32; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 4-14-2005) 
Sec. 16-42. - Enforcement and appeals. 
(a)  Administrative and enforcement personnel. The administrator or a person designated by the administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article including, but not limited to, the conducting of investigation for issuance of disturbance permits. The officers of the marshal's office are authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article through citation for violation of the provisions hereof. All county departments are authorized to assist the administrator in the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Whenever the administrator has reason to believe that a violation of any of the provisions of this article, has occurred, the administrator may initiate investigation and/or enforcement action. Enforcement action shall include, at the administrator's discretion, the issuance of a citation for an infraction as defined by this article. 
(c)  Whenever the marshal's department has reason to believe that a violation of any of the provisions of this article, has occurred, the marshal's department may cause the issuance of a citation for infraction of this article. 
(d)  Any penalty imposed under the provisions of this article shall conform to the constraints of section 1-7. 
(Code 1992, § 12-33; Ord. No. 2005-08, § 1, 4-14-2005) 
Secs. 16-43—16-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Unlawful assembly, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-33; operation of motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-73. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Central traffic districts are all streets and portions of streets within the county. 
Parade and assembly mean any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, public demonstration, public gathering or procession of any kind, or similar display in or upon any street, park or other public place in the county conducted by any person, any government or civic organization or other profit or nonprofit organization or group. 
Parade permit is a permit as required by this article. 
(Code 1983, § 11-4; Code 1992, § 12-46) 
Sec. 16-74. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  Compliance. A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Possession of permit. The parade or assembly chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conducting of the parade or assembly. 
(Code 1983, § 11-13; Code 1992, § 12-47) 
Sec. 16-75. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when these vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The sheriff shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade or location of an assembly. The sheriff shall post signs to this effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 11-14; Code 1992, § 12-48) 
Secs. 16-76—16-93. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 16-94. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade or assembly, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the sheriff. 
(b)  Exceptions to this section are: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing this conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the school authorities. 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its function. 
(Code 1983, § 11-5; Code 1992, § 12-66) 
Sec. 16-95. - Application. 
(a)  Required. A person or group seeking issuance of a parade or assembly permit shall file an application with the sheriff on a form provided by him. 
(b)  Filing. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the sheriff not less than ten days, nor more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade or assembly. 
(c)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade or assembly. 
(2)  If the parade or assembly is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization or group, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization or group, and of the authorized and responsible heads of this organization and group. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the leader or chairperson of the parade or assembly and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
(4)  The date when the parade or assembly is to be conducted. 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
(6)  If an assembly, the location where the assembly will be held. 
(7)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute the parade or assembly; the type of animals and description of the vehicles. 
(8)  The hours when the parade or assembly will start and terminate. 
(9)  A statement as to whether the parade or assembly will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets or location proposed to be traversed. 
(10)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for the parade. 
(11)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at the assembly area or areas. 
(12)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade. 
(13)  If the parade or assembly is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the sheriff a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade or assembly authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(14)  Any additional information which the sheriff shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(d)  Fees. Fees shall be imposed for a permit required by this division as follows: 
(1)  Each application for a parade permit shall include an operational cost of $12.00 per hour for each police officer assigned to the parade or assembly, the number of officers to be determined by the sheriff; provided, however, the aforementioned operational cost shall not apply to any application for a parade permit where the parade is to be held outside the central traffic districts of the county. 
(2)  The sheriff shall have the authority to waive the fee set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section. A request, in writing, for waiver must be attached to the application for a parade permit. 
(3)  Any request for waiver of the application fee which is not acted on by the sheriff within five days from receipt will be regarded as denied. 
(Code 1983, § 11-6; Code 1992, § 12-67) 
Sec. 16-96. - Standards for issuance. 
The sheriff shall issue a permit as provided for under this article when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade or assembly will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade or assembly will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the county to properly police the parade or assembly and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the county. 
(3)  The conduct of the parade or assembly will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the county other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march or gathering and the areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade or assembly will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of the parade or assembly will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade or assembly is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)  Any assembly is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create an undue disturbance. 
(9)  The applicants for permit have not violated the terms of any previous parade permit granted to them and have not caused undue traffic congestion and policy problems under any previous parade permit. 
(Code 1983, § 11-7; Code 1992, § 12-68) 
Sec. 16-97. - Notice of rejection of application. 
The sheriff shall act upon the application for a parade permit within seven days after filing thereof. If the sheriff disapproves the application, he shall cause to be mailed to the applicant within seven days after the date upon which the application was filed a notice stating the reasons for denial. 
(Code 1983, § 11-8; Code 1992, § 12-69) 
Sec. 16-98. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of the parade permit to the board of commissioners. The appeal shall be filed within five days after notice of denial. 
(Code 1983, § 11-9; Code 1992, § 12-70) 
Sec. 16-99. - Alternative permit. 
The sheriff, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade or assembly on a date, at a time, at a place, or over a route different than that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternative permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the sheriff, file a written notice of acceptance with the sheriff. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this division. 
(Code 1983, § 11-10; Code 1992, § 12-71) 
Sec. 16-100. - Notice to county, other officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the sheriff shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The board of commissioners. 
(2)  The county marshal. 
(3)  The county attorney. 
(4)  The director of fire services. 
(5)  The chief of police of any incorporated areas within the county wherein the parade or assembly may be held or pass through. 
(Code 1983, § 11-11; Code 1992, § 12-72; Ord. No. 91-13, 9-18-1991) 
Sec. 16-101. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit issued under this division shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Maximum speed of vehicles participating therein. 
(3)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(4)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(5)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(6)  The streets or other areas to be occupied by any assembly, the numbers of persons, vehicles, animals, or other objects or vehicles to be engaged in the assembly. 
(7)  Such other information as the sheriff shall find necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 11-12; Code 1992, § 12-73) 
Sec. 16-102. - Revocation. 
The sheriff shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this division upon applications of the standards for issuance as herein set forth. 
(Code 1983, § 11-15; Code 1992, § 12-74) 
Secs. 16-103—16-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Dumping refuse in cave or sinkhole, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-145; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; egregious litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51 et seq.; securing loads on vehicles, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-248.1, 40-6-249; transporting refuse across county boundary for dumping without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; county regulation and control of litter, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20. 

Sec. 16-133. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the county of any and all littering on public or private property; and, 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the county and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Code 1992, § 12-91; Ord. No. 87-04, § 11-17, 5-14-1987; Ord. No. 2013-19, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 16-134. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all public and private property within the county. 
(Code 1992, § 12-92; Ord. No. 87-04, § 11-18, 5-14-1987; Ord. No. 2013-19, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42. 
Sec. 16-135. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Code 1992, § 12-93; Ord. No. 87-04, § 11-19, 5-14-1987; Ord. No. 2013-19, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
State Law reference— Dumping, depositing, etc., litter on public or private property or waters, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. 
Sec. 16-136. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Litter shall mean any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, construction and grading debris, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property shall mean the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. No. 2013-19, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 16-137. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to bury, dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the burying, dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The owners of such property has or have a valid permit from the state environmental protection division to dispose of any litter on such property. 
(Code 1992, § 12-95; Ord. No. 87-04, § 11-21, 5-14-1987; Ord. No. 2013-19, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
State Law reference— Prima facie evidence, rebuttable presumption, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-44. 
Sec. 16-138. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Code 1992, § 12-96; Ord. No. 87-04, § 11-22, 5-14-1987; Ord. No. 2013-19, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
State Law reference— Enforcement of Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-45. 
Sec. 16-139. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, buried, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, machinery or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, buried deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the county for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the county; and 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(4)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(5)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(d)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Code 1992, § 12-97; Ord. No. 87-04, § 11-23, 5-14-1987; Ord. No. 2013-19, § 1, 11-14-2013) 
State Law reference— Penalties for littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. 
Secs. 16-140—16-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FILM PERMITS 

Sec. 16-151. - Film permits. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide guidelines for the issuance, approval, and fees associated with the granting of permits for filming by television companies, movie companies, or other media in the county. 
(b)  Permit required. A film permit shall be obtained by any person working on behalf of television companies, movie companies, or other media, company or agency filming on county-owned property. For purposes of this ordinance, "county-owned property" includes, but is not limited to, county right-of-way. There shall be a consistent and uniform process for the issuance of film permits in the county. Any person planning a filming shoot which could impact public safety and/or disrupt county business is required to obtain a film permit. Failure to obtain a film permit shall be a violation of this section. Each day a film permit is not obtained shall be a separate violation. 
(c)  Procedure for issuance of permits. 
(1)  Application. 
a.  Any person desiring to obtain a film permit shall make application to the county clerk on a form prescribed by said official and shall meet the conditions set out in this ordinance (Exhibit A). 
b.  An application for a film permit shall be accompanied by a copy of a certificate of liability insurance for the person, company or agency filming, with at least $1,000,000 of coverage. The certificate of liability shall list the "Fayette County Board of Commissioners" as an additional insured. 
c.  In the event that special provisions are made to secure locations, including parking areas, for traffic enforcement, or other items/issues of an exclusive nature, supporting documentation shall be attached to the film permit application. 
d.  Upon request by the county administrator, a copy of the portion of the script of the scene that will be filmed on county-owned property shall be included with the film permit application. 
(2)  Application review. 
a.  The county clerk or his/her designee will coordinate with all necessary department heads including the sheriff's office and the board of education in a joint effort to determine if a film permit should be approved or denied. 
b.  The county reserves the right to deny a film permit based on the expected disruption to the county's business/operations and in cases deemed to be detrimental to the county's best interests. The county further reserves the right to deny a film permit based on the script of the scene to be filmed on county-owned property. 
c.  Every effort will be made by the county to expedite the processing of a film permit application. However, if the timeframe for which the film permit is needed is not deemed reasonable by the county for processing, Fayette County reserves the right to reject an application for a film permit immediately upon receipt. 
d.  The county administrator shall determine whether a film permit should be approved or denied. 
e.  The county clerk or his/her designee will contact the requesting party or their agent to communicate the decision of the county administrator. 
(3)  Fees. A fee shall be charged for filming on county-owned property in the following amounts: 
a.  One hundred dollars per day for filming at passive locations that do not produce disruption to routine county business/operations or to the general public. 
b.  Five hundred dollars per day for filming at active locations that may produce disruption to routine county business/operations or to the general public. 
c.  The county administrator, county clerk, or their designees shall have discretion to determine whether a particular application requires filming at a passive or active location, as those terms are used in paragraphs a. and b. above. 
(4)  Records retention. At the conclusion of the application process and granting of a film permit, two copies of the film permit shall be signed by the county administrator or in his absence by the county clerk to the board of commissioners, and by the authorized representative of the company or agency applying for the permit. One copy of the approved permit, along with any supporting documentation, shall be kept on file in the county's office of administration for one year. The second copy shall be kept on the site of the filming and is the property of the person listed on the permit application. Electronic copies of these documents may also be kept in the same manner as described. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-16) 
Chapter 18 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Applicability. 
The provisions contained in this article shall apply in all parks and recreational areas owned and operated by the county, with the exception of those areas defined in this chapter as Lake Kedron, Starr's Mill, Lake Horton, and Lake McIntosh. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-1), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the county parks and recreation department, a department under the jurisdiction of the county board of commissioners. 
Park and/or recreation facility means all recreation areas in parks, including land, buildings, lakes, ponds, streams, swimming pools, sports fields, cemeteries, and all other property and buildings owned, leased, or managed by the county, the department the designated agents or departments of the county, and including all recreation areas and parks in the county owned by the state or federal government and managed by the county. 
Park employee means any employee of the county parks and recreation department. 
Parks means all parks and all facilities located thereon, owned and/or controlled by the county and operated under the jurisdiction of the county parks and recreation department. 
Person means any individual, citizen, group, association, firm, corporation or other legal entity that is authorized to use and enjoy the county's parks and any structure or facility located therein. 
Vehicle means any motor-driven or engine-driven equipment, such as an automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle, sled, go-cart, scooter, skateboard, ATV, or Segway. 
Weapon means firearm, rifle, pistol, revolver, paintball gun, or any weapon designed or intended to propel a shot, bullet, or other missile of any kind, or any device capable of discharging a projectile by air, spirit, gas or explosive, or any explosive substance or harmful solid, liquid and gaseous substance, or any spear, arrow, bow and arrow, slingshot, crossbow, spear gun, or any knife, as defined by state law, dirk, Bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, or any other knife, straight-edged razor, spring stick, metal knuckles, blackjack, any club or other bludgeon-type weapon, or any flailing instrument or any disk which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, or any weapon of like kind, and any stun gun, Taser or similar device. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-2), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a county ordinance violation and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance with this Code. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be barred or suspended by the department from using any or all parks, if in the combined discretion of the department and law enforcement, such action is necessary to protect a park, the facilities located therein, or the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  Any person causing a disturbance or engaging in any activity which shall unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of the park by citizens/visitors or who shall violate any ordinance of the county or law of the state shall leave the park upon notification by any authorized park employee or any law enforcement officer, and he shall not return to such park for a period of 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-3), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-4. - Authority to issue citations for violations. 
This chapter shall be enforced by any authorized law enforcement officer of the county. Where there has been a violation of any provisions of this chapter, the law enforcement officer in his discretion may issue a citation, warning and/or order the person to leave the park or recreation area. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-4), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-5. - Development of recreation programs. 
The authority to develop programs of recreational activities and services designed to meet the leisure time needs of all persons is hereby granted to and vested in the department. The department shall have the power to maintain and equip parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, and the facilities associated therewith, and to establish, develop, and maintain a recreational system as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-5), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-6. - Use of grounds and facilities generally. 
Every person using the parks shall clean up all debris, extinguish all permitted fires, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities located thereon in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-6), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-7. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person using the parks, grounds, or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Willfully mar, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables and benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to a park or tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters. 
(3)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or vegetation, or any part thereof. 
(4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot, or throw missiles at any animal, or remove or have in one's possession the eggs, nest, or young of any wild animal. 
(5)  Bring in, dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash or debris in a park or waters in or contiguous to a park, except within public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. It shall be prohibited to take into, carry through, or put into a park, any litter generated from outside the park. 
(6)  Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language, or inflammatory language directed to incite, and likely to incite, imminent lawless action. 
(7)  Commit any assault or battery, engage in fighting, or commit any other offense in violation of federal, state or county law. 
(8)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. 
(9)  Prevent any person from using a park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in contravention of the provisions of this chapter and rules applicable thereto. 
(10)  Apply any chemical or fertilizer to any lawn, athletic field, soil, structure or facility of a park, unless so authorized by the department. 
(11)  Introduce any plant material, seed, sod, tree, or shrub to any lawn, athletic field, forest or soil of a park, unless so authorized by the department. 
(12)  Construct any new facility, paint any facility or make changes in present facilities without written approval of the department. 
(13)  Vend, sell, peddle, or offer for sale any commodity or article within a park, unless such activity is authorized in writing by the department. 
(14)  Possess, display, use, set off or attempt to ignite any firecracker, fireworks, smoke bombs, rockets, black powder guns or other pyrotechnics, except in conjunction with a written permit issued by the department. 
(15)  Use any of the county parks and recreation facilities for fundraising activities and/or any political rallies or events, except in conjunction with a written permit issued by the department. 
(16)  Operate any sound amplification device, including radios, television sets, stereos, public address systems, musical instruments, CD players and the like in such a manner as to unreasonably annoy, disturb, injure or endanger other persons, or to otherwise destroy the comfort, repose, peace or safety of other persons in a park unless authorized by the department. 
(17)  Erect or use any temporary carnival or amusement ride or inflatables in a park unless authorized by the department. 
(18)  Launch hot air balloons and hobby rockets from a park unless approved by written permit by the department. 
(19)  Set up a tent, shack, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight stay, or leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or vehicle to be used or that could be used for overnight stay, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, wagon, or the like, unless authorized by the department. 
(20)  Violate any posted rule or regulation promulgated by the department relative to the use of a park. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-7), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-8. - Hours of operation. 
All parks shall be open daily to the general public between the hours of sunrise to sunset, as designated by the U.S. Weather Service, unless authorized by the department. It shall be unlawful for any person other than county personnel conducting county business therein to come onto or be present in a park during any other hours. A park or section of a park may be closed to the public by the department at any time and for any length of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-8), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-9. - Group activity. 
Whenever any group or organization desires to use a park to host an event for more than five people, such as a picnic, party, sports event or theatrical or other entertainment performance, a representative of such group shall first obtain a permit from the department for such purpose, unless the group is sponsored by the department as one of its scheduled programs. The department shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public, and if the group meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the department. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond and/or on site security to protect the county from liability of any kind or character and to protect county property from damage. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-9), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-10. - Games. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to endanger the general public in a park by taking part in or abetting the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, javelins, or model airplanes in such a way as to disregard the safety of those in the immediate vicinity of the playing of said games. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball, and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts, or areas provided therefor. Park areas other than those designated as golf clubs or driving ranges may not be used for golf practice, driving ranges, or putting greens. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-10), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-11. - Swimming. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to a park except in such waters and at such locations as are designated therefor and so posted. Such swimming activity shall be in compliance with regulations pertaining thereto as set forth in this chapter or hereafter adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-11), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-12. - Boats and rafts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a boat or raft or other flotation device on any waterway, stream, lake or pond in a park unless written authorization allowing such activity is received by the department or as otherwise authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-12), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-13. - Fires restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire in a park or recreation facility except in designated areas which are clearly marked by signs or defined with fire rings, fireplaces, grills or other facilities designated for the purpose of safely maintaining a fire, except by written permit by the department. Fires shall be confined to those areas so designated, shall not be left unattended and must be completely extinguished prior to departure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-13), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-14. - Animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a dangerous animal into a park; to permit a dog to be in a park unless such dog is on a leash of not more than six feet in length; to bring any animal onto an athletic or sports field/court within a park; to ride, graze or walk a horse or other type of hoofed animal within a park without obtaining written authorization from the department, unless the park is specifically designated for such use; to fail to immediately remove from the park and dispose in a sanitary manner excrement deposited by an animal in the person's possession and control while in a park; to fail to have in such person's possession, having possession and control of an animal, a device or equipment for the collection and removal of animal excrement. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person having possession or control of an animal aiding the handicapped (i.e., guide dog) or to police or rescue personnel. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of such animal in a park to immediately remove from such park such animal upon such animal exhibiting aggressive behavior toward any person or toward any other domesticated animal. For the purposes of this subsection, aggressive behavior includes, but is not limited to, barking, growling, bearing of teeth or fangs, biting or attempts to bite, or any other behavior that could reasonably be expected to scare or intimidate any person or domesticated animal. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-14), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-15. - Automobiles and off-road vehicles; parking restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park any automobile or off-road vehicle except on a street, driveway, or parking lot in a park. Law enforcement or other public safety officials, and county employees whose duties require them to drive vehicles and equipment in other areas of a park shall be exempt from the limitations set forth in this section. 
(b)  The speed limit for all vehicles shall be ten miles per hour within all parks. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle or trailer in a park or recreation facility except in those areas designated by the appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas or in marked parking spaces. It shall be unlawful to leave a vehicle or trailer standing or parked in a park or recreation facility during hours when the park or recreation facility is closed. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or trailer in a parking space or location designated for handicapped parking unless the vehicle properly displays a handicapped parking permit. It shall be prohibited for any person to park in a recreation area if the owner of the vehicle or trailer is not utilizing the park unless authorized by the department. In all such instances in which a parked vehicle or trailer violates any provisions of this section, the vehicle or trailer may be towed and impounded from the park or recreation facility at the owner's expense. 
(d)  It shall be prohibited for persons to congregate within a parking area of a park so as to disrupt traffic or other persons, or so as to create a safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-15), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-16. - Alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, controlled substances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, possess or consume alcoholic beverages within a park except as provided in chapter 4. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for persons to smoke or use tobacco products in enclosed buildings in all parks or recreation facilities, and in all other areas of a park or recreation facility, unless otherwise posted. Persons under 18 years of age in possession of tobacco products can and will be charged under state law. 
(c)  No person shall possess or use any drug or any other controlled substance, as defined in the laws of this state, except as permitted by the laws of this state, in any park. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-16), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-17. - Signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, glue, tack, post, erect or cause to be erected any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatsoever within a park or highway or street adjacent to a park. This provision shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of his official duty or by a person having received written authorization from the department. Any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription authorized to be erected shall be in compliance with the county's sign ordinance and other applicable county regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-17), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-18. - Fees. 
A user fee shall be charged for any special or sports event, or other extraordinary program or activity as may be hereafter established by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-18), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-19. - Weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any weapon or similar device in a park or recreation facility, unless said discharge was made in the protection of a person's life or property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take into a park or recreation facility a weapon, or to use, carry or employ any weapon or similar device in a park or recreation facility, except as otherwise provided by applicable law. This subsection (b) shall not apply to firearms as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-11-171(3) or to knives as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-11-125.1. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-19), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-20. - Guidelines for issuance of special permits. 
(a)  Permits for special events in a park or recreation facility shall be obtained by application to the director of the department or employees under the direction of the director. Guidelines for the issuance of permits by the director include: 
(1)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the enjoyment of the park or recreation facility; 
(2)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility will not unreasonably interfere or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation of a park or recreation facility; 
(3)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime, or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility will not entail unusual, extraordinary, or burdensome expenses or policy operation by the county; 
(5)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility will not conflict with existing parks and recreation services; 
(6)  That the proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility desired has not been reserved for other use; 
(7)  That the permitting person or persons will abide by all other state, county and parks and recreation laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and shall be liable for any loss, damage, or injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been issued; and 
(8)  That the director or the director's agent shall have the authority to revoke any permit upon the finding of a violation of any laws, ordinances, rules or regulations or upon good cause shown. 
(b)  Persons may apply for a permit for a proposed activity or use of the park or recreation facility under the following categories: picnicking, fundraising, special event, food service for approved activities, and park or recreation facility rentals. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-1), 1-23-2014) 
Sec. 18-21. - Improper personal conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, abusive, lewd, profane, vulgar, wanton, obscene or otherwise disorderly speech or conduct that is or may be detrimental to the enjoyment of the park by the general public, or that could cause injury to other persons while in a park, which conduct may include, but is not limited to, loitering, fighting, throwing or breaking articles, indecent exposure, inappropriate sexual acts, urinating or defecating in public, or public drunkenness. No person shall upon or in connection with a park by act or speech willfully or unreasonably hinder, interrupt or interfere with any duly permitted activity or unreasonably or willfully intrude on any areas or into the structures designated for the use of a certain person or persons to the exclusion of others by written permit of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2013-17, § 1(14-21), 1-23-2014) 
Secs. 18-22—18-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAKE KEDRON 

Sec. 18-49. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accompanied by means in the physical presence within the vessel of a person who is not under the influence of alcohol, toxic vapors or drugs to a degree that it would violate any applicable law if said person were operating the vessel. 
City means the City of Peachtree City, Georgia, and any of its officials and/or agents and employees. 
Lake Kedron means the county reservoir established along Flat Creek in the city and owned and operated by this county. This definition includes the lake at its normal pool elevation, a certain flood easement as shown on the records as kept in the clerk's office of the county superior court, dam site and public access and facilities. 
Lake Kedron Recreation Facility means all pavilions, picnic areas and recreation areas around Lake Kedron as designated by the county. 
Owner means the county and/or the board of commissioners. 
Public access and facilities means any area open to the public in or about Lake Kedron as designated by the county. 
Vessel means any watercraft of any description used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water and specifically includes, but is not limited to, inflatable rafts and homemade vessels. 
(Code 1992, § 14-26; Ord. No. 87-05, § 15-1, 5-14-1987; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 1, 2-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-21, § 1, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 18-50. - Hours of operation. 
Lake Kedron shall only be open to the general public from and to those public access and facility areas as designated by the county between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. daylight saving time, whichever is applicable. 
(Code 1992, § 14-27; Ord. No. 87-05, § 15-2, 5-14-1987) 
Sec. 18-51. - Prohibitions. 
The following shall be prohibited on or about Lake Kedron and any other and all property surrounding such area as being property of the owner: 
(1)  Swimming, wading. 
(2)  Any activity allowing bodily contact with the water. 
(3)  The operation of any hydrocarbon or alcohol-fueled power boats or other vessels so powered. 
(4)  Water skiing. 
(5)  Scuba diving. 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages, smoking or the use of tobacco products. 
(7)  Fishing from the shore except for the shore within a Lake Kedron recreation facility. 
(Code 1992, § 14-28; Ord. No. 87-05, § 15-3, 5-14-1987; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 2—4, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-52. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The general public shall have access to Lake Kedron only at those areas designated as public access and facilities by the owner. 
(b)  Any person age 12 through 15 may operate a vessel which is electronically, wind or manually powered upon Lake Kedron provided that such person: 
(1)  Is accompanied by an adult 18 years of age or older who is authorized to operate the vessel; or 
(2)  Has completed a boating education course approved by the department. 
(Code 1992, § 14-29; Ord. No. 87-05, § 15-4, 5-14-1987; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 5, 2-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-21, § 2, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 18-53. - Use of grounds and facilities. 
Every person using a Lake Kedron Recreation Facility shall clean up all debris, extinguish all permitted fires, and leave the premises in good order and in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 6, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-54. - Group activity. 
Whenever any group or organization desires to use a Lake Kedron Recreation Facility to host an event for more than five people, a representative of such group shall first obtain a permit from the county recreation department for such purpose. The county recreation department shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group will not interfere with the general use of Lake Kedron by individual members of the public, and if the group meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the department. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond and/or on site security to protect the county from liability of any kind or character and to protect county property from damage. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 6, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-55. - Fees. 
A user fee may be charged for any event requiring a permit pursuant to section 18-54 of this article. Said fee shall be adopted as part of a schedule of fees by the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 6, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-56. - Guidelines for issuance of special permits. 
(a)  Permits for events at a Lake Kedron Recreation Facility shall be obtained by application to the director of the county recreation department or his or her designee. Guidelines for the issuance of permits by the director include: 
(1)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake Kedron Recreation Facility will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the enjoyment of the lake or other recreation facilities by other members of the public; 
(2)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake Kedron Recreation Facility will unreasonably interfere or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare and safety; 
(3)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake Kedron Recreation Facility is reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake Kedron Recreation Facility will entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expenses or policy operation by the county; 
(5)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake Kedron Recreation Facility will conflict with existing lake and recreation services; and 
(6)  Whether the desired Lake Kedron Recreation Facility has been reserved for another use. 
(b)  The holder of any permit issued under this article shall abide by all other state, county and lake and recreation laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(c)  The Director of the Fayette County Recreation Department or the Director of the Fayette County Water Systems or their designees shall have the authority to revoke any permit upon the finding of a violation of any laws, ordinances, rules or regulations or upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 6, 2-26-2015) 
Secs. 18-57—18-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STARR'S MILL 

Sec. 18-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accompanied by means in the physical presence within the vessel of a person who is not under the influence of alcohol, toxic vapors or drugs to a degree that it would violate any applicable law if said person were operating the vessel. 
Owner means the county and/or the board of commissioners. 
Public access and facilities means any area open to the public in or about Starr's Mill as designated by the county. 
Starr's Mill means the county reservoir established in the county and owned and operated by this county. This definition includes the lake at its normal pool elevation, dam site and public access and facilities. 
Starr's Mill recreation facility means all pavilions, picnic areas and recreation areas around Starr's Mill as designated by the county. 
Vessel means any watercraft of any description used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water and specifically includes, but is not limited to, inflatable rafts and homemade vessels. 
(Code 1992, § 14-40; Ord. No. 98-10, § 1, 11-4-1998; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 7, 2-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-21, § 2, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 18-91. - Hours of operation. 
Starr's Mill shall be open to the general public from and to those public access and facility areas as designated by the county between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. daylight saving time, whichever is applicable. 
(Code 1992, § 14-41; Ord. No. 98-10, § 1, 11-4-1998) 
Sec. 18-92. - Prohibitions. 
The following shall be prohibited on or about Starr's Mill and any other and all property surrounding such area as being property of the owner: 
(1)  Swimming, wading; 
(2)  Any activity allowing bodily contact with the water; 
(3)  The operation of any hydrocarbon or alcohol-fueled power boats or other vessels so powered; 
(4)  Waterskiing; 
(5)  Scuba diving; 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages, smoking or the use of tobacco products; and 
(7)  Fishing from the shore except for the shore within a Starr's Mill Recreation Facility. 
(Code 1992, § 14-42; Ord. No. 98-10, § 1, 11-4-1998; Ord. No. 2015-03, §§ 8—10, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-93. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The general public shall have access to Starr's Mill only at those areas designated as public access and facilities by the owner. 
(b)  Any person age 12 through 15 may operate a vessel which is electronically, wind or manually powered upon Starr's Mill provided that such person: 
(1)  Is accompanied by an adult 18 years of age or older who is authorized to operate the vessel; or 
(2)  Has completed a boating education course approved by the department. 
(Code 1992, § 14-43; Ord. No. 98-10, § 1, 11-4-1998; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 11, 2-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-21, § 4, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 18-94. - Use of grounds and facilities. 
Every person using a Starr's Mill Recreation Facility shall clean up all debris, extinguish all permitted fires, and leave the premises in good order and in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 12, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-95. - Group activity. 
Whenever any group or organization desires to use a Starr's Mill Recreation Facility to host an event for more than five people, a representative of such group shall first obtain a permit from the Fayette County Recreation Department for such purpose. The Fayette County Recreation Department shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group will not interfere with the general use of Starr's Mill by individual members of the public, and if the group meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the department. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond and/or on site security to protect the county from liability of any kind or character and to protect county property from damage. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 12, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-96. - Fees. 
A user fee may be charged for any event requiring a permit pursuant to section 18-95 of this article. Said fee shall be adopted as part of a schedule of fees by the Fayette County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 12, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-97. - Guidelines for issuance of special permits. 
(a)  Permits for events at a Starr's Mill Recreation Facility shall be obtained by application to the director of the Fayette County Recreation Department or his or her designee. Guidelines for the issuance of permits by the director include: 
(1)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Starr's Mill Recreation Facility will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the enjoyment of the lake or other recreation facilities by other members of the public; 
(2)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Starr's Mill Recreation Facility will unreasonably interfere or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare and safety; 
(3)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Starr's Mill Recreation Facility is reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Starr's Mill Recreation Facility will entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expenses or policy operation by the county; 
(5)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Starr's Mill Recreation Facility will conflict with existing lake and recreation services; and 
(6)  Whether the desired Starr's Mill Recreation Facility has been reserved for another use. 
(b)  The holder of any permit issued under this article shall abide by all other state, county and lake and recreation laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(c)  The Director of the Fayette County Recreation Department or the Director of the Fayette County Water Systems or their designees shall have the authority to revoke any permit upon the finding of a violation of any laws, ordinances, rules or regulations or upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 12, 2-26-2015) 
Secs. 18-98—18-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LAKE HORTON 

Sec. 18-132. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accompanied by means in the physical presence within the vessel of a person who is not under the influence of alcohol, toxic vapors or drugs to a degree that it would violate any applicable law if said person were operating the vessel. 
Lake Horton means the county reservoir established in the county and owned and operated by this county. This definition includes the lake at its normal pool elevation, a certain flood easement as shown on the records as kept in the clerk's office of the county superior court, dam site and public access and facilities. 
Lake Horton recreation facility means all pavilions, picnic areas and recreation areas around Lake Horton as designated by the county. 
Owner means the county and/or the board of commissioners. 
Public access and facilities means any area open to the public in or about Lake Horton as designated by the county. 
Vessel means any watercraft of any description used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water and specifically includes, but is not limited to, inflatable rafts and homemade vessels. 
(Code 1992, § 14-60; Ord. No. 98-10, § 2, 11-4-1998; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 13, 2-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-21, § 5, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 18-133. - Hours of operation. 
Lake Horton shall be open to the general public from and to those public access and facility areas as designated by the county between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. daylight saving time, whichever is applicable. 
(Code 1992, § 14-61; Ord. No. 98-10, § 2, 11-4-1998) 
Sec. 18-134. - Prohibited activities. 
The following shall be prohibited on or about Lake Horton and any other and all property surrounding such area as being property of the owner: 
(1)  Swimming, wading; 
(2)  Any activity allowing bodily contact with the water; 
(3)  The operation of any hydrocarbon or alcohol-fueled power boats or other vessels so powered; 
(4)  Water skiing; 
(5)  Scuba diving; 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages, smoking or the use of tobacco products; and 
(7)  Fishing from shore except for the shore within the recreation area. 
(Code 1992, § 14-62; Ord. No. 98-10, § 2, 11-4-1998; Ord. No. 2015-03, §§ 14,15, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-135. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The general public shall have access to Lake Horton only at those areas designated as public access and facilities by the owner. 
(b)  Any person age 12 through 15 may operate a vessel which is electronically, wind or manually powered upon Lake Horton provided that such person: 
(1)  Is accompanied by an adult 18 years of age or older who is authorized to operate the vessel; or 
(2)  Has completed a boating education course approved by the department. 
(c)  Entry of any and all vehicles registered in any county, aside from Fayette County, upon the grounds of Lake Horton shall cause the accrual of a daily of annual parking fee in an amount to be adopted as part of a schedule of fees by Fayette County Board of Commissioners. Said fee shall be paid by the occupants of said vehicle subsequent to entering the Lake Horton grounds, in accordance with the procedures and rules posted for said payment. 
(Code 1992, § 14-63; Ord. No. 98-10, § 2, 11-4-1998; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 1, 9-1-2004; Ord. No. 2015-03, §§ 16,17, 2-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-21, § 6, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 18-136. - Use of grounds and facilities. 
Every person using a Lake Horton Recreation Facility shall clean up all debris, extinguish all permitted fires, and leave the premises in good order and in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 18, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-137. - Group activity. 
Whenever any group or organization desires to use a Lake Horton Recreation Facility to host an event for more than five people, a representative of such group shall first obtain a permit from the Fayette County Recreation Department for such purpose. The Fayette County Recreation Department shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group will not interfere with the general use of Lake Horton by individual members of the public, and if the group meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the department. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond and/or on site security to protect the county from liability of any kind or character and to protect county property from damage. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 18, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-138. - Fees. 
A user fee may be charged for any event requiring a permit pursuant to section 18-54 of this article. Said fee shall be adopted as part of a schedule of fees by the Fayette County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 18, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-139. - Guidelines for issuance of special permits. 
(a)  Permits for events at a Lake Horton Recreation Facility shall be obtained by application to the Director of the Fayette County Recreation Department or his or her designee. Guidelines for the issuance of permits by the director include: 
(1)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake Horton Recreation Facility will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the enjoyment of the lake or other recreation facilities by other members of the public; 
(2)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake Horton Recreation Facility will unreasonably interfere or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare and safety; 
(3)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake Horton Recreation Facility is reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake Horton Recreation Facility will entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expenses or policy operation by the county; 
(5)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake Horton Recreation Facility will conflict with existing lake and recreation services; and 
(6)  Whether the desired Lake Horton Recreation Facility has been reserved for another use. 
(b)  The holder of any permit issued under this article shall abide by all other state, county and lake and recreation laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(c)  The Director of the Fayette County Recreation Department or the Director of the Fayette County Water Systems or their designees shall have the authority to revoke any permit upon the finding of a violation of any laws, ordinances, rules or regulations or upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 18, 2-26-2015) 
Secs. 18-140—18-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LAKE McINTOSH 

Sec. 18-176. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accompanied by means in the physical presence within the vessel of a person who is not under the influence of alcohol, toxic vapors or drugs to a degree that it would violate any applicable law if said person were operating the vessel. 
Lake McIntosh means the county reservoir designated as Lake McIntosh and established in the county and owned and operated by this county. This definition includes the lake at its normal pool elevation, a certain flood easement as shown on the records as kept in the clerk's office of the county superior court, dam site and public access and facilities. 
Lake McIntosh recreation facility means all pavilions, picnic areas and recreation areas around Lake McIntosh as designated by the county. 
Owner means the county and/or the board of commissioners. 
Public assess and facilities means any area open to the public in or about Lake McIntosh as designated by the county. 
Vessel means any watercraft of any description used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water and specifically includes, but is not limited to, inflatable rafts and homemade vessels. 
(Code 1992, § 14-80; Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 2015-03, § 19, 2-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-21, § 7, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 18-177. - Hours of operation. 
Lake McIntosh shall be open to the general public from and to those public access and facility areas as designated by the county between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. daylight saving time, whichever is applicable. 
(Code 1992, § 14-81; Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-2013) 
Sec. 18-178. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities shall be prohibited on or about Lake McIntosh and any other property surrounding such area as being property of the owner: 
(1)  Swimming, wading; 
(2)  Any activity allowing bodily contact with the water; 
(3)  The operation of any hydrocarbon or alcohol-fueled power boats or other vessels so powered; 
(4)  Water skiing; 
(5)  Scuba diving; 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages, smoking or the use of tobacco products; and 
(7)  Fishing from shore except for the shore within the recreation area. 
(Code 1992, § 14-82; Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 2015-03, §§ 20,21, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-179. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The general public shall have access to Lake McIntosh only at those areas designated as public access and facilities by the owner. 
(b)  Any person age 12 through 15 may operate a vessel which is electronically, wind or manually powered upon Lake McIntosh provided that such person: 
(1)  Is accompanied by an adult 18 years of age or older who is authorized to operate the vessel; or 
(2)  Has completed a boating education course approved by the department. 
(c)  Entry of any and all vehicles registered in any county, aside from Fayette County, upon the grounds of Lake McIntosh shall cause the accrual of a daily of annual parking fee in an amount to be adopted as part of a schedule of fees by Fayette County Board of Commissioners. Said fee shall be paid by the occupants of said vehicle subsequent to entering the Lake McIntosh grounds, in accordance with the procedures and rules posted for said payment. 
(Code 1992, § 14-83; Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 2015-03, §§ 22,23, 2-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-21, § 8, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 18-180. - Use of grounds and facilities. 
Every person using a Lake McIntosh recreation facility shall clean up all debris, extinguish all permitted fires, and leave the premises in good order and in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 25, 2-26-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-03, § 24, adopted Feb. 26, 2015, repealed the former § 18-180, and enacted a new § 18-180 as set out herein. The former § 18-180 pertained to penalty for violations and derived from Code 1992, § 14-84; Ord. No. 2013-09, § 1, 7-9-2013. 
Sec. 18-181. - Group activity. 
Whenever any group or organization desires to use a Lake McIntosh recreation facility to host an event for more than five people, a representative of such group shall first obtain a permit from the Fayette County Recreation Department for such purpose. The Fayette County Recreation Department shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group will not interfere with the general use of Lake McIntosh by individual members of the public, and if the group meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the department. Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond and/or on site security to protect the county from liability of any kind or character and to protect county property from damage. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 25, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-182. - Fees. 
A user fee may be charged for any event requiring a permit pursuant to section 18-54 of this article. Said fee shall be adopted as part of a schedule of fees by the Fayette County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 25, 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 18-183. - Guidelines for issuance of special permits. 
(a)  Permits for events at a Lake McIntosh Recreation Facility shall be obtained by application to the director of the Fayette County Recreation Department or his or her designee. Guidelines for the issuance of permits by the director include: 
(1)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake McIntosh Recreation Facility will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the enjoyment of the lake or other recreation facilities by other members of the public; 
(2)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake McIntosh Recreation Facility will unreasonably interfere or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare and safety; 
(3)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake McIntosh Recreation Facility is reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
(4)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake McIntosh Recreation Facility will entail unusual, extraordinary or burdensome expenses or policy operation by the county; 
(5)  Whether the proposed activity or use of a Lake McIntosh Recreation Facility will conflict with existing lake and recreation services; and 
(6)  Whether the desired Lake McIntosh Recreation Facility has been reserved for another use. 
(b)  The holder of any permit issued under this article shall abide by all other state, county and lake and recreation laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have been issued. 
(c)  The director of the Fayette County Recreation Department or the Director of the Fayette County Water Systems or their designees shall have the authority to revoke any permit upon the finding of a violation of any laws, ordinances, rules or regulations or upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03, § 25, 2-26-2015) 
Chapter 20 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Acquisition of property by counties for public road construction and other transportation purposes, O.C.G.A. § 32-3-1 et seq.; classification, designation, etc., of public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county powers as to public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; reimbursement of counties in regard to acquisition of rights-of-way, O.C.G.A. § 32-5-26; acquisition by county of unauthorized outdoor advertising, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-83; limited-access roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-110 et seq.; commercial driveways leading to or from state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-130 et seq.; elimination of grade crossings, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-193 et seq.; reimbursement of counties for property, interests and rights-of-way conveyed to Georgia Highway Authority, O.C.G.A. § 32-10-6; county roads, bridges and ferries, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET LIGHTING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2014, repealed the former art. II, §§ 20-19—20-72, and enacted a new qart. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1983, §§ 12-1, 12-2, 12-4, 12-5—12-7; Code 1992, §§ 16-26—16-28, 16-46, 16-48, 16-66—16-68; Ord. No. 97-05, §§ 1, 3, 4, 4-2-1997; Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 6-10-2010. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
District shall mean a group of residential lots that share a common recorded plat of development. 
Lot shall mean any single tract of land and shall include both improved and unimproved property. 
Property owner shall mean the owner(s) according to a deed or other instrument recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fayette County. 
Subdivision shall mean separate lots on a common plat recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fayette County. Multiple phases may be in the same subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 20-20. - Establishment of districts. 
Property owners residing in subdivisions with public streets in unincorporated areas of the county desiring street lighting for the area in which they live may petition the Fayette County Board of Commissioners for such services. The following are required: 
(1)  Street light petition. The street light petition must contain the signatures of the property owners of not less than ten lots representing not less than 66 2/3 percent of the lots within the district to be established. A petition may be brought for a district with less than ten lots where such petition contains the signatures of the property owners of 100 percent of the lots within the district to be established. Where a lot owned by more than one property owner is included in a petition, said petition must contain the signatures of all such property owners. 
(2)  Street light plan. A diagram from the relevant electric company indicating where the district's street lights are installed, type of light, and estimated monthly cost for such lights. 
(3)  Application fee. An application fee of $100 per petition. 
(4)  Prepayment fee. Prepayment for the first two years of electric costs to cover street light expenses until fees may be recouped on the property tax bill. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 20-21. - Public hearing. 
After presentation of the petition to the environmental management department and a review of the petition by that department to verify that the names of the petitioners represent the actual owners of the property in question and to make a determination as to the advisability of establishing a district under this article and receipt of all fees due, the petition shall be presented to the board of commissioners for consideration at a public meeting. After approval by the board of commissioners, the new street-light district shall be included with any other district already approved within the same subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 20-22. - Modification of street light districts. 
Any requests for modifications to an existing street light district shall be handled as follows: 
(1)  Requests for addition of lots to a previously established street light district shall be handled in accordance with sections 20-20 and 20-21. 
(2)  Requests for additional street lights within a previously established street light district shall be made in writing to the environmental management department. The environmental management department shall then estimate whether or not the proposed modifications to the district will generate enough revenue to recover the costs to the county for the requested additional lights. Based on the results of the analysis, the following procedure shall apply: 
a.  If revenue estimated to be generated is sufficient to recover the costs of the requested additional lights, the environmental management department shall approve the changes and instruct the appropriate power company to make the requested changes. 
b.  If revenue estimated to be generated is not sufficient to recover the costs of the additional lights, the environmental management department shall determine the increase in charges to property owners needed to recover the cost of the additional lights. The applicant requesting the changes shall be required to submit to the board of commissioners a petition for increasing the charges to all property owners for lighting within that district. The petition shall contain the signatures of the property owners of at least 66 2/3 percent of the lots within the affected district. The petition shall be processed in accordance with sections 20-20 and 20-21. 
(3)  The removal of a street light, lot, or lots within a street light district shall be processed in accordance with the procedure established in sections 20-20 and 20-21. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Secs. 20-23—20-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES 

Sec. 20-46. - Establishment. 
The rates established for the provision and maintenance of street lights within the county shall be set from time to time by the board of commissioners in consultation with the environmental management department. Rates shall be subject to change to reflect future increases in costs to the county and shall not be less than the actual cost charged to the county for payment for the provision of street lights by the applicable electric utility provider plus an amount equal to 20 percent of such cost to cover administrative, maintenance, and operation costs associated with the lights for that district. The charges shall be levied on a "per lot" basis. A party owning more than one lot, parcel, or tract of property within a street light district shall be billed the established rate or charge for each individual lot, parcel, or tract within that district. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 20-47. - Collection of charges and imposition of liens. 
(a)  The county tax commissioner shall be responsible for the collection and receipt of moneys in payment of the cost of illuminating public rights-of-way from the owners of property lying within each street lighting district. 
(b)  The rates or charges for street light service shall constitute assessments on the property served by street lights in street light districts established in accordance with this article. These assessments shall be added to annual property tax bills for each parcel served at the end of each year and shall constitute a tax lien upon the property served. Such lien shall have the same priority as tax assessments. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall be authorized to establish, by resolution duly adopted, such other manner of billing, accounting, collecting and receiving of moneys in payment of the cost of providing and maintaining street lighting districts as the board of commissioners may deem necessary and proper. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Secs. 20-48—20-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 20-70. - Adoption. 
(a)  The American Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting, as sponsored by the Illuminating Engineering Society and approved by the American Standards Association on July 11, 1973, is hereby adopted as the standard for installation and operation of street and roadway lighting in the unincorporated areas of the county. A copy of these standards is on file with the environmental management department and in the records of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Lighting fixtures installed within the county's public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street or roadway illumination shall comply with these standards. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 20-71. - Approval of proposed installations; appeal from disapproval; manner of installation. 
(a)  Any party applying for permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the environmental management department for approval. Said plans and specifications shall indicate how the proposed lighting meets the required standards. No lighting shall be installed or operated without said approval. Should the environmental management department disapprove the application to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way based on the failure of plans and specifications to meet required standards, the department shall communicate such disapproval in writing to the applicant. Such written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of an application for permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within a public right-of-way by the environmental management department may be appealed to the board of commissioners. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the environmental management department, a notice of appeal shall be filed with the environmental management department within 30 days from the date following the written notice of disapproval; and it shall be the responsibility of the environmental management department to transmit forthwith to the board of commissioners all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken and to insure that such appeal is promptly placed upon the next available agenda for the board of commissioners. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. 
(b)  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within public rights-of-way as "security lights," or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public street or roadway shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from such street or roadway and shall be oriented in such a manner to insure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street, and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the environmental management department shall be obtained before installation of such lighting fixtures. 
(c)  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for any purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner as to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Sec. 20-72. - Installation and operation. 
The installation and operation of lighting fixtures located within the right-of-way of any public street, road, highway, sidewalk and/or alley in the unincorporated areas of the county, or affixed to any pole, lamp post, standard or other supporting device which is located within such right-of-way shall be in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Plans and specifications for the proposed installation indicating compliance with these standards shall be submitted to the environmental management department for approval. No installation shall be allowed without this approval. 
(2)  Fixtures for illuminating areas adjoining public streets or roadways, such as parking areas, driveways, easements, etc., shall be mounted in such a manner as to ensure that the lighting pattern is kept off the public street or roadway. When street or roadway lighting luminaries are to be used for "security lighting," they shall be mounted on the side of the pole that is opposite from the public street or roadway and shall be mounted to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street or roadway and the vertical light distribution at the initial light source is perpendicular to the street or roadway. 
(3)  If lighting fixtures of a type other than those in the classification of street or roadway luminaries are to be used or if the proposed lighting is to be for other than driveways, parking areas, or other similar areas, the plans and specifications submitted shall be sufficiently detailed to clearly indicate that such a proposal is in compliance with these standards and shall not cause a hazard to or interfere with the normal use of the public street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2014-18, § 1, 11-13-2014) 
Secs. 20-73—20-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TIMBER HARVESTING 

Sec. 20-100. - Timber harvesting requirements. 
All persons or entities harvesting standing timber in unincorporated Fayette County for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state shall provide notice of such harvesting operations to the county prior to cutting any such timber. 
(Ord. No. 2014-14, § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Sec. 20-101. - Form of notice. 
(a)  Any person or entity harvesting timber shall so notify Fayette County of such activity in the form and manner required by state law which consists of the following information: 
(1)  An aerial photograph of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and the main point of ingress and egress to such tract from a public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
(3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale, or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or entity harvesting the timber. 
(b)  Notice may be submitted in person, by facsimile or by mail. A form containing the requirements listed in subsection (a) above is available at the department of public works of Fayette County. A copy of this form is attached to this ordinance as exhibit "A", which exhibit "A" is incorporated herein by this reference. 
(Ord. No. 2014-14, § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Editor's note— The copy of exhibit "A" referenced above is not included herein and is available for inspection in the offices of the county 
Sec. 20-102. - Surety bond letter of credit requirement. 
(a)  All persons or entities subject to providing notice shall deliver a surety bond to the public works department as provided in this section. Notice shall not be effective for tree harvesting operations unless and until the person or entity providing such notice has delivered a valid surety bond to the director of the public works department. To be valid, the surety bond must be executed by a surety authorized to transact business in this state. The surety bond protects the county against any damage caused by the person or entity engaged in timber harvesting in the amount of $5,000.00. Alternatively, the person or entity desiring to engage in tree harvesting may submit a valid $5,000.00 irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4. For purposes of this section, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is delivered. The surety bond or letter of credit requirement as described herein is parcel specific. A separate surety bond is required for each parcel of land upon which timber harvesting activity will be conducted. 
(b)  Such surety bond or letter of credit shall protect the county against damage, including, but not limited to: the cost of removal of any obstruction or encroachment upon a public road; the cost of repair to the public road directly incurred by the county as a result of the timber harvesting activity; and any costs associated with traffic management such as flagging, signing, or provision of detours that are directly caused by the timber harvesting activity. 
(c)  Notice shall be effective for such timber harvesting activity upon receipt of same by the director of public works and, if applicable, compliance with the requirements of subsection (a) above. Any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of the notice shall be reported of the director of public works within three business days after such change. 
(Ord. No. 2014-14, § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Sec. 20-103. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to obstruct, encroach upon, solicit the sale of any merchandise on, or injure materially, any part of any public road. For purposes of this section, the term 'obstruct' shall include, without limitation, the causing of any buildup of rock, gravel, mud, dirt, chemicals, or other materials by continued ingress and egress of vehicles or of any natural waters dammed or redirected by diversion to the extent it presents a hazard to the traveling public. 
(b)  Any person who unlawfully obstructs, encroaches upon, or materially injures a public road incident to tree harvesting shall be responsible for reimbursing the county for the cost of removal of any obstruction or encroachment and the cost of any repairs. For purposes of this section, costs associated with traffic management directly incurred due to the aforementioned damages are also recoverable. Costs for traffic management may include, but not be limited to, flagging, signing, or provision of detours. 
(c)  Violation of the notice requirement shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2014-14, § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Chapter 22 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. title 48. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 22-19. - Levy and scope. 
(a)  For the year 2009 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the county, whether with a location in the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation. The occupation tax shall be determined in accordance with the schedule set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. 
(c)  The regulatory tax levied herein upon certain occupations and businesses is an exercise of the police power of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 11-1; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
State Law reference— Levy of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 22-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business means: 
(1)  Any person who, in the unincorporated county, engages in, causes to be engaged in, or represents himself to be engaged in, any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either directly or indirectly; any person who owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in the county. This shall include, but not be limited to, any person advertising by any means, including, but not limited to, signs, cards, circulars, newspapers, etc., that he is engaged in a business of any kind. 
(2)  No business required by this chapter to secure an occupation tax shall be exempt from the payment of said occupation tax on the ground that the business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the gross receipts from the business are devoted to a charitable purpose. 
Date of commencing operations means the date on which a business heretofore not engaged in commercial transactions within the county becomes engaged in business. 
Director means the director of finance or his designee. 
Dominant business activity means that business activity which is the major and principal source of income of the business. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
Engaged in business or carrying on business means doing or performing of any act of selling any goods or services, or soliciting business, or offering any goods or services for sale primarily in an attempt to make a profit, including selling or performing services of the character of a wholesaler or retailer, or being involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, or renting real or personal property; all of the foregoing performed either as an owner, operator or agent of any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the county. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction worksite which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Manufacturing means a person who, either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or commercial use any articles, substances or commodities, including, but not limited to, the following; materials upon which commercial activities have been applied, by hand or machinery, so that as a result thereof a new substance of trade or commerce is produced; the production or fabrication of special or custom-made articles; the making, fabrication, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, preserving, canning, preparing and freezing of fresh foods, fruits, vegetables and meats. 
Nonprofit means any organization that is exempt from federal income taxes under section 501 of title 26 U.S.C.A. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business and enacted by a local government as a revenue raising ordinance or resolution. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organization which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of professions and occupations is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation as designated by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). For the purposes of this chapter, practitioners of professions or occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. The regulatory fee does not include an administrative fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
Retailer means a person who sells to consumers or any other person for any purpose, other than for resale, any tangible personal property. 
Services means the accommodating or performing a duty or work by a person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. 
Wholesaler means a person who sells to jobbers or to persons, other than consumers, any tangible personal property. 
(Code 1992, § 11-2; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 22-21. - Occupation tax levied. 
(a)  A nonrefundable annual occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the county or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Businesses and practitioners shall be required to pay an occupation tax to only one local government in this state, the local government in which the largest dollar volume of business is conducted or service is performed by the individual business or practitioner. 
(c)  Businesses and practitioners must provide proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, for the business or practitioner to be exempt from local occupation tax in this state. 
(d)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 11-3; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-22. - Occupation tax schedule. 
(a)  There is hereby levied upon each person engaged in or carrying on business in the county an annual occupation tax based upon the number of employees using the schedule set forth below: 

 
(b)  Determination of number of employees. The number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full time position equivalents. For the purpose of this provision the business shall figure its number of employees based on the calendar year operations preceding the levy of this tax or for the period if in business for less than one year. 
(Code 1992, § 11-4; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-23. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
The assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the county. 
(Code 1992, § 11-5; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-24. - Business or organizations exempted from occupation tax. 
(a)  The following persons and businesses are not covered by the provisions of this chapter but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by act of local law: 
(1)  Individual farmers who raise, grow or cultivate edible food from the soil of the state provided, however, farm, milk, or other farmer cooperatives are not exempted when they engage in selling goods and/or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of this chapter. 
(2)  Established churches, religious, charitable, and fraternal organizations chartered or operated for nonprofit purposes and which are not engaged in daily selling of goods or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Persons exempted from taxation by virtue of the constitution or any statue of the United States or the state. Those persons shall possess and display at their places of business a certificate of exemption that may be obtained from the director by application of a form provided by same. The applicant for exemption shall clearly state the provision of this chapter or other provision of law under which the applicant claims exemption. The certificate shall contain sufficient facts for the director to determine whether the applicant is entitled to the exemption. The certificate of exemption shall remain valid and the business need not reapply for an annual certificate of exemption as long as the conditions entitling the business to the exemption remain the same. The application for the certificate of exemption shall be made under oath. The certificate of exemption shall not exempt any business from complying with the duty to register. 
(4)  Any person exempted from the requirement of paying an occupation tax by any ordinance heretofore or hereafter passed by the board of commissioners. 
(5)  Any person engaging in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where such involve personal assets and are not the principal occupation of the individual. 
(6)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(7)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(8)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(9)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(10)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(11)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(12)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(13)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(14)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(b)  No business required by this chapter to secure an occupation tax shall be exempt from the payment of said occupation tax on the ground that the business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the gross receipts from the business are devoted to a charitable purpose. 
(Code 1992, § 11-6; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-25. - Option to establish exemption or deduction in occupation tax. 
The board of commissioners may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the board of commissioners in an adopted plan. 
(Code 1992, § 11-7; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-26. - Determination of occupation tax and administrative fee, regulatory fee for new business. 
(a)  If a business is begun for the first time on or after January 1 of any calendar year, the occupation tax levied and assessed in this chapter against the business shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  In the event that any person commences business on any date after January 1, the occupation tax and administrative fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business. 
(2)  The director shall issue an occupation tax certificate for the calendar year in which the application is submitted, and the occupation tax shall be paid in accordance with the provision herein. 
(b)  If a new business begins for the first time after July 1 of the calendar year, then the occupation tax shall be 50 percent of the amount in the schedule set forth in section 22-22. Administrative fees and regulatory fees shall not be reduced for businesses commencing operation on or after July 1. 
(Code 1992, § 11-8; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-27. - Professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees under section 22-22; or 
(2)  A fee of $150.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner tax applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state law. 
(Code 1992, § 11-9; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-28. - Practitioners practicing exclusively for the government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a city or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state or the local government shall not be required to pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1992, § 11-10; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-29. - Evidence of state license required; to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is listed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.) shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before a county certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1992, § 11-11; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-30. - Allocation of employees of business with multiple intra or interstate locations. 
Businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the county shall be taxed upon the number of employees employed in the county. 
(Code 1992, § 11-12; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-31. - False registration. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager, executive officer or employee of any business, coming within the provisions of this chapter, to make a false registration for such business, or to give or file, or direct the giving or filing, of any false information with respect to the occupation tax due under the provisions of this chapter or upon which any occupation tax due under the provisions of this chapter is based. 
(Code 1992, § 11-13; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-32. - Occupation tax and regulatory fee certificate displayed. 
All persons shall exhibit and display the occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate issued to them in some conspicuous place in their business establishment at the address such certificates was issued. Any transient or non-transient person doing business within the county shall carry said certificates either upon his person or in any vehicle or conveyance which is used in such business and such person shall exhibit the same to any authorized enforcement officer in the county when so requested. 
(Code 1992, § 11-14; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-33. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county occupation tax certificate show evidence of such qualification. 
(Code 1992, § 11-15; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-34. - Duty to register business. 
(a)  A form or notice shall be mailed to all known persons engaged in or carrying on business in the county at the beginning of the year for registering each business. However, failure to receive such form or notice shall not release any person from any tax or penalties due under this chapter, nor shall such failure to operate to extend any time limit set by the provisions of this chapter. The registration shall be signed and sworn to by the appropriate persons. 
(b)  Each business operated in the county shall identify their dominate activity and any other lines of business at that same location address. 
(Code 1992, § 11-16; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-35. - Payment of occupation tax and regulatory fee; penalties for late payment. 
(a)  When due. Occupation taxes and regulatory fees levied in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable on or before March 31 of each calendar year or, in case of new business, upon commencement of that business. In the case of attorneys at law starting new practices of law, occupation taxes levied in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable within six months of the date of commencing operations. 
(b)  Additional amounts. For any reason during the year, it is determined that a larger occupation tax should have been assessed, then the additional amount so assessed shall be deemed to have been due and payable on March 1 of such year. All monies that would have been paid, if the correct amount had been assessed at the appropriate time, shall be considered past due and all penalties and interest provided for herein shall apply. 
(c)  Assessment of delinquent occupation tax and fees. Any person who fails to pay the occupation tax, administrative fee, or regulatory fee imposed upon him by this chapter by the due date of the tax or fee, shall be assessed a delinquent charge of ten percent of the amount of the tax and/or fees due. 
(d)  Interest. All taxes, regulatory fees, administrative fees, and delinquent charges imposed by this chapter that are not paid by the due date shall bear interest at a rate of 1.5 percent per month from the due date until paid. 
(e)  Collection of penalties and interest. Penalties and interest imposed by this section shall be collected in the same manner as the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 11-17; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-36. - Issuance and levy of executions for collection. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the occupation tax clerk of the county, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest as otherwise provided in this article, and the lien shall cover the property in the county of the person, partnership or corporation liable for said tax. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the sheriff of the county upon property located in the county of any person, his manager, agent, or employee, who does business in the county after the tax for said business becomes delinquent, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. Practitioners of professions and occupations who practice law, only after delinquency of tax payment has occurred, and for all other taxpayers when a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the occupation tax clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall be allowed to continue to practice their professions without the collection of any fees and charges due. If at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may request a refund of any fees and charges paid by him as a result of the default as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 1992, § 11-18; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-37. - Determination upon failure to file return. 
(a)  If any person fails to make a return, the director shall make an estimate of the number of employees of the businesses in the county which are subject to tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the director. Written notice shall be given as follows: The director, or designee, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the director. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest and penalty as required herein. 
(Code 1992, § 11-19; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-38. - Unpaid taxes levied under repealing. 
This chapter does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. Those parts of ordinances heretofore passed providing for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax due, or for imposing fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to comply with any other provisions thereof shall continue and remain in force and effect until such tax or assessment shall be full paid. 
(Code 1992, § 11-20; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-39. - Separate businesses. 
For the purpose of this chapter, if a business is conducted at more than one location or place, each location or place shall be considered a separate business and must be registered separately and the occupation tax and/or the regulatory fee shall be separately paid. 
(Code 1992, § 11-22; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-40. - Occupation tax certificate and regulatory fee certificate not transferable. 
An occupation tax certificate and/or regulatory fee certificate shall not be transferable and a transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of such business and the establishment of a new business. Therefore, a new occupation tax certificate shall be required. 
(Code 1992, § 11-23; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-41. - Duty to keep information current. 
Any person required by this chapter to register his business shall notify the director in writing within 30 days of the following changes: 
(1)  Any change of address of the business, in which case the same occupation tax certificate shall be valid at the new location; 
(2)  Any change of ownership, in which case the transfer shall be treated as the termination of one business and the establishment of a new business for the purposes of this chapter; 
(3)  The termination of any business. 
(Code 1992, § 11-24; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-42. - Inspection of books, premises, and accounts. 
(a)  Upon request by the director or his authorized representative, any person holding a certificate from the county, shall open to the director his place of business for the purpose of enabling the director or his representative to ascertain and gain such information as may be necessary for determination of the proper classification of such certificate holder for occupational tax purposes and determination of the correct amount of occupation tax to which such person is subject. Upon request by the director or his authorized representative, any person holding an occupation tax certificate from the county shall furnish the director or his authorized representative, during regular business hours at such person's place of business, all books of account, payroll records, invoices, papers, reports and memorandum containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information, ascertained and from which the correct amount of fee to which he is subject may be determined, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sale tax reports to the state, copies of state income tax reports and federal income tax reports. 
(b)  It shall further be the duty of all taxpayers hereunder to secure, preserve, maintain, and keep for a period of three years the records and documents enumerated and referred to in this section. 
(Code 1992, § 11-25; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-43. - Confidentiality of information. 
Except in case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied and assessed, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, or agent to divulge or make known in any manner the information required to be submitted under the terms of this chapter. All information so submitted shall be confidential, and open only to the officials, employees, or agents using such information for the purpose of the occupation levy and assessment and the collection of same. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the board of commissioners shall be classified as employees. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the disclosure of the tax levied and assessed upon any person, or the name, address and type of business of such taxpayer. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit publication by the county of statistics classified so as to prevent the identification of particular returns. 
(Code 1992, § 11-26; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
State Law reference— Confidentiality of information, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15. 
Sec. 22-44. - Administration of ordinance. 
(a)  The director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  In carrying out its responsibilities hereunder, the director shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide the necessary forms for registration of a business, and for the submission of required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of the ordinance; 
(2)  To issue to each person an occupation tax certificate within a reasonable time after the payment of the occupation tax assessed and levied in this chapter, provided, however, where under other ordinances of the county, permits, certifications, and compliance with the enumerated conditions are required for the operation of the business, the director shall not issue said certificate until the applicant exhibits to the director such obtained permits, certifications and compliances; 
(3)  To audit periodically, and when deemed necessary by the director, the books and records of the business subject to the provisions of this chapter, and to require the submission of such additional information as may be necessary in order to correctly determine the amount of the occupation tax due and to ensure the collection of same; 
(4)  To issue in any year without a charge an occupation tax certificate when an applicant exhibits to the director such permits, certifications and compliance under the law of the state or United States, would entitle the applicant to such; 
(5)  The director shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or other laws of the county and the state or the constitution of this state for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the collection of the occupation tax and fees hereunder; 
(6)  The director and the marshal's office shall see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed and shall have the power to summon all violators of the same to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction to hear county ordinance violations. It is hereby made the further duty of the director, members of the marshal's office, and their assistants, to inspect all registrations issued by the county, as often as in their judgment they deem necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 11-27; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-45. - Compliance with other ordinances and laws. 
(a)  All businesses are required to comply with the provisions of all ordinances of the county and other laws. The issuance of an occupation tax certificate to any business pursuant to this chapter shall not authorize that business to engage in or carry on business or to perform any other activity in violation of state or federal law or regulations and other ordinances of the county nor shall it relieve that business from obtaining any certificate or permit required by the provision of other laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Upon the application for any occupation tax certificate for a new business, the director shall notify the director of planning and zoning, the fire marshal, and the building official of the proposed new business. 
(Code 1992, § 11-28; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Sec. 22-46. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Except for practitioners of professions and occupations, if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain an occupation tax certificate shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any business, profession, trade or occupation subject to this article without having first obtained said certificate, such offender upon conviction by the municipal judge shall be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $500.00 which may be enforced by the contempt power of the state court. In addition, delinquent taxpayers shall be subject to the penalties provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
(b)  In the case of practitioners of professions and occupations, if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to pay occupation tax shall fail to pay such tax in a timely fashion, such offender upon conviction by the municipal judge may be subject to a civil fine not to exceed $500.00 which may be enforced by the contempt power of the municipal court and such offender may also be subject to the penalties imposed herein on delinquent tax payments of practitioners of professions and occupations found in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. For practitioners of professions and occupations, all penalties listed herein shall only be invoked by delinquency of tax payment rather than continuation of operations after failure to pay taxes due. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the criminal sanctions imposed due to the delinquent payment by the payor of the occupation tax, shall not be enforceable against members of the legal profession. Timely payment of the occupation tax is required subject to the ten percent penalty, however, no fines and/or imprisonment shall be levied against members of the State Bar. 
(Code 1992, § 11-30; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 5-13-2010) 
Secs. 22-47—22-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 22-70. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County shall mean unincorporated Fayette County wherein the county is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. 48-13-50 et seq. 
Finance director shall mean the finance director appointed by the board of commissioners. 
Guestroom shall mean a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants and used for that purpose and where overnight occupancy is allowed. 
Hotel/motel shall mean any tourist accommodation. 
Monthly period shall mean any calendar month of any year. 
Occupant shall mean any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement or otherwise. 
Operator shall mean any person operating a hotel (as defined in this article) in unincorporated Fayette County, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of the premises, lessee, sub lessee, lender in possession, or any other person otherwise operating a hotel. 
Permanent resident shall mean any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days next preceding that date. The right of occupancy for at least 30 consecutive days is clearly established through the advance payment of 30 days' rent or a lease that has been signed in excess of 30 days. 
Rent shall mean the consideration received for occupancy valued in money whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom. 
Tax shall mean the tax imposed by this article. 
Tourist accommodation shall mean any property, facility, or structure providing accommodations for value to the public for not more than 30 consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-71. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is hereby levied and assessed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three percent of the rent for every occupancy of a tourist accommodation in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are furnished for value in the unincorporated area of Fayette County. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after June 1, 2014, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. Where rent is paid, or charged or billed, or falls due on either a weekly, monthly or other less than 30 day basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed or falling due shall be subject to the tax herein imposed to the extent that it covers any portion of the period from June 1, 2014, and any monthly period thereafter. The proceeds of the lodging tax will be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 (a)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 2, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-72. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a tourist accommodation in the unincorporated area of Fayette County is liable for the tax. This liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to this county except that a receipt from an operator naming a place of business in this county or from an operator who is authorized by the finance director under such rules and regulations as he or she may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this article, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in the unincorporated area of Fayette County, which receipt is given to the occupancy pursuant to section 22-73, is sufficient to relieve the occupancy from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 3, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-73. - Collection of tax by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the unincorporated area of Fayette County, as provided in the next preceding section, and renting guest rooms in the unincorporated area of Fayette County, not exempted under this article shall, at the time of collecting rent from the occupant and on demand shall give to the occupant a receipt therefore. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefore at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The finance director shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 22-74. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guest room, or that, if added, it or any part thereof, will be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 22-75. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed hereunder: 
(1)  Upon fees, rents, or charges made for continuous use of any tourist accommodation after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy. 
(2)  Upon the fees or charges for any tourist accommodation furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(3)  Upon charges made for any accommodations provided to any persons who certify by affidavit that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 4, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-76. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a tourist accommodation in the unincorporated area of Fayette County shall immediately register with the finance director of the county on a form provided by the finance director. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 15 days after the date this article becomes effective and the tax is imposed as set forth in the ordinance, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the same name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his or her place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the finance director may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. the finance director shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall prominently display therein so as to be seen and to come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificates shall be non-assignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the finance director upon the cessation of business at said location. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 5, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-77. - Determination; returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. The tax imposed by this article shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any tourist accommodation in the unincorporated area of Fayette County. All amount of such taxes collected by any operator shall be due and payable to the finance director monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding such respective monthly period as set forth in this ordinance. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period a return shall be filed with the finance director in such form as finance director may prescribe, by every operator, liable for the payment of tax hereunder. For purposes of this section, a return shall be deemed filed if postmarked on the twentieth day, or, if the twentieth day falls upon a holiday recognized by the State of Georgia or upon a Saturday or Sunday, then a return postmarked on the next business day shall be regarded as timely filed. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 6, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 22-78. - Delivery of return and remittance. 
The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the finance department at 140 W. Stonewall Ave Suite 101, Fayetteville, Ga. 30214. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 22-79. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 22-80. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person, he or she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession. One or more than one deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments . In making a determination the finance director may offset overpayments, for a period or periods, against underpayments, for another period or periods, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 50 percent of the total amount of taxes due, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the other penalties provided in this article. 
(e)  Notice of finance director's determination; service of. The finance director, or his or her designated representative, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the finance director. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office. 
(f)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20 th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 22-81. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the unincorporated area of Fayette County which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come to the possession of the finance director. Upon the basis of this estimate the finance director shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the county, adding to the sum thus determined any applicable penalties. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination the finance director may offset overpayments for a period or penalties, and against the interest on the under payments. The interest on under payments shall be computed in the manner set forth in this article. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or rules and regulations, a penalty of 50 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the other penalties provided in this article. 
(e)  Giving of notice; manner of service. Promptly after making his or her determination, the finance director shall give the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 22-82. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
(a)  When any operator fails to make any return or to pay the full amount of the tax imposed by this article, a penalty shall be added to the tax in the amount of three percent or three dollars, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than 30 days. An additional penalty of three percent or three dollars, whichever is greater, shall be added for each additional 30 days or fraction of 30 days during which the failure continues. The penalty for any single violation under this section shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. The penalty imposed herein shall be in addition to the tax, any other penalties, and interest on the unpaid tax as set forth in this article. 
(b)  The amount of the unpaid tax, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20 th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 22-83. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Security, exaction by finance director; amount; sale of; notice of sale; return of surplus. The finance director, whenever he or she deems it necessary to insure compliance with this article, may require any person subject thereto to deposit with him or her such security as the finance director may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the finance director but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such a manner as the finance director deems proper, or $5,000.00, whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased by the finance director subject to the limitations herein provided. The finance director may sell the security at public auction, with the approval of the board of commissioners if it becomes necessary so to do in order to recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who deposited the security personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be made in the manner prescribed for service of a notice of a deficiency determination and shall be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the finance director. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the person who deposited the security. 
(b)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance director may bring action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the county to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. The bringing of such an action shall not be a prerequisite for the issuance of a fi. fa. under the provisions of subsection (g) hereof. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his or her business or quits the business, his or her successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient portion of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the finance director showing that he or she has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required in subsection (c) hereof, the purchaser shall become personally liable for the payment of the unpaid taxes. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the finance director shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at the address as it appears on the records of the finance director of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his or her business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. Any purchaser that fails to withhold from the purchase price the amount of unpaid taxes or fails to pay any amount of such tax for which it becomes liable as a result of said purchase shall not be permitted to obtain an occupation tax certificate or alcoholic beverage license until all such taxes, including all penalties and interest, have been paid in full. 
(e)  Tax credit, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county under this article, it may be offset as provided in section 22-80(c). If the operator or person determines that he or she has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the finance director, he or she will have three years from date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited by the county finance department. If the claim is approved by the finance director, the excess amount paid the county may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from, the person by whom it was paid, or his or her administrators or executors. 
(f)  Lien for taxes. The lien of taxes collectible under the provisions of this article shall date from January 1 of the year in which the taxes become due, and the lien of such taxes shall be a special lien on the property upon which the same are due and a general lien against all property of the taxpayer owing same. 
(g)  County administrator authorized to issue fieri facias. The county administrator is hereby authorized to issue a fieri facias (fi. fa.) for execution and levy to satisfy the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest due but not paid under the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Eligibility for occupational tax and/or alcoholic beverage license. Any person who fails to pay the tax imposed herein to the county or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the county shall not be permitted to obtain or renew their occupation tax certificate or alcoholic beverage license until all such taxes, including all penalties and interest, have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 22-84. - Administrator of excise tax. 
(a)  Authority of finance director. The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of excise tax division of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The finance director shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article, other laws or ordinances of Fayette County and the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administrator and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in the unincorporated area of Fayette County to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the finance director may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The finance director or any person authorized in writing by the finance director may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administering the provisions of this article, the finance director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance director when required by the finance director and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the finance director may require. 
(f)  Disclosure of business of operators, etc.; limitations on rule. The finance director or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this article, except in case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed, or as required by the Georgia Open Records Act. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 22-85. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in this section of the Code of Ordinances of Fayette County. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  Any operator or other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other date required by the finance director or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the termination of an amount due required by this article to be made shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon convictions thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Sec. 22-86. - Proceeds of tax. 
The proceeds of the hotel, motel, tax will be used in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 48-13-51(a)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 2, 4-24-2014) 
Chapter 24 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq.; Consumer Choice for Television Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-3. 

Sec. 24-19. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the respective meanings given herein: 
Additional service means any communication service other than basic service provided over its CATV system by a grantee directly or as a carrier for its subsidiaries, affiliates or any other person engaged in communications services, including, but not limited to, burglar alarm, data or other electronic intelligence transmission, facsimile reproduction, meter reading and home shopping. 
Administrative officer means the county manager or his designee. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application to the county for a franchise to operate a CATV system under the terms and conditions set forth by the board of commissioners. 
Basic service means the simultaneous delivery by the grantee to television receivers (or any other subscribers in the unincorporated areas of the county) of all signals of over-the-air television broadcasts required by the FCC to be carried by a CATV system. The term "basic service" shall also include grantee channels, county channels, except as may be designated for special purposes by the administrative officer, public channels and additional channels at the option of the grantee, or as directed by the board of commissioners. 
CATV or community antenna television system means any facility which: 
(1)  In whole or in part receives directly or indirectly over the air and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television and AM and FM radio stations and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services; 
(2)  Distributes by cable or wire news, weather and other information including civil defense type information as required as an incidental part of CATV's service to all subscribers without additional charge; and 
(3)  Distributes any and all other lawful communications of a specialized nature; provided that it shall not mean or indicate any facility to which is transmitted any special television program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in a manner commonly known and referred to as "pay television," except as may be permitted by the federal, state and/or local regulatory agencies. 
Certificate of compliance means approval required by the FCC in order for a grantee of a CATV franchise to begin operation within the county. 
Channel means a band of frequencies, six megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum, which is capable of carrying either one audio-video television signal and a number of video signals or several thousand nonvideo signals. 
Commercial subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system who is not a residential subscriber. 
County channels means channels on the CATV system which are reserved by this chapter for use by the county. 
FCC or Federal Communications Commission means that agency as presently constituted by the United States Congress, or any successor agency. 
Federal Securities and Exchange Commission means that agency as presently constituted by the United States Congress, or any successor agency. 
Grantee means the person to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the board of commissioners under this chapter or anyone who succeeds the person in accordance with the provisions of the franchise. 
Grantee channels means the channels on the system which are reserved by this chapter for the carriage of program material originated by a grantee and the retransmission of broadcast signals in accordance with the FCC's cablecasting rules and regulations. 
Gross subscriber revenue means all revenue derived from the charges to all subscribers. 
Pay television means the delivery over the CATV system of video signals in intelligible form to residential subscribers for a fee or charge (over and above the charge for basic service) on a per program, per channel or other subscription basis. 
Public channels means channels on the CATV system which are reserved for carriage of program material provided by persons who lease channel time and, if necessary, studio facilities from a grantee for the presentation of programs. 
Residential subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system to an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. 
Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement held by the county for the purpose of public travel, and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be held by the county which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the county and its grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting CATV system transmission over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a CATV system. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1; Code 1992, § 7-1) 
State Law reference— "Cable television system" defined, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1. 
Sec. 24-20. - Authority to grant franchise. 
The board of commissioners is authorized to grant the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the streets of the county for a period of 15 years from and after the passage, acceptance and effective date of the franchise, subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided; and such right, privilege and franchise may be granted to any qualified applicant who, upon the proper showing, shall fulfill all the requirements and conditions of this chapter and franchise. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2; Code 1992, § 7-2) 
State Law reference— Powers of governing authorities of counties with regard to cable television systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-2. 
Sec. 24-21. - Franchise term. 
The franchise, authority or permit granted grantee herein shall terminate 15 years from date of grant and may be renewed for successive 15-year terms on the same terms or conditions as contained herein, or such different or additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified by the board of commissioners, and consistent with the requirements of Rule F.31(a)(6) of the FCC. 
(Code 1983, § 8-3; Code 1992, § 7-3) 
Sec. 24-22. - Application for franchise. 
(a)  No CATV franchise or renewal thereof shall be given except on a written application and upon a form approved by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The form shall set forth such facts in detail as the board of commissioners may deem appropriate including: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated association, its statement shall contain the name and addresses of all persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchise's business operation, and in and to prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignments for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise under this chapter. 
(2)  If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders of such corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the federal Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which it is incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service. 
(5)  The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all CATV facilities, and a demonstration of the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost. 
(6)  A detailed schedule of the rates to be charged for the services offered, the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the cables used in redistributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the CATV system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)  A detailed schedule of rates to be applied to residential, apartment, commercial and other users of services. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may request such other information as it may deem appropriate. 
(d)  All applications shall be open to public inspection and shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the board of commissioners; any intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for its rejections or for termination of the franchise. 
(e)  All applications shall be considered firm offers to the county, shall be signed and verified by the applicants and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 8-4; Code 1992, § 7-4) 
Sec. 24-23. - Franchise payments. 
(a)  The grantee shall pay to the county, on or before March 31 of each year, a three percent franchise fee based on gross subscriber revenues received for cable television operations in the county for the preceding calendar year. No other fee, charge or consideration shall be imposed, except that the board of commissioners may impose a fee in excess of three percent but no more than five percent of the gross subscriber revenues received from cable television operation in the county, provided that the FCC certifies, after appropriate showing made by grantee, that a franchise fee in excess of three percent but not greater than five percent will not interfere with the effectuation of federal regulatory goals in the field of cable television, and after appropriate showings made by the board of commissioners that the franchise fee in excess of three percent but no greater than five percent is appropriate in light of the county's planned regulatory program for cable television. A grantee shall file with the county within 30 days after expiration of each calendar year during the period the franchise shall be in force a financial statement showing in detail the gross annual subscriber revenues of grantee during the preceding year. It shall be the duty of a grantee to pay to the county at the time of filing such statement the sum hereinabove prescribed. A grantee shall also file within 90 days following the conclusion of each fiscal year of grantee an annual report prepared and audited by an independent certified public accountant acceptable to the county showing the yearly total gross subscriber revenues and payments to the county and any further relevant financial information in regard to the grantee as may be required by the administrative officer and board of commissioners. 
(b)  In the event the franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to the end of the basic 15-year term, a grantee shall immediately submit to the county a financial statement prepared as required in subsection (a) of this section, showing the gross subscriber revenues of a grantee for the time elapsed since the last period for which a grantee has paid to the county the required percentage of annual gross subscriber revenues, and a grantee shall pay to the county not later than 30 days following the termination of the franchise a like percentage of such revenues and any other such sums legally due and owing to the county. 
(c)  Upon entering the franchise agreement, grantee shall deposit with the county the sum of $25,000.00. The grantee shall make all reports as required in subsection (a) of this section but shall not begin paying the franchise fees until the amount of fees have accumulated to the sum of the deposit. The $25,000.00 shall be forfeited to the county in the event the grantee does not comply with section 24-30(b) as contained hereinafter. 
(d)  In the event that any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section hereof, interest on such payments shall apply from such date at the yearly rate of 12 percent or at the highest rate permitted by state law. 
(e)  The county shall have the right to inspect a grantee's records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed, and shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under the franchise. No acceptance of any payment by the county shall be construed as a release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the county might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter or for any other performances or obligations of grantee hereunder. 
(f)  Payments of compensation made by a grantee to the county pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or hereafter required to be paid by any law of the United States, the state or the county. 
(g)  A grantee shall also make to the county payments of compensation, not otherwise provided for herein, which are allowable under the rules and regulations of the FCC and which the grantee has agreed or agrees to make to other cities or counties for the acquisition of similar franchise rights. 
(Code 1983, § 8-5; Code 1992, § 7-5) 
Sec. 24-24. - Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the term of the franchise, grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the county executed duplicate copies and receipts evidencing the payments of premiums for the following: 
(1)  A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned by the operations of a grantee under the franchise herein granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $500,000.00 per personal injury or death of any one person and $1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(2)  Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for property damage occasioned by the operation of grantee under the franchise herein granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $250,000.00 for property damage to any one person and $500,000.00 for property damage to two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(3)  One million dollars for all other types of liability. Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by a grantee during the existence of and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(b)  All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be in a form satisfactory to the county, shall be issued and maintained by companies that are authorized to do business in the state and are acceptable to the county, and shall require 30 days' written notice of any cancellation to both the county and a grantee herein. A copy of the policy shall be filed with the county. 
(Code 1983, § 8-6; Code 1992, § 7-6) 
Sec. 24-25. - Surety bond. 
(a)  A grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agree that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, a faithful performance, license and franchise bond running in favor of the county, written by a corporate surety approved by the county in the penal sum of $50,000.00 conditioned that a grantee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties thereof for all damages resulting from the failure of a grantee to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee shall pay all premiums chargeable for the bond and shall keep the same in force and effect at all times throughout the term of the franchise, including the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(c)  The bond shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or otherwise allowed to expire prior to 30 days after written notice to that effect is given to the county. 
(d)  The bond shall be in a form satisfactory to the county, and a duplicate copy of it, along with written evidence of payment of the required premiums, shall be filed with the county during the term of the franchise. 
(Code 1983, § 8-7; Code 1992, § 7-7) 
Sec. 24-26. - Indemnity. 
(a)  The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and save harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damage. 
(b)  These damages or penalties shall include but shall not be limited to the damages arising out of copyright infringement, and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee shall pay, and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will pay, all expenses incurred by the county in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned above. These expenses shall include but not be limited to all out of pocket expenses such as attorney fees and all other costs of litigation. 
(Code 1983, § 8-8; Code 1992, § 7-8) 
Sec. 24-27. - Books and records of grantee. 
(a)  A grantee shall file with the county engineer a true and accurate copy of maps and/or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the streets. These maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the county engineer and shall be kept continuously up to date. 
(b)  A grantee shall continually keep on file with the county a current list of its shareholders holding over three percent of the outstanding stock and its officers, with their current addresses. 
(c)  All books and records of a grantee concerning its operations within the county shall be made available for inspection and audit by the administrative officer or his designee within 30 days after any request for such inspection or audit shall be made. 
(d)  Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by a grantee for the operation of a CATV system under the franchise shall be filed with the county and at the local office of a grantee. 
(Code 1983, § 8-9; Code 1992, § 7-9) 
Sec. 24-28. - County channels; payment of fee by county not required. 
No charge shall be made to the county for its use of county channels or for the construction and operation of the coaxial between the county studio and the CATV system head-end, and under no circumstances shall the county be obligated to pay a grantee any fee for service rendered to the county under the terms of the franchise. 
(Code 1992, § 7-10; Ord. No. 86-16, § 1(8-10), 11-5-1986) 
Sec. 24-29. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  All transmissions and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the county shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the streets. The CATV system shall be kept current with new codes. 
(b)  Except when absolutely necessary to service a subscriber and not simply because it shall be more convenient, economical or profitable for a grantee to so operate, and then only when expressly permitted in writing by the county engineer, under such conditions as he shall prescribe for the public welfare, a grantee shall not erect or authorize or permit others to erect any poles or facilities within the streets of the county for the conduct of its CATV system but shall use the existing poles and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power and telephone and other utility companies under such terms and agreements as a grantee negotiates with these companies. The county shall cooperate with a grantee in negotiating and obtaining permission to use such facilities. 
(c)  No poles, cables, equipment or wires for the construction, maintenance and operation of the CATV system shall be installed or the installation thereof commenced on any existing pole within the county until the proposed location, specifications and manner of installation of such poles, cables, equipment and wires shall have been set forth upon a plat or map showing the existing poles, streets, alleys or highways within the county where such installations are proposed and submitted in writing by a grantee to the county engineer and approved by that department in writing. 
(d)  Should a grantee be required in the conduct of its business to locate property within the streets of the county other than property which may be attached to utility poles, then before a grantee shall install or shall permit any other person to install for grantee any of such property in the street, the nature of such property shall be disclosed to the county engineer for his approval as to the need thereof and as to the location within the street, and only installed under such conditions as he shall prescribe concerning such location or installation. 
(e)  Whenever the county or state shall require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of a grantee in any of the streets of the county, it shall be the obligation of a grantee, upon notice of such requirement, to immediately remove and relocate or reinstall such property as may be reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of the county or state. Such relocation, removal or reinstallation by a grantee shall be at the sole cost of a grantee. 
(f)  Whenever, in any place within the county, all electric and telephone utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the obligation of a grantee to locate or to cause its property to be located underground within such places. If the electric utilities or telephone utilities shall be located underground in any place within the county after a grantee shall have previously installed its property, a grantee shall at the same time or immediately thereafter remove and relocate its property also underground in such places. Facilities of a grantee placed underground at the property owner's request in an area where electric utilities or telephone utilities are aerial shall be installed with the additional expense paid by the property owner. 
(g)  The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging the streets of the county so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a grantee's wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the county and at the expense of a grantee. 
(h)  In case of disturbance of any street caused by a grantee, a grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the county engineer, replace and restore such street in as good condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. Where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut, a grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk length of the section or sections cut, a section being determined as that area marked by expansion joints or scoring. 
(i)  A grantee shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for a period of one year following such disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or street disturbed by it or its agents, provided such maintenance and repairs shall be made necessary because of defective workmanship or materials supplied by grantee. 
(j)  A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the county, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building. The expense of such temporary removing, raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and a grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. In the event of a disagreement between a grantee and a holder of a permit, such disagreement will be resolved by the county engineer. 
(k)  If at any time in case of fire or disaster in the county it shall become necessary, in the judgment of the administrative officer or the chief of the fire department, to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or other fixtures of a grantee, this may be done, and the repairs thereby rendered necessary shall be made by the grantee, at its own cost and expense and without charge against the county. 
(l)  Grantee's work, while in progress, shall be properly executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the streets involved, or adjacent property. 
(Code 1983, § 8-11; Code 1992, § 7-11) 
Sec. 24-30. - Initial system installation schedule. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the acceptance of the franchise, a grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
(b)  The grantee, within 18 months from the date the FCC certifies grantee's compliance with its rules and regulations governing cable television operations in and for the county, shall extend energized trunk cable service to 25 percent of the county and shall extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of the county within 30 months thereafter unless additional time is granted by the board of commissioners upon request by grantee for good cause shown. 
(Code 1983, § 8-12; Code 1992, § 7-12) 
Sec. 24-31. - System extension to new subscribers. 
(a)  A grantee, whenever it shall receive a request for service from at least five subscribers within 660 feet of its system, shall extend such system to such subscriber at no cost to the subscriber for system extension other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers. The 660 feet shall be measured in extension length of grantee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premises. 
(b)  In addition, the county engineer may, upon complaint from any potential subscriber residing in the county, order the extension of the system to such subscriber after opportunity for hearing and notice to a grantee. In such cases, the county engineer, in his discretion, may order such extension to any subscriber only upon reasonable contribution from the subscriber to the cost of the extension. 
(Code 1983, § 8-13; Code 1992, § 7-13) 
Sec. 24-32. - Type and capacity of equipment to be installed. 
The applicant shall specify in its proposal the type and capacity of the equipment to be installed, and a grantee shall be required by the county engineer to update this section of its proposal in keeping with the advances in the state of the art of CATV systems design. 
(Code 1983, § 8-14; Code 1992, § 7-14) 
Sec. 24-33. - Operational standards. 
(a)  The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the industry to the end that the subscriber may receive the highest and most desirable form of service. 
(b)  In determining satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the following, among other things, shall be considered: 
(1)  That the CATV system is installed and remains capable of using all band equipment and of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum and that it has the further capability of converting UHF for the distribution to subscribers on the VHF band. 
(2)  That the CATV system as installed is capable of transmitting and passing the entire color television signals without the introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence. 
(3)  That the CATV system is designed and capable of 24 hours a day continuous operation. 
(4)  That the CATV system is capable of and will produce a picture upon any subscriber's television screen in black and white or color (provided the subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture) that is undistorted and free from ghost images and accompanied by proper sound, assuming that the technical, standard production television set is in good repair and that the television broadcast signal transmission is satisfactory. In any event, the picture produced shall be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(5)  That the CATV system shall transmit or distribute signals of adequate strength to produce good sound in all television receivers of all subscribers without causing cross modulation in the cables or interference with other electrical or electronic systems. 
(6)  That the CATV system as installed has a minimum capacity of 20 channels. 
(7)  That a grantee shall provide, upon request and without charge, one outlet to each public office building, fire station, police station and public school that is passed by its cable. If more than one outlet is required at any of the locations, a grantee shall install additional outlets at the cost of time and material only. In no event will there be a monthly service charge at the locations except for additional outlets. 
(8)  That a grantee shall make its studio facilities, including color cameras and other equipment, available for use by public schools, for local organization programs and for closed-circuit educational films, subject to reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to such use by grantee, and in such manner as to not unduly interfere with the cable television operations of a grantee. Services rendered to all users by a grantee under the terms of the franchise shall at all times be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(9)  That a grantee shall provide at least one fee-dedicated noncommercial public access channel to be available to the county. 
(10)  That a grantee shall reserve at least one channel solely for educational use on a developmental basis, and that, upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five years thereafter at least one channel will be made available for free. 
(11)  That a grantee shall reserve at least one channel solely for use by state and local governments on a developmental basis, and that, upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five years thereafter at least one channel will remain free. 
(12)  That the CATV system shall be installed with the capacity for two-way communication in accordance with the regulations of the FCC now in effect or which may be promulgated. 
(c)  A grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for such good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(d)  A grantee shall maintain an office in the county, which office shall be open during all usual business hours, shall have necessary listed telephones, and shall be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
(Code 1983, § 8-15; Code 1992, § 7-15) 
Sec. 24-34. - Supervision by county. 
(a)  A grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the CATV system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the county who have jurisdiction in such matters, and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances and departmental rules and regulations. 
(b)  The CATV system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the county. 
(c)  The county engineer may, from time to time, issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the CATV system as are consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  If at any time the powers of the board of commissioners or any agency or official of the county are transferred by law to any other board, authority, agency or official, the transferee shall have the powers, rights and duties previously vested under this chapter or by law in the board of commissioners or any agency or official of the county. 
(Code 1983, § 8-16; Code 1992, § 7-16) 
Sec. 24-35. - Grantee's duty to remove its properties from the public streets. 
(a)  Following a grantee's commencement of service through and over its CATV system, a grantee shall promptly remove from the public streets where its properties are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one or more of the following enumerated conditions occur: 
(1)  A grantee ceases to operate the CATV system for a continuous period of six months from the date of such occurrence. 
(2)  A grantee fails to construct the system as hereinabove and hereafter provided. 
(3)  The franchise is terminated or revoked pursuant to notice as provided herein. 
(b)  A grantee shall be entitled to receive notice in writing from the county setting forth one or more of the occurrences hereinabove enumerated or such other occurrences hereinbefore or hereinafter provided and shall have 90 days from the date upon which such notice is received to remove such properties as hereinabove required. 
(Code 1983, § 8-17; Code 1992, § 7-17) 
Sec. 24-36. - Operational reports. 
(a)  Within six months from the acceptance date of the franchise, a grantee shall submit to the county engineer and the administrative officer an installation plan for the entire county, indicating the date on which a grantee expects the installation of the CATV system to be completed and available for service to subscribers in the various areas of the county. 
(b)  A grantee shall furnish the county engineer with progress reports indicating in detail the area of construction of the CATV system. Such periodic reports shall be furnished at three month intervals, the first report to be made three months after the construction commencement date. 
(Code 1983, § 8-18; Code 1992, § 7-18) 
Sec. 24-37. - Off-the-air programming. 
(a)  A grantee shall carry the signals of all television stations licensed to communities within 35 miles of the county pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. 
(b)  A grantee may also transmit or distribute the full output on FM radio stations provided that a grantee transmits or distributes all of the FM stations whose broadcasting studios are now located within the county or within 35 miles of the limits thereof. 
(Code 1983, § 8-19; Code 1992, § 7-19) 
Sec. 24-38. - Cable-casting on city and public channels. 
For the presentation of programming on public channels, a grantee shall make available free time and, if necessary, adequate studio facilities to members of the public at rates filed with the board of commissioners and subject to the board of commissioners' review in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Appropriate technical assistance shall also be furnished by a grantee. Time shall be provided on a first come, first-served basis, except that a grantee shall endeavor to grant such channel time to as many different persons as is practical, it being the intention of the board of commissioners that such public channels serve as a significant source of diversified expression. In order that there is a maximum opportunity for freedom of expression by members of the public, such programming shall be free from any control by a grantee as to program content, except as is required to protect a grantee from liability under applicable law. The board of commissioners may direct that a grantee discontinue, or not deliver, a program on the public channels which it finds to be essentially promotional or otherwise related primarily to the conduct of a business, trade or profession; provided, however, this provision shall not be construed as a prohibition of advertiser-supported programming on public channels. 
(Code 1983, § 8-20; Code 1992, § 7-20) 
Sec. 24-39. - Local event blackout. 
If any local event within the metropolitan Atlanta area is blacked out or not telecast within the area pursuant to and within the terms of any agreement by or with the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of such event, such event shall not be transmitted or delivered by a grantee, notwithstanding the source of such event or its TV picture signals, except with prior written permission of said owners, distributors or licensees. The term "event" means any live entertainment or sports contest. A grantee shall be required to show proof of written permission if requested. 
(Code 1983, § 8-21; Code 1992, § 7-21) 
Sec. 24-40. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his written request. Such removal shall be at no cost to the subscriber. 
(Code 1983, § 8-22; Code 1992, § 7-22) 
Sec. 24-41. - Emergency use of the facilities. 
(a)  In the event of any emergency or disaster, a grantee shall, upon request of the administrative officer, make available its facilities to the county at no cost for emergency use during the period of such emergency or disaster and shall provide such personnel as necessary to properly operate under the circumstances. 
(b)  A grantee shall incorporate into its facilities the capability for an emergency override alert whereby the county, in times of crisis, may be able to introduce a bulletin on all channels simultaneously. 
(Code 1983, § 8-23; Code 1992, § 7-23) 
Sec. 24-42. - Compliance with state and federal laws. 
(a)  A grantee shall, at all times, comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal governments or any administrative agency thereof. If any state or federal law or regulation shall require a grantee to perform any service or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any service or shall permit a grantee to perform any service in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the county, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, a grantee shall notify the administrative officer of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the county or franchise, and a grantee shall be governed by the advice of the administrative officer. 
(b)  Grantee shall be subject to all county ordinances as set forth herein, and grantee shall also be subject to all applicable rules and regulations which, from time to time, may be promulgated by the FCC for CATV systems. 
(c)  If the board of commissioners determines that a material provision of this chapter is affected by such subsequent action, the board of commissioners shall have the right to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 8-24; Code 1992, § 7-24) 
Sec. 24-43. - Filing communications with regulatory agencies. 
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by a grantee to the FCC, SEC or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting CATV operation shall also be submitted simultaneously to the county. 
(Code 1983, § 8-25; Code 1992, § 7-25) 
Sec. 24-44. - Restrictions on assignment, etc., of franchise. 
(a)  The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, leased or sublet in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the act of a grantee or by operation of law, without the consent of the board of commissioners. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or consents. 
(b)  The consent or approval of the board of commissioners to any assignment, lease, transfer or sublease of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the county in and to the streets. 
(c)  Prior approval of the board of commissioners shall be required where ownership or control of more than ten percent of the right of control of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already owns or controls ten percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively, at the date the franchise is granted. By its acceptance of the franchise, a grantee specifically agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the board of commissioners shall constitute a violation of this chapter by a grantee. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the CATV system equipment, or any part thereof, or leasing by a grantee from another person of the CATV system equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. 
(Code 1983, § 8-26; Code 1992, § 7-26) 
Sec. 24-45. - Preferential or discriminatory practices. 
A grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person or subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage; provided, however, connection and service charges may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of grantee. 
(Code 1983, § 8-27; Code 1992, § 7-27) 
Sec. 24-46. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all the rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the county, the county reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct power the right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee under this chapter in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A grantee shall by act or omission violate any term or condition of this chapter and within 30 days following written demand by the county shall fail to effect compliance. 
(2)  Any provision of this chapter shall be finally adjudged by a court of law invalid or unenforceable and the board of commissioners further finds that such provision constitutes at that time a consideration material to the continuance of the franchise herein granted. 
(3)  A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt, or all or part of grantee's facilities are or are to be sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemable by grantee within 30 days from such sale. 
(4)  A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the county or subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(b)  A grantee shall not be declared at fault nor be subject to any sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control. 
(Code 1983, § 8-28; Code 1992, § 7-28) 
Sec. 24-47. - Procedures. 
(a)  Any injury, proceeding, investigation or other action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the administrative officer and the board of commissioners in regard to the operations of grantee's cable television system other than as provided in subsection (c) of this section, but including action in regard to a change in subscription rates, shall be taken only after 30 days' public notice of such action or proposed action is published in a local daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in the county, a copy of such action or proposed action is served directly on grantee, the grantee has been given an opportunity to respond in writing and/or at a hearing as may be specified by the administrative officer and board of commissioners, and general members of the public have been given an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the action or proposed action. 
(b)  The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response, the persons in authority to whom such response should be addressed, and such other procedures as may be specified by the administrative officer and board of commissioners. If a hearing is to be held, the public notice shall give the date and time of such hearing, whether public participation will be allowed and the procedures by which such participation may be obtained. The grantee is a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operations. 
(c)  An informal complaint shall be submitted to the administrative officer and board of commissioners in writing and shall contain the name and address of the complainant, the name of the cable system against which the complaint is made and a complete statement of facts upon which the complaint is based. 
(1)  Upon receipt of any informal complaint, the administrative officer and board of commissioners will forward a copy to the system complained of or may take the question up by correspondence with the system. Within such time as may be prescribed by the administrative officer and the board of commissioners, the system will be called upon to satisfy the complaint or advise the administrative officer and board of commissioners of its refusal or inability to do so. If the system satisfies the complaint, it shall so notify the administrative officer and the board of commissioners in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c)(2) of this section. The administrative officer and board of commissioners will forward a copy of the system's notice of satisfaction to the complainant. If the system refuses or is unable to satisfy the complaint, it shall so notify the administrative officer and board of commissioners, and the administrative officer and board of commissioners will forward a copy of such notice to the complainant, with a statement of the procedure to be followed to further prosecute the complaint. 
(2)  If a system satisfies any complaint brought to its attention by the administrative officer and board of commissioners, a statement must be filed with the administrative officer and board of commissioners setting forth when and how the complaint has been satisfied. 
(3)  When a complaint has not been satisfied pursuant to subsection (c)(2) of this section, the complainant may file a formal complaint with the administrative officer and board of commissioners in the form and manner to be specified thereby. The complaint to the administrative officer and board of commissioners must be filed within six months from the date of the administrative officer's and board of commissioners' statement accompanying a copy of the system's notice of refusal or inability to satisfy the complaint, and the complaint to the administrative officer and board of commissioners must make reference to the date of the complaint filed with the administrative officer and board of commissioners and that it is based on the same facts as the complaint filed with the administrative officer and board of commissioners. If no complaint is filed with the administrative officer and board of commissioners within a six-month period, the complainant will be deemed to have abandoned his complaint, and such complaint will be deemed dismissed. 
(Code 1983, § 8-29; Code 1992, § 7-29) 
Sec. 24-48. - Grantee to have no recourse. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in the franchise, a grantee herein shall have no recourse whatsoever against the county for any loss, cost or expenses or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the county, nor for the failure of the county to have the authority to grant all or any part of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee expressly acknowledges that, upon accepting a franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the county to grant the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee, by acceptance of the franchise, acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding, promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the county or by any other third person, concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed herein. 
(d)  A grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, the same shall be construed strictly against a grantee and in favor of the county. 
(Code 1983, § 8-30; Code 1992, § 7-30) 
Sec. 24-49. - Failure of county to enforce the franchise; no waiver of the terms thereof. 
A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the county upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(Code 1983, § 8-31; Code 1992, § 7-31) 
Sec. 24-50. - Time essence of agreement. 
Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence, and any failure of a grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the county to revoke the franchise. 
(Code 1983, § 8-32; Code 1992, § 7-32) 
Sec. 24-51. - Grantee will not contest validity of franchise. 
A grantee agrees by the acceptance of the franchise that it will not at any time set up against the county in any claim or proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void, or that the county had no power or authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety. 
(Code 1983, § 8-33; Code 1992, § 7-33) 
Sec. 24-52. - Rights reserved to the county. 
Without limitation upon the rights which the county might otherwise have, the county does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authorities: 
(1)  To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the county. 
(2)  To determine through the board of commissioners any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise. 
(Code 1983, § 8-34; Code 1992, § 7-34) 
Sec. 24-53. - Acceptance. 
This chapter and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by a grantee by a written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by grantee and filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners. Such agreement shall incorporate grantee's written application to the county for the CATV franchise and shall bind grantee to the provisions of the application. The board of commissioners may require a grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to final acceptance. 
(Code 1983, § 8-35; Code 1992, § 7-35) 
Sec. 24-54. - Local office. 
During the term of the franchise, and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain in the county a local business office and agent. 
(Code 1983, § 8-36; Code 1992, § 7-36) 
Sec. 24-55. - Pay television. 
A grantee shall not engage in pay television except under conditions affirmatively authorized by the FCC. 
(Code 1983, § 8-37; Code 1992, § 7-37) 
Sec. 24-56. - Employment regulations. 
A grantee shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment, because of sex, race, creed, color or national origin. A grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated equally during employment without regard to their sex, race, creed, color or national origin. This requirement shall apply to, but not be limited to, the following: employment upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training. 
(Code 1983, § 8-38; Code 1992, § 7-38) 
Sec. 24-57. - Modification of FCC rules. 
Consistent with the requirements of Rule 76.31(a)(6) of the FCC, any modification of Rule 76.31 resulting from amendment thereto by the FCC shall, to the extent applicable, be considered as a part of the franchise as of the effective date of the amendment made by the FCC, and shall be incorporated in such franchise by specific amendments thereto by the lawful action of the board of commissioners within one year from the effective date of the FCC's amendment or at the time of renewal of the franchise, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1983, § 8-39; Code 1992, § 7-39) 
Chapter 26 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; use of citations, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63; county traffic regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; traffic violations bureaus, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-50 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Uniform rules of the road—Adoption. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1992, § 10-1) 
State Law reference— Form for above section, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-374. 
Sec. 26-2. - Same—Penalties. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of section 26-1 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment of not more than 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1992, § 10-2) 
State Law reference— Violations, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-375, 40-6-376. 
Sec. 26-3. - Off-road motorized vehicles prohibited on county property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any off-road motorized vehicle within any property of the county unless otherwise designated or posted by the board of commissioners, other than on public roadways within that property. 
(Code 1992, § 10-3; Ord. No. 84-08, § 11-20, 12-13-1984) 
State Law reference— Off-road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq.; operating restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-4; powers of counties, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-5. 
Secs. 26-4—26-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSPORTING BUILDING AND WASTE MATERIALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Definitions relating to solid waste handling, disposal, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22; transportation of special solid waste, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-44; accompaniment of hazardous waste by manifest, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-67. 

Sec. 26-25. - Building materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport any building materials by means of any vehicle between the hours of sunset and sunrise unless: 
(1)  The driver of the vehicle has in his possession documents establishing the ownership of such building materials; or 
(2)  The vehicle is owned by a governmental entity or public utility and is operated by an authorized employee of such governmental entity or public utility; or 
(3)  The vehicle is subject to regulations of the state public service commission or the federal interstate commerce commission. 
(b)  As used herein, "building materials" shall mean and include any materials customarily used in building or construction work and which have a reasonable fair market value in excess of $100.00. 
(c)  Any person and/or company violating the provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in section 1-7. Such fine shall not bar prosecution or conviction for any related offense upon a showing that the person convicted was unlawfully in possession of the building materials concerned. 
(Code 1983, § 11-1; Code 1992, § 10-26) 
Sec. 26-26. - Hazardous wastes. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all businesses which engage in any of the following operations within the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)  The storage of hazardous wastes; 
(2)  The treatment of hazardous wastes; 
(3)  The transportation of hazardous wastes; 
(4)  The disposal of hazardous wastes. 
(b)  Definition. As used herein, the term "hazardous wastes" shall apply to all those substances controlled by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 USC 6901 et seq., as amended; Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 USC 2601 et seq., as amended; and the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq. 
(c)  License. Each business which engages in the operations described in subsection (a) of this section shall apply for and receive, prior to operation, a county hazardous waste license. Such license shall be subject to renewal each January 1 and shall be in addition to any other license required by this Code. A license fee of $25.00 shall be assessed and collected prior to the issuance of any such license. A county hazardous waste license shall be issued upon proper documentation of all necessary business licenses and all certificates or permits as may be required by state or federal law. 
(d)  Notice. At least 24 hours prior to any operation described in subsection (a) of this section, each licensee shall provide the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and the sheriff's department the following information: 
(1)  Notice of the intended operation and the nature, time and place thereof; 
(2)  The names of all personnel to be in charge of the operation and on site during the operation; and 
(3)  If any transportation of hazardous wastes is involved in the operation, the designated route to be taken and the point of origin and destination. If any information should be changed, proper notice should be given immediately. In the event of an accident of any kind or nature involving the storage, transportation, treatment or disposal of hazardous wastes, whether directly or indirectly, proper notification shall be given immediately. Notice shall also be given upon the conclusion of any such operation. 
(e)  Intent. It is the sole purpose of this section to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the county. These provisions are not intended in any manner to preempt, override, replace or hinder the application of state or federal law nor to prevent the location or operation of a business merely because such business involves hazardous wastes. 
(Code 1983, § 11-2; Code 1992, § 10-27) 
Secs. 26-27—26-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOTORIZED CARTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, adopted March 27, 2014, repealed the former art. III, §§ 26-56—26-63, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1992, §§ 10-41—10-47; Ord. No. 95-10, 4-27-1995; Ord. No. 2008-05A, § 1, 7-24-2008. 
State Law reference— Off-road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-56. - Findings; definition. 
(a)  Findings. The board of commissioners finds that certain public streets located within the unincorporated county are designed and constructed so as to safely permit the use thereof by regular vehicular traffic and also the driving thereon of motorized carts. The board of commissioners further finds that recreation paths are designed and constructed so as to safely permit travel thereon by motorized carts. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. 
Authorized streets means all such streets which have been authorized for motorized cart travel and are on file with the planning and zoning department. The list of authorized streets is subject to amendment from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
Automobile means a passenger vehicle primarily designed to legally travel on the highways of this state that usually has an engine capable of propelling the vehicle over 35 miles per hour. 
County means Fayette County, Georgia. 
Dealer means a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging vehicles who has an established place of business in this state. 
Electric bicycle means a device with two or three wheels which has a saddle and fully operative pedals for human propulsion and also has an electric motor. For such a device to be considered an electric assisted bicycle, it shall meet the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, as set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571, et seq., and shall operate in such a manner that the electric motor disengages or ceases to function when the brakes are applied. The electric motor in an electric assisted bicycle shall: 
(1)  Have a power output of not more than 1,000 watts; 
(2)  Be incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour on level ground; and 
(3)  Be incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power alone is used to propel the device at or more than 20 miles per hour. 
Electric personal assistive mobility device or EPAMD means a self-balancing, two non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Low-speed motor vehicle or LSMV means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. 
Moped means a motor driven cycle equipped with two or three wheels, with or without foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, and an independent power source providing a maximum of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement shall be 3.05 cubic inches (50 cubic centimeters) regardless of the number of chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour (48.28 kilometers per hour) on level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor, all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, and moped. 
Motor driven cycle means every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, every bicycle with a motor attached, and every moped. 
Motorized cart means every motor vehicle having no less than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hour. Within this article, the terms "motorized cart," "golf cart" and "cart" shall have the same meanings;. 
Motorized play vehicle means a coaster, scooter, pocket bike, any other alternatively fueled device, or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor engine, gas or electric, and is not otherwise defined in this code as a "motorized cart", "low speed motor vehicle (LSMV)" "motor vehicle", "motorcycle", "electric bicycle", motorized skateboard", "electric personal assistive mobility device" or "motorized wheelchair". 
Motorized skateboard or motorized scooter means a self-propelled device that has a motor, gas or electric, a deck upon which a person may ride, not equipped with a seat, and at least two tandem wheels in contact with the ground and which is not otherwise defined in this Code as a "motor vehicle," "motorcycle," "motorized play vehicle," "electric personal assistive mobility device" or "motorized wheelchair." 
Motorized wheelchair means a self-propelled wheelchair that is used by a physically disabled person for mobility. 
Pocket motorcycle or pocket bike means a two-wheeled vehicle other than a motor vehicle, bicycle with helper motor or a motorized scooter and which is propelled by an internal combustion engine, electric motor or other mechanical means, is capable of carrying a rider and/or passenger at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour, and is designed to replicate the general appearance of a motorcycle, regardless of the scale of the replication. 
Recreation path means a paved area of generally six feet or more in width that is designed or intended for multi-use such as pedestrians, bicyclists, motorized carts, or any other approved use. 
Sidewalk means a paved area of generally five feet in width or less that is designed or intended for the use of pedestrian traffic only. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 26-57. - Registration/transfer requirements. 
(a)  Required. It shall be the duty of every owner of an electric or gasoline-powered motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle that is operated over the designated streets, paved recreational paths or sidewalks of the unincorporated portion of the county to register the vehicle with the county within ten business days of the date of purchase. Proof of ownership listing the vehicle must be presented. This is to be accomplished at the county administrative complex where two numerical decals will be issued for each vehicle registered. A record of each vehicle so registered will be completed. The registration will record the name and address of the owner, vehicle manufacturer, model, serial number or VIN, and color. 
(b)  Registration fee. The registration fee for motorized carts or low-speed motor vehicles owned by residents of the unincorporated portion of the county shall be $12.00, and the registration shall be effective until the next regular registration period. Registration periods shall occur every five years, beginning in 2011. If the cart is not registered within ten business days of purchase, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the registration fee; and the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the ten business-day period. In addition, those persons wishing to register a vehicle designed for a disabled person, presentation of medical verification of a disability is required. An annotation will be placed on the registration document. A decal will be issued and must be displayed when utilizing parking designated for the disabled. Upon termination of the disability, this decal must be removed and the vehicle's registration form updated. 
(c)  Revocation. The registration of gasoline-powered motorized carts will be revoked if the motorized cart is not in compliance with subsection (f) of this section and a new registration will be required upon compliance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  Reciprocal agreement . A reciprocal agreement exists between the county and the City of Fayetteville and the Town of Tyrone (the "cities"). The county will honor/recognize permits issued from the cities in the unincorporated portion of the county. Residents of the cities will be afforded the same privileges as those permit holders who are residents of the unincorporated portion of the county and all sections of this article will apply to the residents of the cities as well. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the minimum age for operating a motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle in the unincorporated portion of the county is 12 years old with an accompanying adult and 15 years old with a valid learner's permit. 
(e)  Transfer of ownership. Upon the sale of a golf cart or low-speed motor vehicle to another person who will operate the vehicle over the streets or paved recreation paths of the unincorporated portion of the county, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of the change in ownership. Transfer cost will be $5.00. If the transfer registration is not accomplished within ten business days, a $5.00 penalty shall be applied for each month the registration has not been updated. This additional fee shall be capped at $30.00 and will be in addition to the transfer fee. 
(f)  Gasoline-powered motorized carts. 
(1)  Every gasoline-powered motorized cart shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
a.  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to, and including, the muffler(s) and exhaust pipe(s) or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. 
b.  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened, including the consideration of missing or broken brackets or hangers. 
c.  The engine and power mechanism of every gasoline-powered motorized cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned, as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any gasoline-powered motorized cart to operate, or permit the operation of such cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer, has been altered, rendered unserviceable or removed. 
(g)  Rental motorized carts and low-speed motor vehicles. Motorized cart and low-speed motor vehicle dealers and distributors, as well as other commercial establishments, may rent golf carts and low-speed motor vehicles to the public for use on the streets and paved recreation paths. Each such establishment renting motorized carts or low-speed motor vehicles shall be required to register each and shall maintain a written record of each person renting a motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle. Renters shall be required to furnish positive identification and shall be furnished a copy of this article to read. Each renter must be at least 16 years of age and possess a valid driver's license. Registration fees and transfer fees shall be the same as those in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. Motorized carts and low-speed motor vehicles for temporary use by the county during special events are exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(h)  Age, number of registrants limited. Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle. Registration may be in one person's name only and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2014; Ord. No. 2014-13, § 1, 10-10-2014) 
Sec. 26-58. - Operating regulations. 
(a)  Any person who possesses a valid motor vehicle driver's license may operate a motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle on the recreation paths and authorized streets of the unincorporated portion of the county. 
(b)  Any person who possesses a valid motor vehicle learner's permit and is at least 15 years of age may operate a motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle on the recreation paths and authorized streets of the unincorporated portion of the county. 
(c)  No person less than 15 years of age shall be permitted to operate a motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle on the recreation paths and authorized streets of the unincorporated portion of the county under any circumstances. Exception: Those persons who are 12 years of age or older may drive a motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle on designated streets and paved recreation paths of the unincorporated portion of the county if they are accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(d)  All operators of motorized carts and low-speed motor vehicles shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the recreation paths and authorized streets of the unincorporated portion of the county. Where recreation paths exist, they must be used in preference to parallel authorized streets. 
(e)  Motorized carts and low-speed motor vehicles shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(f)  Motorized carts and low-speed motor vehicles may be operated over authorized streets or recreation paths of the unincorporated portion of the county only during daylight hours, unless such motorized carts or low-speed motor vehicles are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle to operate, or permit the operation of, such cart over the recreation paths or authorized streets of the unincorporated portion of the county in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 26-59. - Recreation path users prohibited uses. 
Recreation paths shall not be used by: 
(1)  Automobiles and trucks, except authorized maintenance vehicles; 
(2)  Motorcycles; 
(3)  Street and trail motorized bikes (not to include electric bicycles) or vehicles, including, but not limited to, all-terrain vehicles, commonly known as ATVs; 
(4)  Minibikes and mopeds; 
(5)  Horses, mules or donkeys 
(6)  Go-carts. 
(7)  Motorized play vehicles; 
(8)  Unregistered electric motorized carts; and 
(9)  Unregistered gasoline-powered motorized carts. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 26-60. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
No individual or group shall engage in hazardous activities on the recreation paths or authorized streets. Such hazardous activities include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Racing of any kind, except for special events approved by the county. 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the county. 
(3)  Pedestrians, skaters and permitted vehicles shall not loiter or park on recreation path bridges or in underpasses. 
(4)  Pedestrians should be given due consideration and reasonable right-of-way by other users of the recreation paths to ensure safe passage. 
(5)  An audible warning shall be given by operators of motorized carts and low-speed motor vehicles and other users of the recreation paths, such as bicyclists and skaters, when approaching pedestrians from the rear. 
(6)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and the use thereof, including open container laws, apply to the recreation paths. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 26-61. - Liability. 
Each person using the recreation paths is liable for his or her own actions. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 26-62. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the county code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2014) 
Sec. 26-63. - Street authorization. 
The board of commissioners may designate authorized streets upon its own initiative or by request from a private citizen for the use of motorized carts. The board of commissioners may consider issues including, but not limited to, the street classification, posted speed limit, speed characteristics of the street as determined by studies, maximum grade of the road, minimum visibility distance, or any other existing conditions particular to the street in their designation subject to safety measures on the street including, but not limited to, the reduction of the posted speed limit, additional signage/markings, and traffic calming devices to improve safety. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1, 4-24-2018) 
Chapter 28 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1 et seq.; regulations of county board of health governing septic tanks, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; contracts to provide industrial wastewater treatment services, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - System generally. 
There shall be a system for the distribution of safe and pure water in the county. This system and the functions necessary to effectuate same shall be the responsibility of the board of commissioners, which shall be authorized to employ such assistance and professional persons as may be necessary for this purpose. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1; Code 1992, § 19-1) 
Sec. 28-2. - Extending service into corporate limits. 
No water service shall be extended to any resident or business establishment inside the corporate limits of any municipality without the express permission of the governing body of that municipality. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2; Code 1992, § 19-2) 
Sec. 28-3. - Separate connections. 
Each resident and user of county water shall be required to have a separate and individual connection to the system, and no water connection shall be extended to any other resident or user; provided, however, apartment houses, roominghouses and similar multiple dwellings may have a common connection with the permission of the board of commissioners. Any property owner or other person who shall extend lines to any resident, tenant, or user other than the principal or original tenant, user or resident shall be deemed to be personally liable for the payment of all costs incurred by all tenants, users or residents served through the same meter, and the county shall have the right to discontinue water service until the connection shall comply with the intent of this article, or until the owner pays all costs set forth above. 
(Code 1983, § 6-3; Code 1992, § 19-3) 
Sec. 28-4. - Private water distribution systems. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all businesses which engage in the sale of water by means of a water distribution system for human consumption and use. 
(b)  Definition. The term "water distribution system" means an operation which transports water from an original source to consumers and employs the use of one or more of the following: water lines, water meters, chlorinators, water treatment facilities or water storage facilities. 
(c)  License. Each business which engages in the operations described in subsection (a) of this section shall apply for and receive, prior to operation, a county private water system license. Such license shall be subject to all regulations concerning the business licenses in the county and to the regulations contained in this section. 
(d)  Application. Upon applying for a private water system license, each such applicant shall submit the following: 
(1)  A one-year maintenance bond or letter of credit, to be renewed each year, for the repair and maintenance of the water distribution system. The bond or letter of credit shall have a surety acceptable to the county and shall be for the benefit of the county. The amount of such bond shall be the sum of money as determined by the director of public works in order to ensure the continued maintenance and service to the proposed customers of the water distribution system. Those systems operated by a homeowners association shall be exempt from giving such bond or letter of credit. 
(2)  A copy of all plats, plans, diagrams and specifications indicating the location, size and type of all water lines, meters, and storage and treatment facilities. 
(3)  Where a water distribution system is located on private property, copies of easements to the applicant. 
(e)  Compliance with county standards. 
(1)  All water distribution systems constructed on or after March 1, 1982, must be approved by the county as to its configuration and to the size and type of its pipes, meters, and treatment and storage facilities. The county's approval shall be based on the minimum standards utilized by the county water system and on general engineering principles. 
(2)  All water distribution systems constructed prior to March 1, 1982, shall be nonconforming systems but shall be allowed to continue in their present condition subject to any and all licensing regulations. However, any repair, replacement or extension to such nonconforming system must meet the standards established for new systems as set out above. 
(3)  All water distribution systems constructed on or after March 1, 1982, and all repairs, replacements, extensions, additions and improvements to a water distribution system originally constructed prior to March 1, 1982, shall be inspected for compliance by the county. Such inspection shall occur prior to the covering of any pipes and prior to the operation of any part of the water distribution system. 
(f)  Transfer of the system to the county. In the event the owner of a water distribution system desires to transfer ownership, operation, maintenance and repair of such system to the county, and the county desires to accept such transfer into the county water system, the following procedures shall be utilized to effect such transfer: 
(1)  The owner shall file a copy of all plats, plans, diagrams and specifications indicating the location, size and type of water lines, meters, and storage and treatment facilities. 
(2)  Where a water distribution system is located on private property, the owner shall obtain for and provide to the county proper easements allowing the county to enter onto such private property for the maintenance and repair of such system. 
(3)  All records of individual meter readings shall be transferred to the county. 
(4)  The owner shall be responsible for all costs of connecting the water distribution system to the county water system, including but not limited to costs for pipeline, joints, meters, and labor. 
(5)  The owner shall be responsible for all costs in sterilizing the water lines and equipment and for any repair deemed necessary by the county prior to transfer of the water distribution system. 
(6)  The owner shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the county, its agents and employees from and against all claims, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees, arising from the performance by the owner of any work necessary for the transfer of the system, and including but not limited to the connection of the water distribution system to the county water system, and the repair of the water distribution system deemed necessary by the county prior to transfer, or arising from any defect or faulty workmanship in the water distribution system occurring or existing prior to the time of transfer, or arising from the change in water pressure at the time the water distribution system is connected to the county water system. 
(g)  Intent. It is the sole purpose of this section to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(Code 1983, § 6-5; Code 1992, § 19-5) 
Sec. 28-5. - Rate schedules. 
There is hereby adopted the following water and sewer rate schedules for the county: 
(1)  Water rate schedule (Fayette County): 
a.  Residential size meters: 
1.  Minimum bill, $12.00 for the first 2,000 gallons. 
2.  All over 2,000 gallons for $2.55 per 1,000 gallons. 
3.  In the event that any residential water user exceeds 20,000 gallons of water use in any monthly billing cycle a penalty shall be imposed according to the schedule fixed by the board of commissioners. 
b.  Larger than residential size meters: 

 
All over zero gallons for $2.55 per 1,000 gallons. 
c.  The rate schedule set forth above contemplates a single user, such as a one-family dwelling, one-farm dwelling with appurtenances, or one-commercial operation. 
d.  Extraordinary circumstances, such as multiple dwelling units, industrial users, and fire protection shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the board of commissioners on recommendation of the county engineer. 
(2)  Water rate schedule (Fayetteville): 
a.  City of Fayetteville, $1.77 per 1,000 gallons. 
b.  Meters. 

 
(Code 1992, § 19-6; Ord. No. 88-02, § 1, 3-9-1988; Ord. No. 91-14, 9-18-1991) 
Sec. 28-6. - Application for connection, deposits for service. 
(a)  Application for water service. The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service, in person, or by mail, at the county water system and at the same time shall make a cash deposit for residential consumers of $50.00 and for rental or lease consumers of $75.00 for water service. The deposit fee may be waived if the customer has been on the county water system before and has paid his water bill promptly. 
(b)  Minimum charges. The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only, and, except for fire protection, the county shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Code 1983, § 6-6; Code 1992, § 19-7; Ord. No. 88-02, §§ 2, 3, 3-9-1988) 
Sec. 28-7. - Water service installation charges. 
(a)  Water service installation charges, which charges include the furnishing of a water meter, labor and material for installation from the county water main to the customer's property line, shall be determined from time to time by the board of commissioners in conjunction with the head of the county water department. 
(b)  All charges for installation are payable when application for meter and connection is made, and includes costs of tapping main, running service lines to backup curb or road ditch and installing curb stop and meter. 
(Code 1983, § 6-7; Code 1992, § 19-8) 
Sec. 28-8. - Meters required for water service. 
No person shall tap on or use any water which is furnished through the county water system without the same being furnished by the county through a metering device approved by the county for his use, unless otherwise authorized to do so by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1983, § 6-8; Code 1992, § 19-9) 
Sec. 28-9. - County's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The county shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where a distribution line exists, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. The county water system shall be responsible for services herein described within this chapter, and no other service charges shall be made other than those listed in the schedule below: 

 
*All meters over two inches will be charged $400.00 as an availability fee. Cost of installation will be borne by the consumer/builder/developer. 
(b)  All taps for fire lines will be charged a $400.00 availability fee and will require the appropriate size water meter. All fire lines will be metered to detect unauthorized water consumption, and a back-flow preventer will be installed. The cost of a six-foot fire line is $5,000.00. The cost of an eight-foot fire line is $8,400.00. 
(c)  The above tap fees will not apply to taps previously installed by the builder and/or developer at the initial installation of the water main, provided the contract governing the initial installation by the developer does not prohibit waiving by the county of such tap fees. In no case will the county be responsible for extending water service lines beyond the distance provided for in this article. 
(1)  The county may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(2)  The county may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the county's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(3)  The county reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or back-flow. 
(Code 1992, § 19-10; Ord. No. 88-02, § 4, 3-9-1988) 
Sec. 28-10. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the county shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor for other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Each building or structure wherein water furnished by the county is utilized shall have its own separate meter. A master meter may be provided in certain instances; for example, for apartment complexes and shopping centers, where the ownership and operation lies in one company, individual or corporation. A lot, which has thereon structures or buildings utilizing water furnished by the county and which reasonably can be subdivided, shall not be served by a single meter unless specifically allowed by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefore, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(d)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(e)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(f)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the county's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the county's water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the county covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the county they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the county's water system. 
(g)  No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or in any other manner disturb a water line or any appurtenance there belonging to the county without first obtaining a written permit from the water manager of the county water system or his authorized representative. Any such unauthorized act shall be deemed a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00 plus the cost of any repairs. 
(h)  Duly authorized agents of the county shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing county property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(i)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the county a permanent easement or right-of-way across any property traversed by the water/sewer lines. 
(Code 1992, § 19-11; Ord. No. 88-02, § 5, 3-9-1988) 
Sec. 28-11. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the county. Bills shall be paid at the county water system and bills paid after the due date shall be subject to a ten percent late charge penalty. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  In the event payment for the current monthly bill for water and sewer used during a preceding reading period is not received by the county water system by the due date, gross rates shall apply. Such gross rates shall be and are fixed at an additional ten percent charge as shown on the schedules. 
(2)  Nonpayment within 20 days from the due date will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 40 days after the original due date will allow the county, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate this agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the county obligated to supply, any water under this agreement. 
(b)  Service discontinued for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, such security deposit as may be required by the county water system is made, and a service charge of $25.00 paid for each meter reconnected. 
(Code 1992, § 19-12; Ord. No. 88-02, § 7, 3-9-1988) 
Sec. 28-12. - Execution for water charges. 
Whenever water bills shall be due by any person for using water service and such bills shall not be paid on demand by the county water department, it shall be lawful for the board of commissioners to issue an execution against such property owner and/or the property for the water bill due, as in the cases of taxes due to the county. Such execution shall be subject to foreclosure. 
(Code 1983, § 6-10; Code 1992, § 19-13) 
Sec. 28-13. - Refund of deposits. 
Regular deposits for service, plus accrued interest, shall be applied to the customer's bill after two years of service. 
(Code 1983, § 6-11; Code 1992, § 19-14; Ord. No. 91-14, § 4, 9-18-1991) 
Sec. 28-14. - Liability of county for failure to provide water service. 
The county does not and will not assume liability for damage to property or person or for inconvenience caused by a failure of the water system. It is understood that the county may from time to time find it necessary to temporarily discontinue service to make additions, corrections, or repairs. 
(Code 1983, § 6-12; Code 1992, § 19-15) 
Sec. 28-15. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the county water system to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Code 1992, § 19-16; Ord. No. 88-02, § 6, 3-9-1988) 
Sec. 28-16. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the county water system before the bill becomes delinquent, and shall be entitled to a hearing. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The county will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee of $10.00; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the county of the actual cost of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the county's representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 1992, § 19-17; Ord. No. 88-02, § 9, 3-9-1988) 
Sec. 28-17. - Termination of service. 
When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, any remaining security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the county as follows: 
(1)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the county toward settlement of the account. If the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the county may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(2)  Upon discontinuance of service for any reason other than nonpayment of bills, except theft, the security deposit will be applied by the county towards settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is not sufficient to cover the bill, the county may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(3)  The county reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
a.  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
b.  Consumer's willful disregard of the county's rules. 
c.  Emergency repairs. 
d.  Insufficient water supply due to circumstances beyond the county's control. 
e.  Legal processes. 
f.  Direction of public authorities. 
g.  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1992, § 19-18; Ord. No. 88-02, § 8, 3-9-1988) 
Secs. 28-18—28-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL WATER LINE EXTENSION POLICY 

Sec. 28-40. - Generally. 
The county water system will not be responsible for the total cost involved for a connector water line linking an existing county water system water line to a housing, commercial, or industrial project, be it existing or proposed construction. 
(Code 1983, § 6-13; Code 1992, § 19-36) 
Sec. 28-41. - Procedure to be followed in order to be served. 
If an individual, partnership, corporation, or group desires to be served by the county water system through a water line extension, then the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  A list for proposed customers shall be circulated in the immediate area to determine projected interest. 
(2)  This petition shall be given to the county water system for study. 
(3)  If a water line extension is economically feasible and/or environmentally necessary, then a contract will be developed by the county attorney for the water line extension. 
(4)  Those persons or groups who signed the petition will become parties of the contract with the required parties of the county. 
(5)  General terms of the contract shall include: 
a.  Those parties who signed the contract to receive county water will share equally in the water line extension costs. 
b.  If the water line extension required size is the same size as shown on the county water system master water line plan, then the parties who signed the contract to receive county water will share equally in the total cost of the water line extension without any county financial assistance. 
c.  The county water system will finance the difference in total cost between the proposed county water system water line, as shown on the county water system map on the water line plan, and the minimum size water line necessary and required to serve the new development, both for the domestic as well as fire service requirements, as determined by the county water system manager and approved by the board of commissioners. 
d.  Any person or group of persons who privately funds a water line extension shall be entitled to reimbursement of a proportionate share of the project cost by any person or entity desiring to hook up to the water line for a period of two years after project completion and acceptance by the county water system. After the two year period, the individuals or groups who have assisted in financing the water line extension will not be entitled to any financial or other compensation for future taps or meter connections to the water line extension by other parties. 
(6)  After installation of the water line extension and county collection of the construction costs, ownership and maintenance of the water line will revert to the county water system. 
(Code 1983, § 6-14; Code 1992, § 19-37; Ord. No. 89-01, 2-15-1989) 
Sec. 28-42. - Compliance with standards. 
All water line extensions and appurtenances shall comply with the county water system standards. 
(Code 1983, § 6-16; Code 1992, § 19-38) 
Secs. 28-43—28-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 28-73. - Generally. 
The board of commissioners may, from time to time, impose such water restrictions as to control the consumption of water which it may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1992, § 19-51) 
Sec. 28-74. - Restrictions on outdoor watering. 
The board of commissioners may, from time to time, impose restrictions on outdoor watering to control the consumption of water when necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. The following subsections provide for graduated restriction on outdoor watering based on drought level declared. 
(1)  During non-drought periods, outdoor water use, other than those uses exempted in section 28-75, shall occur as follows: Those parties having an address with an odd number shall be allowed to water outdoors on Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday, and those parties having an address with an even number shall be allowed to water outdoors on Monday, Wednesday, and Saturday. During periods in which a drought is declared by the director of the environmental protection division, outdoor water use shall occur in accordance with the following standards as applicable. 
a.  During declared drought conditions, outdoor water use other than those activities exempted below in subsection (3) of this section, shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days in accordance with the drought level declared. 
b.  Declared drought response level one—Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
1.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
2.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
3.  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
c.  Declared drought response level two—Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
1.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays. 
2.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays. 
3.  The following uses are prohibited: 
i.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
ii.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways except when necessary for public health and safety. 
d.  Declared drought response level three—Outdoor water use may occur on the scheduled day within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
1.  The scheduled day for odd-numbered addresses is Sunday. 
2.  The scheduled day for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways is Saturday. 
3.  The following uses are prohibited: 
i.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
ii.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
iii.  Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care or structural integrity. 
iv.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailers, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. 
v.  Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. 
vi.  Noncommercial fundraisers, such as car washes. 
vii.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
e.  Declared drought response level four—No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for activities exempted in subsection (3)of this section, or as the EPD director may order. 
(2)  These restrictions shall apply to all entities and their customers which are permitted by the state environmental protection division (EPD) for water withdrawal or for operation of a drinking water system. 
(Code 1992, § 19-52; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1, 7-22-2004) 
Sec. 28-75. - Exemptions from outdoor watering restrictions. 
The following water uses shall be exempt from the restrictions set forth in section 28-74: 
(1)  This rule shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
a.  Capture and re-use of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
b.  Re-use of gray water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of these rules. 
a.  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
b.  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(3)  Newly (in place less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following: 
a.  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during drought response level four. 
b.  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(4)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule. 
a.  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
b.  Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and declared drought response level one. 
c.  Irrigation of trees during times of non-drought and declared drought response levels one, two and three. 
d.  Irrigation of greens. 
(5)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule. 
a.  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers; during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
b.  Irrigation contractors; during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
c.  Sod producers. 
d.  Ornamental growers. 
e.  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
f.  Retail garden centers. 
g.  Hydro-seeding. 
h.  Power-washing. 
i.  Construction sites. 
j.  Producers of food and fiber. 
k.  Car washes. 
l.  Other activities essential to daily business. 
m.  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(Code 1992, § 19-53; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 2, 7-22-2004) 
Sec. 28-76. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Address means the "house number" (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. The term "even numbered address" means a house number ending with a number 0, 2, 4, 8, or no house number. The term "odd numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
Declared drought response level means one of the four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
House number is hereby deemed to be an identifier for properties of whatever character of use they may be, including but not limited to residential, commercial, government, and institutional properties. 
(Code 1992, § 19-54; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 3, 7-22-2004) 
Sec. 28-77. - Enforcement and penalties for violations. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, the following terms shall mean: 
(1)  Water conservation measure means any resolution adopted by the board of commissioners or the state that restricts or prohibits the use of water supplied by the county. 
(2)  Water conservation period means the time from which a water conservation measure is adopted or imposed until the time at which such measure is repealed. 
(3)  Enforcement officers means those persons listed in section 2-1. 
(4)  Violator means a person or entity who engages in an act or omission that results in a violation of any provision of a water conservation measure. 
(b)  Enforcement officers are hereby authorized to issue warnings and citations pursuant to this section and to assist otherwise in the prosecution of violators. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to engage in any act or omission that violates the provisions of any water conservation measure. It shall be unlawful for any violator to continue to engage in such act or omission after service of a warning or citation under this section. 
(d)  All enforcement officers are hereby authorized to serve upon any violator written warnings or citations for any and all violations. Such written warnings and citations shall be served by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the last billing address of the violator known to the water department or by hand-delivery to the violator. 
(e)  The county may, immediately upon either the failure of any violator to comply immediately, considering the totality of the circumstances, with a warning or the service of a citation upon any violator, terminate the provision of services to said violator. 
(f)  For a first conviction during a water conservation period a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed, for second conviction during a water conservation period a fine of $750.00 shall be imposed, and for third and subsequent convictions during a water conservation period of a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed by the state court or other court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 19-55; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1, 12-5-2007) 
Secs. 28-78—28-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 28-123. - Definitions. 
The following definitions and terms shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Auxiliary intake means any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source other than that normally used. 
By-pass means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant. 
Cross connection means any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building or buildings in such a manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves, or because of any other arrangement. 
Inter-connection means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, or other devise which does or may contain sewage or other waste liquid which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
Public water supply means the waterworks system furnishing water to the county for general use and which is recognized as the public water supply by the state department of natural resources/environmental protections division. 
(Code 1992, § 19-86; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-13-2005) 
Sec. 28-124. - Compliance. 
The county water system shall comply with chapter 391-3-5-.13 of the state rules for safe drinking water and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Cross Connection Manual which pertain to cross connections, and establish an effective, ongoing program to control these undesirable water uses. 
(Code 1992, § 19-87; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-13-2005) 
Sec. 28-125. - Actions prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection to be made; or to allow a cross connection auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Code 1992, § 19-88; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-13-2005) 
Sec. 28-126. - Separate sources of water. 
Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public water supply, and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water supply or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from which the water stored is circulated through a piping system, shall file a statement of the nonexistence of unapproved or unauthorized cross connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections with the director of the county water system. Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection will ever be permitted upon the premises. 
(Code 1992, § 19-89; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-13-2005) 
Sec. 28-127. - Protective devices. 
(a)  The director of the county water system or his designated representative, shall require the use of an approved protective device on the service line serving all premises to assure that any contamination that may originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. The protective device shall be a backflow preventer approved by the director of the county water system as to manufacture, model, and size. The method of installation of all backflow protective devices shall be approved by the director of the county water system prior to installation and shall comply with the criteria set forth by the director of the county water system. The installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(b)  The county water system shall have the right to inspect and test the device or devices on an annual basis or whenever deemed necessary by the director of the county water system or his designated representative. Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without the knowledge of the occupant of the premises. 
(c)  Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations or protection of life, property, or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective device or devices. Where only one unit is installed and the continuance of service is critical, the director of the county water system shall notify, in writing, the occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and shall arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. These repairs shall be made by qualified personnel, acceptable to the county water system. 
(Code 1992, § 19-90; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-13-2005) 
Sec. 28-128. - Authority for entry. 
The director of the county water system or authorized representative is hereby authorized to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the county water system for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connection. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspecting party, any and all pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Code 1992, § 19-91; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-13-2005) 
Sec. 28-129. - Violations. 
Any person who now has cross connections, auxiliary intakes, by-passes, or inter-connections in violation of the provisions of this article shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to comply with the provisions of this article. After a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to complete the work, the amount of time shall be designated by the director of the county water system. 
(Code 1992, § 19-92; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-13-2005) 
Sec. 28-130. - Disconnection. 
There is a likelihood that protective measures will be subverted, altered or otherwise disconnected where the use of the water supplied to a premises by the county water system is such that: 
(1)  It is impractical to provide an effective air-gap separation; 
(2)  The owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the system, or his designated representative, that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are such as to pose no threat to the safety or potability of the water supply; 
(3)  The nature and mode of operation within the premises cause a need for frequent alterations to the plumbing. 
(Code 1992, § 19-93; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-13-2005) 
Sec. 28-131. - Potable water supply. 
(a)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified herein. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner such as: 
Water Unsafe for Drinking 
(b)  The minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters, each letter being one inch high and located on a red background. 
(Code 1992, § 19-94; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-13-2005) 
Sec. 28-132. - Penalty. 
Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00, and each day of continued violation after conviction shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines and penalties, the director of the county water system shall discontinue the public water supply to any premises upon which there is found to be a cross connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until such cross connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection has been discontinued. 
(Code 1992, § 19-95; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 1-13-2005) 
Secs. 28-133—28-162. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COMMUNITY SEPTIC AND DRIP IRRIGATION SEWER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 28-163. - Scope. 
The provisions of this section shall be administrated by the county water system and shall apply to the installation of all community septic and drip irrigation sewer systems in the unincorporated county. 
(Code 1992, § 19-9; Ord. No. 2008-2A, § 1, 2-14-2008) 
Sec. 28-164. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Community septic or drip irrigation sewer system. A decentralized sewage treatment system where sanitary sewage is collected from a small area such as a single development and transported through a pipe network to a common collection point for land treatment and disposal. 
(Code 1992, § 19-97; Ord. No. 2008-2A, § 1, 2-14-2008) 
Sec. 28-165. - Submittal. 
Construction plans for a community septic or drip irrigation sewer system must be submitted to the county water system for review and approval. The construction plans must comply with the construction plan check list maintained by the county water system. All systems must comply with the sanitary sewer system specifications approved on August 10, 1995 on file at the county water system offices. The submittal will include a completed state environmental protection division (EPD) large community subsurface system engineering submittal form and a completed EPD sanitary sewer extension submittal form. These forms are available from EPD. Upon approval of the submitted construction plans, these forms will be forwarded to the EPD by the county water system. 
(Code 1992, § 19-98; Ord. No. 2008-2A, § 1, 2-14-2008) 
Sec. 28-166. - Minimum standards for community septic and drip irrigation sewer systems. 
(a)  Each lot must have a septic tank and the septic tank is required to have a filter. Only filters listed on the sewage effluent filter approvals list, as compiled by the state department of human resources, can be used. The sizing of the tank and installation will be according to the state department of human resources standards. The tank must be pumped by the lot owner every five years and a copy of the receipt for pumping must be submitted to the county water system at that time. 
(b)  Each lot within the development must be connected to the public water system and the community septic or drip irrigation sewer system. 
(c)  A 100 percent land treatment/disposal replacement area is required to be maintained on-site for the community septic or drip irrigation sewer system. This area must be depicted in the construction plans as well as any applicable preliminary plat, final plat, or site plan. 
(Code 1992, § 19-99; Ord. No. 2008-2A, § 1, 2-14-2008) 
Sec. 28-167. - Transfer of ownership to the county. 
After the installation, inspection, and testing of a community septic or drip irrigation sewer system is approved by the county water system, the ownership of the system, associated property, and any associated easements shall be transferred to the county by deed. Two copies of the as-built drawings of the community septic or drip irrigation sewer system and operations and maintenance manuals must also be submitted to the county water system as part of the transfer of ownership to the county. 
(Code 1992, § 19-100; Ord. No. 2008-2A, § 1, 2-14-2008) 
Sec. 28-168. - Rate schedule. 
Rates for single-family residential, multifamily residential, industrial, commercial, and office sewer service shall be established periodically by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 19-101; Ord. No. 2008-2A, § 1, 2-14-2008) 
Secs. 28-169—28-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 28-190. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners of the county makes the following findings: 
(1)  An independent professional engineering and financing analyses as prepared by Integrated Science and Engineering, Inc. properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities, and funding opportunities of the unincorporated county. 
(2)  Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities, and funding opportunities identified in the professional engineering and financing analyses, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems in unincorporated Fayette in concert with other water resource management programs. 
(3)  Stormwater services are applicable and needed throughout the unincorporated boundaries of Fayette County. While specific service demands may differ from area to area at any given time, a stormwater service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the unincorporated boundaries of Fayette County is consistent with present and future needs of the community. 
(4)  The stormwater needs in unincorporated Fayette County include, but are not limited to, protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Stormwater management benefits all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of Fayette County in a variety of ways. These benefits may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and risk exposure. 
(5)  Fayette County presently owns and operates stormwater systems developed over many years. To effectively and efficiently manage these systems, the county is obligated to have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management operating and capital investment needs. 
(6)  A stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of providing stormwater services. 
(7)  Impervious area is the most important factor influencing stormwater service requirements and costs posed by properties throughout the county, and therefore is the basis upon which fees are calculated. Credits may be available as provided herein. 
(8)  The existence of privately owned and maintained systems that reduce or otherwise mitigate the cost of providing stormwater services can be taken into account to reduce the user fee. 
(9)  Stormwater utility user fees shall be dedicated to stormwater services as provided herein. 
(Code 1992, § 19-96; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 1, 7-10-2014) 
Sec. 28-191. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined in this chapter, all words used in this title have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used are defined a follows: 
County. The unincorporated jurisdictional boundaries of Fayette County, Georgia. 
Credit. A reduction in the amount of a customer's user fee in recognition of efforts to mitigate the stormwater runoff impact that a developed property has on the county's stormwater systems. 
Developed property. All real property containing 1,000 square feet or more of impervious area. 
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual is a stormwater technical guidance manual published by the Atlanta Regional Commission. The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. 
Hydrologic response means the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area; the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property; antecedent moisture conditions; and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious area/impervious surface. Man-made areas or surfaces that prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil, e.g., rooftops; asphalt-, concrete-, brick-, or stone-paved areas; and all driveways and parking areas. 
Non-single-family residential property means developed property that consists of various nonresidential land uses including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Multifamily, commercial, office/institutional, public, transportation, industrial, manufacturing and storage buildings and facilities; 
(2)  Parking lots, parks, public and private schools, universities and hospitals; 
(3)  Streets, roads, water and wastewater treatment plants; and 
(4)  Any other form of use not specifically defined as a single family residential property. 
Single-family residential property means developed property containing at least one dwelling with one or more bedrooms, a bathroom, and cooling facilities, designed for occupancy by one or more persons, regardless of relationship, living as a single-family unit. Improved property may be classified as single-family residential even if supplemental detached dwelling units are present that include but not limited to garages, carports, storage buildings and barns. 
Stormwater drainage influence zone means areas lying downstream of a culvert, or other stormwater management conveyance system. On the downstream side of the conveyance system, the stormwater influence zone will extend for a length of six times the diameter (or width) of the culvert from which runoff is being discharged (Field Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Third Edition, pg. 99), and within the horizontal limits set forth in the aforementioned field manual. For example, if a 48-inch diameter culvert is discharging to a private property, the stormwater drainage influence zone shall extend 24 feet (six times 48 inches) from the end of the culvert and for the specified width (i.e., typically the width of the creek). The county stormwater utility may perform maintenance and/or capital construction activities only within that portion of the public water influence zone which the county has an ownership interest in, or for which a dedicated easement has been granted to, and accepted by the county for such purpose. 
Stormwater services. Services provided by Fayette County that relate to the: 
(1)  Calculation and collection of user fees; 
(2)  Development and maintenance of a stormwater systems database; 
(3)  Repair, replacement and improvement of county-owned stormwater systems; 
(4)  Assessment, prioritization and implementation of public stormwater projects; and 
(5)  Performance of supporting administrative and technical functions. 
Stormwater systems. All infrastructure, natural or otherwise, used for collecting and/o conveying stormwater, e.g., culverts, ditches, swales, etc. 
Stormwater Utility Credit Manual. A technical guidance manual that defines and provides criteria for credits available to property owners. 
Undeveloped property. All real property with less than 1,000 square feet of impervious area. 
User fee. A fee charged to a developed property for stormwater services. The user fee is a function of the rate schedule applied to the impervious area. 
(Code 1992, § 19-97; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 2, 7-10-2014) 
Sec. 28-192. - Establishment of a stormwater utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a Stormwater Utility in Fayette County. 
(b)  A stormwater enterprise fund shall be established separate and apart from the general fund. The stormwater enterprise fund shall be used to provide stormwater services as provided herein. 
(Code 1992, § 19-98; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 3, 7-10-14) 
Sec. 28-193. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater utility. 
The Stormwater Utility shall: 
(1)  Calculate and collect user fees. 
(2)  Develop and maintain a database of public (i.e., county-owned) and private stormwater systems. 
(3)  Fund the repair, replacement and/or improvement of county-owned stormwater systems. 
(4)  Assess, prioritize and implement public stormwater system repairs, replacement and new construction projects. 
(5)  Provide supporting administrative and technical functions (e.g., training). 
These services may be provided in conjunction with other Fayette County Departments (e.g., public works), the use of private consultants and contractors, or other similar means. 
(Code 1992, § 19-99; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 4, 7-10-2014) 
Sec. 28-194. - Requirements for stormwater systems; inspections and enforcement methods. 
The stormwater utility may inspect private stormwater drainage systems to ascertain that the stormwater drainage systems are functioning properly. 
(a)  Stormwater systems shall be sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater runoff in a safe manner consistent with all applicable county development regulations, ordinances, and state and federal laws. 
(b)  Stormwater systems that are connected to the county's stormwater systems shall be properly operated and maintained by the respective property owner. 
(Code 1992, § 19-100; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 2013-22, § 1, 11-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 5, 7-10-2014) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 9-12-81(b). 
Sec. 28-195. - Stormwater user fees. 
(a)  The Stormwater utility shall recover the cost of providing stormwater services by imposing a user fee on all developed properties. The stormwater utility shall apportion the cost of delivering stormwater services to all stormwater customers based on the demand the property places on the county's stormwater system. 
(b)  User fee rate. The user fee imposed on all developed properties shall be calculated based on the impervious area and the utility rate schedule approved by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Change in user fee rate. From time to time the user fee rate may be adjusted to adequately reflect the funding requirement for the repair, replacement and/or improvement of county-owned stormwater systems. Whenever an adjustment in the user fee rate is requested the board of commissioners shall determine whether such an adjustment shall be made. A decision by the board of commissioners on a request for a user fee rate adjustment shall be made after a public hearing on the matter has been conducted. The public hearing to consider a user fee rate adjustment shall be advertised in the legal organ at least one week prior to the public hearing. 
(Code 1992, § 19-101; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 6, 7-10-2014) 
Sec. 28-196. - Stormwater user-fee billing, collections, and delinquencies. 
(a)  Billing and collections. User fees shall begin to accrue on January 1, 2012, and shall be billed periodically, thereafter to customers, except as specific exemptions and credits may apply. 
(b)  Delinquencies. The owner of each developed property as of the billing date is responsible for the user fee. A late charge as established by the board of commissioners kept and maintained in the office of environmental management shall be assessed against the property owner for the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility user fee that becomes delinquent in accordance with applicable State law. In addition, the county shall assess all costs of collection, including attorney's fees and court costs, against the property owner. 
(Code 1992, § 19-102; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 2013-22, § 2, 11-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 7, 7-10-2014; Ord. No. 2016-01, § 1, 1-14-2016) 
Sec. 28-197. - Exemptions and credits applicable to stormwater service charges. 
Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no owner of developed property shall be exempt from user fees. No credit in user fees shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services. 
(a)  Exemptions: 
(1)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks) shall be exempt from user fees. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from user fees. 
(2)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) streets and rights-of-way shall b exempt from user fees. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction services undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way and road systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other improved property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from user fees. All other state, federal, and county properties are subject to the user fs on the same basis as private properties. 
(3)  Fayette County-owned streets and rights-of-way shall be exempt from user fees. This exemption is in consideration for the county allowing the stormwater utility to use the county's existing stormwater systems. However, other improved property owned and used for county purposes shall not be exempt from user fees. 
(b)  Credits. Fayette County shall grant credits based on the criteria set forth in the Stormwater Utility Credit Manual. A copy of the Stormwater Utility Credit Manual is attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and is by this reference incorporated herein. 
(Code 1992, § 19-103; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 8, 7-10-2014) 
Sec. 28-198. - Appeals. 
(a)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the Fayette County Environmental Management Department. 
(b)  A written determination will be issued within 15 days stating whether an adjustment to the service charge is appropriate and, if so, the amount of the adjustment. 
(c)  The environmental management director may adjust the user fee applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(d)  A decision of the environmental management director that is adverse to an appellant may be further appealed to the county administrator within five days of receipt of notice of the adverse decision. The county administrator shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 15 days. All decisions of the county administrator shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant The decision of the county administrator shall be the final decision of the county. 
(e)  An appeal from the decision of the county administrator shall lie with the Superior Court of Fayette County. Any appeal to the Superior Court of Fayette County must be filed within 30 days of the decision of the county administrator. 
(Code 1992, § 19-105; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 9, 7-10-2014) 
Sec. 28-199. - Repeal of stormwater utility. 
(a)  The provisions of this article VI shall remain valid and enforceable in all respects for the purpose of supporting any and all efforts to collect delinquent stormwater utility fees which were assessed and billed prior to April 25, 2017. For all other purposes, i.e., assessing and billing for stormwater utility fees subsequent to April 25, 2017, the provisions of this article VI shall remain void and unenforceable. It is the intent of the board of commissioners that no new stormwater utility fee be assessed or billed subsequent to April 25, 2017. 
(b)  Article VI, pertaining to Stormwater Management, shall sunset and stand repealed on December 31, 2017 in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07, § 1, 4-25-2017) 
Secs. 28-200—28-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - UNDERGROUND MARKING STANDARDS 

Sec. 28-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency means a sudden or unforeseen occurrence involving a clear and imminent danger to life, health, or property; the interruption of utility services; or repairs to transportation facilities that require immediate action. 
Extraordinary circumstances means circumstances other than normal operating conditions which exist and make it impractical or impossible for a facility owner or operator to comply with the provisions of this article. Such extraordinary circumstances may include, but shall not be limited to, hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, ice and snow, and acts of God. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 2(19-71), 1-23-2014; Ord. No. 2014-02A, § 1, 6-26-2014; Ord. No. 2015-08, § 1, 6-11-2015) 
Sec. 28-232. - White lining. 
(a)  Background. White lining is a practice that has been widely used in the United States where the National Transportation Board concluded that pre-marking is a practice that helps prevent excavation damage. The procedure simply involves an excavator using white paint to indicate the route or area that is going to be excavated, such that the locator then knows exactly how much marking is required and where. White lining reduces confusion about what utilities need to be marked or not marked. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of white lining is to allow everyone involved with the dig site to know the exact location of the proposed excavation. White lining the excavation site is an excellent way to assist the utilities or utility locators in marking lines in the work area right the first time and in less time. This technique eliminates speculation by the locator about where the excavation will take place and will often enable the utility or its agent to locate faster and more accurately. In short, pre-marking the area and the extent of the intended excavation can reduce delays and the time it takes to perform the locate. 
(c)  Examples; timing. Examples of areas to be white lined are smaller (involving only a portion of a particular address) or linear excavations such as telecommunication drops and lines, service lines (such as for water, gas, electricity and sewer), utility pits, cuts and repairs, curb repairs, bore holes, directional boring pathways, pole and signage placements, etc. Such examples are merely explanatory of the type of excavation where white lining is appropriate and are not meant to be exclusive. White lining shall be completed prior to contacting GA811 to obtain a locate request ticket number. Electronic/virtual white lining shall be clearly marked on submitted documentation within a 20' tolerance zone of the proposed excavation site. 
(d)  Exceptions to white lining. Exceptions are allowed as follows: 
(1)  For large projects as defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-3 (18), unless one or more utility facilities are damaged three times or more collectively by a contractor making the locate request within a 90-day contract period, white lining will not be required for any large project so designated in accordance with GSPC Rule 515-9-4-.13. A copy of GSPC Rule 515-9-4-.13 currently in effect is attached to Ordinance No. 2014-02 as exhibit "A" and by this reference is incorporated herein; said exhibit is on file in the county offices. Every contractor begins each large project with zero damages. It is only when three damages (at-fault damages) occur during the 90-day period of the specific large project that the white lining requirement will be triggered. A large project ticket holder whose past prohibits it from being exempt, as stated above, will be subject to no more than a two-day shutdown period and shall be required to white line the remainder of the project to meet the large project marking facility locating agreement schedule that the ticket holder and utility originally agreed upon; 
(2)  Homeowners/occupants involved in excavation or land disturbance that is confined to a single address or parcel. Homeowners/occupants shall not submit locate requests for excavation or land disturbance that will be performed by a business, a contractor, or a utility. Businesses, contractors, and utilities are not exempt from white lining; 
(3)  Emergencies and extraordinary circumstances as such terms are defined herein, are statutory exceptions to the requirement for obtaining a locate ticket prior to commencing mechanized excavation and, hence, also exceptions to the requirement for white lining under this section. However, if a particular emergency notification is later determined not to have been an emergency or an extraordinary circumstance, then the excavator's failure to procure a locate ticket before excavating will be treated as a violation of this section. Also, pre-excavation emergency locate ticket requests (that is, a request for a locate ticket on an expedited basis sooner than the prescribed time limit) will not be an exception to white lining as required in this section; 
(4)  Residential telecommunication service drop lines that can be delineated by the route of the existing line on the ground for single residential address/parcel requests only; and 
(5)  Termite baiting systems. 
(e)  White lining symbols as directions to locator. White lining proposed dig sites that will follow a single path or trench shall be marked using white lines and/or arrows and shall be located for 20 feet on either side of the white line and for 20 feet outward beyond the designated "START" and "END" of such linear white line. Therefore, it is important to identify the starting and ending points. 

(f)  Identification of white lining excavator. In order to enable the locating utility or its locators to quickly identify the requested locate at the job site and expedite the locating process, such excavator when white lining shall identify himself or itself by labeling the white line area with the excavator's name or the applicable locate ticket number or both. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 3(19-72), 1-23-2014; Ord. No. 2014-02A, § 2, 6-26-2014; Ord. No. 2015-08, §§ 2—6, 6-11-2015) 
Sec. 28-233. - Facility marking by or for utilities. 
Facility owners or their locate contractors shall indicate utility facilities by placing their UPC alpha code, along with the type material (if known) that the facility consists of, at the beginning and end of locates. Also, arrows should be placed at the ends of markings to indicate that the underground facility continues. In accomplishing the locate task, the line locator shall use industry-approved and generally accepted methods of locating. The tolerance zone shall be 18" measured horizontally from the outer edge of either side of such marked utility facilities. 
(1)  To avoid confusion on long runs, the marks shall be frequent enough to identify the owner. 
(2)  The marks shall indicate the approximate centerline of the underground lines. For example, the middle of the cable, line or pipe shall be at the center of the dashed marks. 
(3)  Location marks shall be 4 to 12 inches in length and at intervals of 5 to 10 feet. If the facility to be marked has a greater diameter than 12 inches the size of the facility shall be indicated if known. If size is not known, then the mark shall be greater than 12 inches. 

(4)  The line locator (person marking the lines) shall extend marks outside the proposed work area by 20 to 30 feet if those facilities extend outside the proposed excavation area. 

(5)  In areas such as flower beds, rock gardens, etc., flags or stakes may be an alternative to paint. The decision to use flags, paint, or stakes shall be based on the terrain and job conditions, for instance, flags or stakes in wet areas, offsets in dirt construction zones that have a high volume of traffic crossing their line location marks. 

(6)  Dead ends, stub-outs, termination points, etc., shall be marked as follows: 

(7)  Lines that have connections (e.g., T's or Y's) or changes in directions shall be clearly indicated. Marks indicating lines or connections shall clearly show the intersection and path of the line or connection. Marks that show changes in direction shall be placed closer together for more clarity and accuracy. 

(8)  Manholes and valves shall be identified by using a circle and letters if they are not visible (dirt covering valve boxes or pavement covering manhole cover). 

(9)  Facilities that cross but do not intersect shall be marked as described to indicate such installation manner. 

(10)  Unlocateable sewer laterals shall be marked by placing a green triangle on the sewer main and, if the location of the tap for such unlocateable sewer lateral is known, by placing a green "T" or "Y" or other appropriate symbol at the tap pointing generally toward the address served by such unlocateable sewer lateral. 

(11)  When facilities share the same trench, they shall be heavily identified and separated enough so that they can be readily identified. This would apply to lines that share the same color code. For example, cable television and telephone lines: 

(12)  If the facility to be marked has a diameter greater than 12 inches, the size of the facility shall be indicated if known. If the size is not known, then the mark shall indicate greater than 12 inches. 
(13)  Duct structures shall be marked by using a dot with parallel boundary on each side of the dot. 

(14)  In areas where there is a strong likelihood that any or all marker types showing line location would be destroyed, offsets shall be placed on a permanent surface. However, offsets should be used only in conjunction with marks placed above a facility. Offset spacing should be every third or fourth mark. For example, the following mark would indicate the line is 16 feet from the end of the arrow. 

(15)  In areas where cables are spliced, the facilities should be located individually as far as possible on both sides of the splice. When the signal is distorted due to the near proximity to the splice a circle with "SP" should indicate the area of distortion or "splice pit." 

(Ord. No. 2014-02, § 4(19-73), 1-23-2014; Ord. No. 2014-02A, §§ 3, 4, 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 28-234. - Facility protection/damage prevention requirements for contractors/excavators/utilities 
(b)  Any person involved in an excavation with mechanized equipment found digging or performing land disturbing activities within the "tolerance zone" of a facility without evidence of "potholing" will be found to be in violation of this article. 
(c)  The tolerance zone shall be 18" measured horizontally from the outer edge of either side of such marked utility facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02A, § 5, 6-26-2014; Ord. No. 2015-08, §§ 7—9, 6-11-2015) 
Sec. 28-235 - Large projects 
(a)  Public Service Commission Rule 515-9-4-.13 Procedures for large projects shall be followed. 
(b)  The Large Project Marking Agreement referenced in Public Service Commission Rule 515-9-4-.13 must describe the scope of the project. The Large Project Marking Agreement must divide the project into sections and assign "locate by" and "excavation by" dates for each section. 
(c)  Changes to the Large Project Marking Agreement must be in writing, i.e., hard copy or e-mail. 
(Ord. No. 2015-08, § 12, 6-11-2015) 
Sec. 28-236. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from any government official, work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be given to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Any person who shall continue any wok after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to rectify the violation, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02A, § 6, 6-26-2014; Ord. No. 2015-08, § 11, 6-11-2015) 
Editor's note— Formerly sec. 28-235. 
Sec. 28-237. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates a provision of this ordinance shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Multiple offenses can result in revocation of the privilege to work within right of ways. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02A, § 7, 6-26-2014; Ord. No. 2015-08, § 10, 6-11-2015) 
Editor's note— Formerly sec. 28-236 
Secs. 28-238—28-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLY FOR PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 28-251. - Purpose and intent. 
The Board of Commissioners of Fayette County finds that every citizen of Fayette County should have a reliable drinking water source in sufficient quantity for day-to-day living requirements. The board of commissioners further acknowledges that not every Fayette County citizen chooses to purchase drinking water from the Fayette County Water System, although the Fayette County Water System produces more than enough daily volume of drinking water to meet the needs of all the citizens of Fayette County. Some Fayette County citizens choose to obtain drinking water from wells either on or off their property. Other Fayette County systems receive their water from private water systems as defined herein. The purpose and intent of this article in the Fayette County Code is to recognize that a solution should be available for those Fayette County citizens who are part of a private water system and, for whatever reason, are not receiving any drinking water, and to provide that solution. The individual property owner has opportunities available to him or her which are not available to those Fayette County citizens who receive water from a private water system. Individual property owners may drill another well, or hook onto the Fayette County Water System at the point nearest their property. Fayette County citizens who purchase water from a private water system, generally, do not have those options available. This article will provide the parameters within which the Fayette County Water System shall make drinking water available to Fayette County citizens who purchase water from a private water system when the private water system no longer provides drinking water for their use. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 28-252. - Definitions. 
(a)  Fayette County Water System means the public water distribution system in Fayette County which provides drinking water to Fayette County citizens. The Fayette County Water System may provide drinking water to other than Fayette County citizens with the appropriate agreements in place. 
(b)  Private water system means a water system owned by other than a governmental entity which provides drinking water to Fayette County citizens based upon a permit obtained from the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Water unavailable means the lack of drinking water from the source, e.g., when a private water system has no drinking water available. A private water system or a well experiencing low pressure is not deemed to have water unavailable. 
(d)  Contaminated water means drinking water which does not meet the minimum drinking water standards as established by the Clean Water Act as enforced by the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources for the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 28-253. - Identification of private water systems; requirements; vaults. 
(a)  There are 12 permitted private water systems in Fayette County. The private water systems are: 
(1)  Fayette Mobile Home Park, Permit No. GA1130005 for 30 service connections; 
(2)  Dix Lee'On Estates, Permit No. GA1130007 for 214 service connections; 
(3)  Newton Plantation, Permit No. GA1130008 for 124 service connections; 
(4)  Rolling Meadows Estates, Permit No. GA1130009 for 115 service connections; 
(5)  Four Seasons Mobile Home Park, Permit No. GA1130010 for 210 service connections; 
(6)  Long's Mobile Home Park, Permit No. GA1130012 for 35 service connections; 
(7)  Woodland Road Water Association, Permit No. GA1130016 for 15 service connections; 
(8)  Fernwood Mobile Home Park, Permit No. GA1130019 for 61 service connections; 
(9)  Starr's Mill Ridge Subdivision, Permit No. GA1130033 for 52 service connections; 
(10)  Line Creek Estates, Permit No. GA1130034 for 97 service connections; 
(11)  Wendell Coffee Golf Center, Permit No. GA1130035 for 1 service connection; and 
(12)  Corinth Woods Subdivision, Permit No. GA0630008 for 29 service connections. [This system is listed as Clayton County with the State and we do not have a Corinth Woods Subdivision in our subdivision list. Corinth Drive comes off of Corinth Road in Fayette County. There are two lots in Fayette County accessing on Corinth Drive. Neither of their deeds makes reference to Corinth Woods Subdivision. The rest of Corinth Drive is in Clayton County.] 
Any of these private water systems is eligible to receive water from the Fayette County Water System when water is unavailable, as that term is defined herein, within their respective private water system. 
(b)  Any request for the emergency supply of drinking water from the Fayette County Water System shall be made through the Director of the Fayette County Water System. In order to be eligible to receive emergency water from the Fayette County Water System, the private water system must first comply with any requirements set out in this article in addition to any necessary requirements which, in the opinion of the water system director, shall be installed to ensure the safe provision of drinking water to the private water system. 
(c)  Any private water system comprised of water lines of six inches in diameter or larger will be required to provide the cost for the installation of a vault to facilitate the installation of a water meter on county property to tie in to the private water system. Payment for the installation of the vault, where required, is a precondition to receiving drinking water from the Fayette County Water System when drinking water is unavailable in a private water system. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 28-254. - Supplying drinking water to a private water system; water meter; activation fee; cost of water; duration. 
(a)  Whenever a request is made to the water system director to provide emergency drinking water to a private water system, and the water system director has determined that water is unavailable to the private water system, the water system director may cause the emergency water supply to flow to the private water system. The presence of contaminated water may not be sufficient reason for emergency water to be supplied to a private water system. 
(b)  The water system director shall determine what size water meter will be required to supply water to the private water system. The water meter shall be installed on county property at the closest point to the subdivision served by the private water system. Payment for the cost of the water meter and the installation of the water meter shall be borne by the owner of the private water system. The cost of the water meter and the installation of the water meter shall be paid within ten calendar days of installation of same. Of the private water systems listed herein, the closest point from county property to the respective subdivision is as follows: 

 
(c)  Whenever a private water system requests the delivery of emergency drinking water, an activation fee shall be charged for the delivery of the drinking water. The activation fee shall be an amount set from time to time by the Board of Commissioners of Fayette County and shall be on file at the Fayette County Water System. An activation fee shall be charged for every request for emergency drinking water where drinking water is supplied as a result of the request. Any private subdivision may be subject to more than one activation fee depending upon the number of requests made for emergency drinking water which are responded to with a supply of emergency drinking water. 
(d)  The volume of drinking water provided to a private water system when drinking water is unavailable shall be charged at a rate equal to the amount of three times the water rate currently in place for purchasing drinking water from the Fayette County Water System. 
(e)  When emergency drinking water is provided to a private subdivision by the Fayette County Water System, the emergency drinking water shall be provided for no more than 60 consecutive days. For purposes of this article, consecutive days are measured from the activation of the water meter to allow drinking water to flow to the private water system to the de-activation of the water meter shutting off the flow of drinking water to the private water system. When emergency drinking water has been provided to a private system for 30 consecutive days, the owner of the private water system shall begin taking appropriate steps to merge his or her private water system into the Fayette County Water System. The owner of the private water system shall pay to the Fayette County Water System an amount equal to the amount it would take for the private water system to be constructed to minimum Fayette County Water System standards. 
(Ord. No. 2018-07, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND LAND USE 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 101-1. - Applicability of chapter 1. 
The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this subpart. 
Sec. 101-2. - Status. 
While this subpart is a codification of the ordinances pertaining to land use and development, provisions in subpart A of this Code may also pertain to land use and development. The failure to include provisions in this subpart does not excuse failure to comply with such provisions. Additionally, provisions in this subpart that do not pertain to land use and development are valid even though they are included in this subpart. 
Chapter 102 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Building, electrical and other codes, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-1 et seq.; state building codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 102-1—102-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-19. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Where terms are not defined in chapter 2 of the various construction codes, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, publish date June 1, 2002 (ISBN: 0877792011), shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. 
Approved means approved by the code official or other authority having jurisdiction. 
Approved agency means an established and recognized agency regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing inspection services, where the agency has been approved by the code official. 
Building official means director of permits and inspections. 
Code official means director of permits and inspections. 
Department of building safety means the county permits and inspections department. 
Department of electrical inspection means the county permits and inspections department. 
Department of inspection means the county permits and inspections department. 
Department of mechanical inspection means the county permits and inspections department. 
Department of plumbing inspection means the county permits and inspections department. 
Department of property maintenance inspection means the county permits and inspections department. 
Deputy building official means assistant director of permits and inspections. 
Deputy code official means assistant director of permits and inspections. 
Disaster means a sudden grave occurrence caused by fire, flood, tornado, vehicular impact, civil disorder, acts of terrorism or other natural or manmade event having ruinous results that negatively affects public safety, health or general welfare. 
Listed and listing means equipment, appliances or materials included in a list published by a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of listed equipment, appliances or materials, and whose listing states either that the equipment, appliances or materials meet nationally recognized standards, or has been tested and found suitable for use in a specified manner. Not all testing laboratories, inspection agencies and other organizations concerned with product evaluation use the same means for identifying listed equipment, appliances or materials. Some do not recognize equipment, appliances or materials as listed unless they are also labeled. The authority having jurisdiction shall utilize the system employed by the listing organization to identify a listed product. 
Occupancy means the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is utilized or occupied. 
(Code 1992, § 5-1; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 1, 12-3-2008) 
Sec. 102-20. - Copyright acknowledgment. 
Portions of this chapter have been reproduced with permission from the 2006 edition of the International Building Code&reg;, International Residential Code&reg; for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, International Mechanical Code&reg;, International Plumbing Code&reg;, International Code Council Electrical Code&reg;, and International Fuel Gas Code&reg;, and the 2003 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code&reg; and International Existing Building Code&reg; copyrighted and owned by the International Code Council, Inc. 
Code 1992, § 5-2; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-21. - Insertions. 
Insertions required by this Code that are not addressed by the Georgia State Amendments shall be established by the building official as a written directive. 
(Code 1992, § 5-3; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-22. - Adoption of Construction Codes. 
The following codes, as amended from time to time by the state, are hereby adopted as the construction codes for the county, except for those administrative and enforcement sections where are provided for herein: 
(1)  International Building Code (ICC). 
(2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA). 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC). 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC). 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC). 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC). 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC). 
(8)  International Fire Code (ICC). 
(9)  International Existing Building Code (ICC). 
(10)  International Property Maintenance Code (ICC). 
a.  302.4. Weeds . All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 14 inches (exception listed below). All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include, crops, cultivated flowers and gardens. Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. 
b.  Exception. Any property being used for the purpose of agricultural purposes, including but not limited to the raising and/or feeding of grazing animals and the cutting of grass for hay. 
(Code 1992, § 5-4; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 2, 12-3-2008; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1, 10-10-2013) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-3; state building codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 
Secs. 102-23—102-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 102-48. - Generally. 
Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Code 1992, § 5-11; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-49. - Other laws. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state, or federal law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-12; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-50. - Referenced codes and standards. 
(a)  The codes and standards referenced in this chapter shall be considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(b)  Exception. Where enforcement of a chapter provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer's instructions shall apply. 
(Code 1992, § 5-14; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-51—102-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT OF CODES 

Sec. 102-74. - Creation of enforcement agency. 
The permits and inspections department is hereby delegated the authority for the enforcement of the construction codes and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-21; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-75. - Appointment. 
The building official shall be appointed by the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 5-22; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-76. - Deputies. 
In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the county and with the concurrence of the county board of commissioners, the building official shall have the authority to appoint, deputize, promote, demote, and remove a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the department of building safety. Such employees shall have the powers as delegated by the building official. For maintenance of existing properties, see the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-23; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-77—102-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 102-96. - General. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The building official, deputy building official, plans examiners and inspectors shall have the authority to exercise police powers for the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this chapter. The code official shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall act on any question relative to the installation, alteration, repair, maintenance or operation of fuel gas systems, mechanical systems, and plumbing systems, except as otherwise specifically provided for by statutory requirements or as provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 5-31; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-97. - Rule-making authority. 
The code official shall have authority as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret and implement the provisions of this chapter to secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically provided for in this chapter, or of violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety. 
(Code 1992, § 5-32; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-98. - Applications and permits. 
(a)  Procedure. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, repair, alteration, addition, demolition, change of occupancy, and relocation of buildings and structures; installation of electrical systems and equipment; installations and alterations of fuel gas systems, mechanical systems, and plumbing; inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued; and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Preliminary meeting. When requested by the permit applicant, the building official shall meet with the permit applicant prior to the application for a construction permit to discuss plans for the proposed work or change of occupancy in order to establish the specific applicability of the provisions of this chapter. Exception: Repairs and level 1 alterations. 
(c)  Building evaluation. The building official is authorized to require an existing building to be investigated and evaluated by a registered design professional based on the circumstances agreed upon at the preliminary meeting to determine the existence of any potential nonconformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Remedies for outstanding violations. The remaining provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, the building official is authorized to withhold the issuance of building permits, and/or refuse inspections to any permittee, and any business or person which is legally or organizationally related to the permittee, until such time as such permittee has resolved satisfactorily all outstanding violations from previously issued permits. 
(Code 1992, § 5-33; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 4-10-2008) 
Sec. 102-99. - Notices and orders. 
The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. Citations necessary for the enforcement of this chapter shall be prepared and served by the county marshal's office as directed by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-34; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-100. - Inspections. 
The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 5-35; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-101. - Identification. 
The building official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 5-36; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-102. - Right of entry. 
Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the structure or premises unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(Code 1992, § 5-37; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-103. - Department records. 
The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence unless otherwise provided for by other regulations. 
(Code 1992, § 5-38; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-104. - Liability. 
The building official or employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this chapter shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 5-39; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-105. - Approved materials and equipment. 
(a)  Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
(b)  Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this chapter for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements have been reconditioned, tested, placed in good and proper working condition and approved by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-40; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-106. - Modifications. 
(a)  Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner's representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this chapter impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of building safety. 
(b)  Areas prone to flooding. The building official shall not grant modifications to any provision related to areas prone to flooding as established by table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code without the granting of a variance to such provisions by the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 5-41; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-107. - Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this chapter, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(b)  Research reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this chapter, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources. 
(c)  Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records. 
(Code 1992, § 5-42; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-108. - Coordination of inspections. 
Whenever in the enforcement of this chapter or another code or ordinance, the responsibility of more than one code official of the jurisdiction is involved, it shall be the duty of the code officials involved to coordinate their inspections and administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the owners and occupants of the structure shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders. Whenever an inspector from any agency or department observes an apparent or actual violation of some provision of some law, ordinance or code not within the inspector's authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings to the code official having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-43; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-109. - Cooperation of other officials and officers. 
The building official may request, and shall receive, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction so far as is required in the discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other pertinent law or ordinance. 
(Code 1992, § 5-44; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-110—102-131. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 102-132. - Generally. 
The board of commissioners of the county (the "board") shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this chapter. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-51; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-133. - Limitation on authority. 
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this chapter or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this chapter do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 5-52; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 2, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-134—102-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTRATION OF THE BUILDING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-165. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article apply to the International Building Code, as adopted in section 102-22. In this article the term "building code" means the International Building Code as adopted in section 102-22. 
(Code 1992, § 5-101; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-166. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of the building code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(b)  Exception. Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International Residential Code. 
(c)  Appendices. Provisions in the appendices of the International Building Code shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-102; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-167. - Intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the building code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. The purpose of the building code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of the building code. 
(b)  Public duty, warranty and quality control. The permitting, plans examination or inspection conducted with regard to a building or structure in accordance with the building code constitutes a public duty and does not warrant or ensure the absence of any hazard, deficiency or other matter. Any duty created by or based on the building code is transferred to the public, and no private cause of action is created by a breach of such duty. The building code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any building or structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the department of building safety or the county be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections or plans examinations authorized by the building code or any permits or certificates issued under the building code. The building official checks for substantial compliance with the building code, but reviews and inspections performed by the building official pursuant to this Chapter do not create any guarantee or warranty that buildings, structures or service equipment have been constructed in accordance with all provisions of the building code. The permitting, plans examination, or inspection of any building, structure, system, element, or construction document shall not be construed as a warranty of the physical condition or adequacy of such building, structure, system, element, or construction document, including without limitation a representation or warranty that a building or structure is complete, that it is in compliance with the building code or any other law, that it was inspected, that it is safe or ready for occupancy or that it meets any particular degree of quality or workmanship. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the building code except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. The amount and quality of inspection and other services provided is discretionary with the building official and may vary in response to the amount of staff, work load, training and experience, funding and other pertinent factors affecting whether and how inspection is made or whether any hazard, deficiency or similar matter is observed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-103; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-168. - Referenced codes. 
The other codes listed in subsections (1) through (7) of this section and referenced elsewhere in the building code shall be considered part of the requirements of the building code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. 
(1)  Electrical. The provisions of the ICC Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(2)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in the building code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
(3)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems. 
(4)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. 
(5)  Property maintenance. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures. 
(6)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Fire Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation. 
(7)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency. 
(Code 1992, § 5-104; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-169. - Existing structures. 
The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of the building code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in the building code, the International Property Maintenance Code or the International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
(Code 1992, § 5-105; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-170—102-191. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 102-192. - Required. 
Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the building code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. If a licensed contractor performs construction without obtaining any necessary permit, there is a rebuttable presumption that the contractor willfully and deliberately violated the building laws of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-111; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-193. - Work exempt from permit. 
Exemptions from permit requirements of the building code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of the building code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Building: 
a.  One-story detached accessory structures less than 200 square feet (18.58 m 2 ) used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses. 
b.  Fences not over six feet (1,829 mm) high. 
c.  Oil derricks. 
d.  Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA liquids. 
e.  Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1. 
f.  Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route. 
g.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
h.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
i.  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and are installed entirely above ground. 
j.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems. 
k.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings. 
l.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of Group R-3 and U occupancies. 
m.  Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) in height. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Repairs and maintenance. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
b.  Radio and television transmitting stations. The provisions of the building code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas. 
c.  Temporary testing systems. A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
(3)  Gas. 
a.  Portable heating appliance. 
b.  Replacement of any part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Portable heating appliance. 
b.  Portable ventilation equipment. 
c.  Portable cooling unit. 
d.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the building code. 
e.  Replacement of any part that does not alter approval or make it unsafe. 
f.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
g.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (5 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(5)  Plumbing. 
a.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with the new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in the building code. 
b.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(6)  Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. For the purposes of this section, emergency shall be defined as an unexpected situation requiring prompt action to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare. This section shall not be construed as allowing work to be done without a permit to restore comfort and convenience items, equipment or systems. Emergency work performed shall not be done contrary to the provisions of the building code. 
(7)  Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
(8)  Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution, metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right. 
(Code 1992, § 5-112; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 1, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 102-194. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Required. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the department of building safety for that purpose. Such application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in division 3 of this article. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the building official. 
(b)  Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the building code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(c)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not exceeding 180 days. No application shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. A request for an extension must be received by the building official prior to the expiration of the application. The building official is not required to notify the applicant prior to the application's expiration or that the application has expired. 
(Code 1992, § 5-113; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-195. - Validity of permit. 
The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the building code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the building code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of the building code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-114; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-196. - Expiration. 
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. A minimum of one inspection approval must be obtained as evidence that work was commenced or that work has continued. The determination as to whether work was suspended shall be based on the most recent inspection approval date. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for an additional period of not more than 180 days provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work. No permit shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Requests for extensions must be received by the building official prior to the expiration of the permit. The building official is not required to notify the permittee prior to the permit's expiration or that the permit has expired. The fee for an extension shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work. 
(Code 1992, § 5-115; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-197. - Suspension or revocation. 
The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of the building code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-116; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-198. - Placement of permit. 
Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the building permit or copy thereof is posted on the site of the work until the completion of the project. The posted permit shall be visible from the street and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-117; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-199. - Responsibility. 
It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for which the building code is applicable, to comply with the building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-118; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-200. - Inspection record card and approved construction documents. 
Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the permittee has made available an inspection record card and approved construction documents on the premises and in such a position to allow the building official convenient access and use. These items shall be protected from the elements and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-119; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-201. - Work without a permit: investigation required. 
(a)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The building official shall establish policies and procedures for work without a permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5-120; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-202—102-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 102-226. - Submittal documents. 
(a)  Special conditions. Construction documents, statement of special inspections and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. 
(b)  Exception. The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with the building code. 
(c)  Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn to scale upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the building code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. Sketches and pencil or other erasable media used to prepare construction documents shall not be accepted by the building official. 
(d)  Policies and procedures. The building official shall establish policies and procedures for the minimum standards of acceptance for construction documents. 
(e)  Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection systems shall be submitted to indicate conformance with the building code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in chapter 9. 
(f)  Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of the building code. In other than occupancies in groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces. 
(g)  Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with the building code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings. 
(h)  Manufacturer's installation instructions. The construction documents shall include manufacturer's installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used. 
(Code 1992, § 5-131; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-227. - Site plan. 
The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-132; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-228. - Examination of documents. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the building code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(1)  Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by a stamp as "REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE." One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative. 
(2)  Previous approvals. The building code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of the building code and has not been abandoned. 
(3)  Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the building code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-133; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-229. - Design professional in responsible charge. 
(a)  Generally. When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. Where structural observation is required, the statement of special instructions shall name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur. 
(b)  Deferred submittals. For purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official. Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design and submittal documents have been approved by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-134; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-230. - Amended construction documents. 
Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. Willful and prejudicial departure from or disregard of construction documents in any material respect without the approval of the building official is unlawful. 
(Code 1992, § 5-135; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-231. - Retention of construction documents. 
One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws. 
(Code 1992, § 5-136; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-232—102-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FEES 

Sec. 102-256. - Payment of fees. 
A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
(Code 1992, § 5-141; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-257. - Schedule of permit and other fees. 
(a)  Schedule. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit or other designated activity shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(b)  Investigation fees: work without a permit. Where work, for which a permit is required, has been commenced prior to obtaining a permit, an investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the building code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum permit fee set forth in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of the building code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-142; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-258. - Building permit valuations. 
The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at the time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of the work, including materials and labor, for which a permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-143; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-259. - Related fees. 
The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-144; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-260. - Refunds. 
(a)  The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(b)  Refunds shall not be given: 
(1)  For an application or permit that has expired. 
(2)  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the application submittal date. 
(3)  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the permit issuance date. 
(4)  For that component of the permit fee which is representative of the development impact fee. 
(Code 1992, § 5-145; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-261—102-283. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 102-284. - Generally. 
Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the building code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the building code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 5-151; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-285. - Preliminary inspection. 
Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-152; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-286. - Required inspections. 
The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in this section. 
(1)  Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspection shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C94, the concrete need not be on the job. 
(2)  Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. 
(3)  Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in section 161.2.5 shall be submitted to the building official. 
(4)  Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved. 
(5)  Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
Exception. Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear assembly. 
(6)  Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 
(7)  Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with chapter 13 and shall be include, but not be limited to, inspections for: 
a.  Envelope insulation R and U values; 
b.  Fenestration U value; 
c.  Duct system R value; and 
d.  HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency. 
(8)  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the building code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety. 
(9)  Lot and foundation survey. A survey of the lot and foundation shall be required by the building official to verify that the building or structure is located within the designated setbacks and in accordance with the approved plans for the following: 
a.  For all newly constructed single-family dwellings. 
b.  For residential accessory structures, pools and additions located within two feet of the setback, floodplain and/or watershed protection areas. The foundation survey shall occur after concrete is placed and shall be submitted to and approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department prior to the commencement of any framing operations or work. It shall be unlawful to commence any framing operations or work until the foundation survey is approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department. 
Exception. For pools, the survey shall be submitted to and approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department after excavation and the placement of forms and reinforcing steel, but prior to the placement of any concrete, shotcrete or gunite. For pre-manufactured pools, the survey shall be submitted to and approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department after excavation, but prior to the placement of the pool shell. 
(10)  Special inspections. For special inspections, see section 1704. 
(11)  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-153; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-287. - Inspection agencies. 
The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(Code 1992, § 5-154; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-288. - Inspection requests. 
It shall be the duty of the permit holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspection of such work that are required by the building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-155; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-289. - Approval required. 
Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or agent wherein the same fails to comply with the building code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-156; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-290. - Work covered without inspection approval; investigation required. 
(a)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been covered without first obtaining the necessary inspection approval, a special investigation shall be made before subsequent inspections are approved. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The building official shall establish policies and procedures for work covered without inspection approval. 
(Code 1992, § 5-157; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-291—102-313. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 102-314. - Use and occupancy. 
No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the building code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-161; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-315. - Certificate issued. 
After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of the building code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following: 
(1)  The building permit number. 
(2)  The address of the structure. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner. 
(4)  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
(5)  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of the building code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified. 
(6)  The name of the building official. 
(7)  The edition of the building code under which the permit was issued. 
(8)  The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 3. 
(9)  The type of construction as defined in chapter 6. 
(10)  The design occupant load. 
(11)  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided and whether the sprinkler system is required. 
(12)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5-162; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-316. - Provision of temporary certificate of occupancy. 
The board of commissioners finds that certain nonresidential structures may be of such a size that requiring 100 percent completion of the structures can impact the timely legitimate and safe use of a substantial part of the structures. Components of this type of structures could be safe for persons to use, work in, or visit so long as certain minimum standards are met. The minimum standards within this chapter have been developed in recognition of the need to facilitate the early use of certain structures where requiring 100 percent of project completion could impact the timely legitimate and safe use of the structures based upon its size. 
(Code 1992, § 5-163; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 1(5-163), 1-15-2014) 
Sec. 102-317. - Temporary certificate of occupancy. 
The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for nonresidential structures when all conditions for such issuance have been satisfied. The following criteria are minimum standards which must be met prior to any structure being eligible for a temporary certificate of occupancy: 
(1)  The development shall be an approved nonresidential use being constructed within a nonresidential zoning district. 
(2)  The development shall be a minimum of 50 acres. 
(3)  The building shall total a minimum of 25,000 square feet. 
(4)  All fees and every other charge due the county for the structure shall be current and paid in full. 
(5)  The area of the structure for which a temporary certificate of occupancy is being sought comprises at least 75 percent of the structure. 
(6)  Every part of a structure for which a temporary certificate of occupancy is being requested shall meet all minimum standard codes (building, fire, etc.) applicable to all nonresidential structures in the county. Separation of the area specified by the temporary certificate of occupancy from any area of ongoing construction will be required. Fire marshal release shall also be required. The building official shall identify the limits of the occupied area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 3(5-164), 1-15-2014) 
Sec. 102-318. - Request for temporary certificate of occupancy. 
The owner/licensed contractor, to which a nonresidential building permit was issued, must submit in writing a request for issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy. This request shall include justification of the proposed need, construction plans identifying the requested area, and signed agreement holding the county harmless in the event of any claims that may arise during the period that the temporary certificate is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 3(5-165), 1-15-2014) 
Sec. 102-319. - Time limit for temporary certificate of occupancy. 
The duration of the temporary certificate of occupancy shall not exceed 45 days. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 3(5-166), 1-15-2014) 
Sec. 102-320. - Expiration of temporary certificate of occupancy. 
The temporary certificate of occupancy shall expire on the date provided thereon or on the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is first to occur. However, if the temporary certificate of occupancy expires prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the property owner acknowledges that the property owner is subject to a daily fine for every day after the expiration of the temporary certificate of occupancy until the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 3(5-167), 1-15-2014) 
Sec. 102-321. - Revocation. 
The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of the building code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-164; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 2, 1-15-2014) 
Secs. 102-322—102-337. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SERVICE UTILITIES 

Sec. 102-338. - Connection of service utilities. 
No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by the building code for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-171; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-339. - Temporary connection. 
The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility, source of energy, fuel or power. 
(Code 1992, § 5-172; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-340. - Authority to disconnect service utilities. 
The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of the utility service to the building, structure or system regulate by the building code and the referenced codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Code 1992, § 5-173; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-341—102-368. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 102-369. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the building code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-181; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-370. - Notice. 
The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the building code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the building code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-182; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-371. - Prosecution. 
If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to request the solicitor general of the county state court to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the building code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 5-183; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-372. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates a provision of the building code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the building code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 5-184; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-373—102-402. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - STOP WORK ORDER 

Sec. 102-403. - Authority. 
Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by the building code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of the building code, other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of the building code, or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(Code 1992, § 5-186; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-404. - Issuance. 
The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
(Code 1992, § 5-187; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-405. - Unlawful continuance. 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-188; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-406—102-423. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - EMERGENCY MEASURES 

Sec. 102-424. - Imminent danger. 
When, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building that endangers life, or when any building or part of a building has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the building official is hereby authorized an empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "DANGER!—NO ENTRY." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same. 
(Code 1992, § 5-191; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-425. - Temporary safeguards. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of the building code, whenever, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the building official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the building official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(Code 1992, § 5-192; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-426. - Closing streets. 
When necessary for public safety, the building official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(Code 1992, § 5-193; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-427. - Emergency repairs. 
For the purposes of this section, the building official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(Code 1992, § 5-194; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-428. - Costs of emergency repairs. 
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1992, § 5-195; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-429. - Hearing. 
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the board of commissioners of the county, be afforded a hearing as described in the building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-196; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-430. - Emergency declaration. 
In the event of a national, state, or local emergency declaration, the building official may waive or augment the provisions of this chapter as needed during the periods of emergency to protect public safety. 
(Code 1992, § 5-197; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-431. - Disaster assessment. 
(a)  Notification. Upon notification from emergency first responder personnel, law enforcement personnel or others of a disaster to a building or structure, the building official shall make or cause to be made any necessary visual, nondestructive inspections to determine: 
(1)  Immediate hazards that jeopardize public safety, health or general welfare; 
(2)  Extent of damage; 
(3)  Necessity to evacuate or condemn the building or structure; 
(4)  Necessity to disconnect or authorize reestablishment of utilities; 
(5)  What permits will be required; and 
(6)  Whether plans are necessary. 
(b)  Posting of placards. Placards shall be clearly posted at each entrance of the building or structure immediately upon completion of a disaster assessment as follows: 
(1)  Inspected—No Restriction on Lawful Use or Occupancy (Green); or 
(2)  Danger!—Limited Entry (Yellow); or 
(3)  Danger!—No Entry (Red). 
It shall be unlawful to remove placards posted by the building official. 
(c)  Policies and procedures. The building official shall establish policies and procedures for conducting disaster assessments. 
(Code 1992, § 5-198; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-432—102-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE RESIDENTIAL ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-461. - Application to residential code. 
The provisions of this article apply to the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as adopted in section 102-22. In this article the term "residential code" means the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings as adopted in section 102-22. 
(Code 1992, § 5-201; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-462. - Scope. 
The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures. 
(Code 1992, § 5-202; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-463. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the residential code is to provide minimum requirements to safeguard the public safety, health and general welfare through affordability, structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, light and ventilation, energy conservation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment. The purpose of the residential code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of the residential code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-203; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-464. - Public duty, warranty and quality control. 
The permitting, plans examination or inspection conducted with regard to a building or structure in accordance with the residential code constitutes a public duty and does not warrant or ensure the absence of any hazard, deficiency or other matter. Any duty created by or based on the residential code is transferred to the public, and no private cause of action is created by a breach of such duty. The residential code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any building or structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the department of building safety or the county be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections or plans examinations authorized by the residential code or any permits or certificates issued under the residential code. The building official checks for substantial compliance with the residential code, but reviews and inspections performed by the building official pursuant to this chapter do not create any guarantee or warranty that buildings, structures or service equipment have been constructed in accordance with all provisions of the residential code. The permitting, plans examination, or inspection of any building, structure, system, element, or construction document shall not be construed as a warranty of the physical condition or adequacy of such building, structure, system, element, or construction document, including, without limitation, a representation or warranty that a building or structure is complete, that it is in compliance with the residential code or any other law, that it was inspected, that it is safe or ready for occupancy or that it meets any particular degree of quality or workmanship. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the residential code except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. The amount and quality of inspection and other services provided is discretionary with the building official and may vary in response to the amount of staff, work load, training and experience, funding and other pertinent factors affecting whether and how inspection is made or whether any hazard, deficiency or similar matter is observed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-204; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-465. - Existing structures. 
(a)  The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of the residential code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in the residential code, the International Property Maintenance Code or the International Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
(b)  Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to the requirements for a new structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with all of the requirements of the residential code, unless otherwise stated. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the building. 
(Code 1992, § 5-205; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-466. - Appendices. 
(a)  Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically referenced herein or in the adopting ordinance. 
(b)  Appendix Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs, G adopted. Appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs of the 2006 International Residential Code for One-and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby adopted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-206; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-467—102-485. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 102-486. - Required. 
Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the residential code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit. If a licensed contractor performs construction without obtaining any necessary permit, there is a rebuttable presumption that the contractor willfully and deliberately violated the building laws of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-211; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-487. - Work exempt from permit. 
Exemption from permit requirements of the residential code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of the residential Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. All work exempt from a permit shall comply with chapter 110, pertaining to zoning. Although work may be exempt from a building permit, separate electrical, fuel, gas, mechanical or plumbing permits may be required and vice-versa. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Building . 
a.  One-story detached accessory structures less than 200 square feet (18.58 m 2 ) used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses. 
b.  Fences not over eight feet (2438.4 mm) high. For the purposes of this section, the term "fences" means lightweight structures made of posts and boards, wire, pickets, or rails commonly used as an enclosure for a field or yard. 
c.  Walls not over four feet (1219.2 mm) in height measured from the grade to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge. For the purposes of this section, the term "walls" means structures made of masonry or concrete used as an enclosure for a field or yard. 
d.  Concrete or masonry pilasters not over eight feet (2438.4 mm) high and that do not exceed a minimum 3½:1 or a maximum 1:1 height-to-width ratio used in conjunction with fences or walls. Example: 3.5:1 equals eight feet or 96 inches + 3.5 equals 27.5 inches square pilaster and footing 1:1 equals eight feet. 
e.  Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1219.2 mm) in height measured from the grade to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge. For the purposes of this section, the term "retaining walls" means structures made of masonry, concrete, timber or similar materials used to retain earth, water, or other lateral pressure. For clarification purposes, cast in place walls that are part of the original foundation wall and retain earth, water, or other lateral pressure are not to be considered as retaining walls. Note: 1:1 ratio maximum length. If 45-degree angle at end of wall, 1.5:1 maximum ratio is allowed. 
f.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2:1. 
g.  Sidewalks and driveways. 
h.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work; shelving, casing, baseboards, wainscoting, or similar mill work. 
i.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep; portable spas installed at grade level with all heating and circulating equipment integral to the manufactured product; portable swimming pools (non-permanently installed pool) that may be readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its original integrity, and are not permanently attached to plumbing or electrical services. 
j.  Swings and other playground equipment. 
k.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
l.  Decks not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade and not over any basement or story below. 
m.  Screen and storm doors, storm shutters and doors, and window screens. 
n.  Roofing repairs and replacement, provided the new roofing material is identical to the existing roofing material, and the repair or replacement of structural sheathing (e.g. plywood, OSB, etc.) does not exceed 128 square feet (11.9 m 2 ). This exemption does not apply to the supporting structural system or components (e.g. trusses, rafters, ceiling joists, etc.). 
o.  Siding applied over existing siding; the replacement of vinyl or aluminum siding with hardboard panel siding. This exemption does not apply to the removal of structural panel sheathing. 
p.  Door and window replacement, provided the opening size, location, and operation (e.g. casement, single-hung, horizontal slider, etc.) remain the same; vehicle garage doors and garage door openers at existing approved vehicle garage door openings. 
q.  Guards (guardrails), stairs, and handrails associated with changes in elevation that are not associated with a structure as a means of egress element (e.g. landscape elevation changes). 
r.  Rain gutters and associated appurtenances. 
s.  Pull down stairs at existing approved attic access openings, provided the installation does not include the cutting away of any wall, partition, ceiling joist or portion thereof, or the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Minor repair or maintenance work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
b.  Low voltage systems including telecommunication, computer networking, security, audio and video systems; low voltage landscape lighting. 
c.  Installation or replacement of ceiling fans or light fixtures at existing approved permanently installed lighting outlet locations. 
d.  Replacement of switches for lighting and receptacle outlets at existing approved permanently installed device locations, provided the new device type, voltage, ampacity, and method of grounding are identical to the existing device. 
e.  Replacement of receptacle outlets at existing approved permanently installed outlet locations, provided the new outlet type, voltage, ampacity, and method of grounding are identical to the existing outlet. 
f.  Installation or replacement of electric cooking, food refrigeration, dishwashing, and clothes washing appliances, provided the installation or replacement does not involve or require the relocation of the existing approved permanently installed receptacle outlet or wiring; the approved existing circuit voltage and ampacity is within the appliance's specifications; and the appliance is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. This section includes ground-mounted air conditioning units, microwaves, cooking exhaust hoods, cooktops, ranges, ovens, warming drawers, dishwashers, clothes washers, and clothes dryers. This section does not include water heaters, furnaces, or ventilation equipment. Installation of appliances is not required for inspection purposes on new construction, but if the appliances are installed, they will be inspected for code violations and be brought into Code compliance before approval. 
g.  Replacement of any overcurrent device of the required capacity in the same location, provided the new overcurrent device manufacturer, type and rating are identical to the existing overcurrent device. 
h.  Temporary decorative seasonal lighting. 
(3)  Fuel gas. 
a.  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances. 
b.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
c.  Portable fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
d.  Installation or replacement of gas cooking and clothes drying appliances, provided the installation or replacement does not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves or pipes; the approved existing piping system fuel type and output is within the appliance's specifications; and the appliance is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. This section includes cooktops, ranges, ovens, grills, barbeques, and clothes dryers. This section does not include factory-built fireplaces, water heaters, or furnaces. Installation of appliances is not required for inspection purposes on new construction, but if the appliances are installed, they will be inspected for code violations and be brought into code compliance before approval. 
e.  Underground and above-ground storage tanks for liquefied petroleum gas (propane). 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Portable heating appliances. 
b.  Portable ventilation appliances. 
c.  Portable cooling units. 
d.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the residential code. 
e.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
f.  Portable evaporative coolers. 
g.  Self-contained refrigeration systems containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
h.  Portable fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
i.  The installation or replacement of ground-mounted air conditioning units. The installation of ground-mounted air conditioning units is not required for inspection purposes on new construction, but if the units are installed, they will be inspected for code violations and be brought into code compliance before approval. 
(5)  Plumbing. 
a.  Water filtration systems or water softeners. 
b.  Replacement of sinks, lavatories, faucets, and water closets at existing approved permanently installed locations, provided the new sink, lavatory, faucet and water closet does not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves or pipes. 
c.  Private sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, disposal fields and seepage pits. 
d.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with the new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in the residential code. 
e.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
f.  Location, drilling or installation of well casing. 
g.  The installation or repair of water service piping from the utility meter to the building envelope. 
(6)  Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official. For the purposes of this section, emergency shall be defined as an unexpected situation requiring prompt action to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare. This section shall not be construed as allowing work to be done without a permit to restore comfort and convenience items, equipment or systems. Emergency work performed shall not be done contrary to the provisions of the residential code. 
(7)  Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
(8)  Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution, metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right. 
(Code 1992, § 5-212; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 2007-04, § 2, 3-22-2007; Ord. No. 2007-08, § I, 11-7-2007) 
Sec. 102-488. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Required. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the department of building safety for that purpose. Such application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which the application is made. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in section 102-514. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the building official. 
(b)  Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the residential code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas. For applications for reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of existing buildings or structures located in an area prone to flooding as established by table R301.2(1), the building official shall examine or cause to be examined the construction documents and shall prepare a finding with regard to the value of the proposed work. For buildings that have sustained damage of any origin, the value of the proposed work shall include the cost to repair the building or structure to its predamage condition. If the building official finds that the value of the proposed work equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage has occurred or the improvement is started, the finding shall be provided to the board for a determination of substantial improvement or substantial damage. Applications determined by the board to constitute substantial improvement or substantial damage shall meet the requirements of R324 of the residential code. 
(c)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not exceeding 180 days. No application shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. A request for an extension must be received by the building official prior to the expiration of the application. The building official is not required to notify the applicant prior to the applications expiration or that the application has expired. 
(Code 1992, § 5-213; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-489. - Validity of permit. 
The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the residential code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the residential code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of the residential code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-214; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-490. - Expiration. 
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. A minimum of one inspection approval must be obtained as evidence that work was commenced or that work has continued. The determination as to whether work was suspended shall be based on the most recent inspection approval date. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for an additional period of not more than 180 days provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work. No permit shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Requests for extensions must be received by the building official prior to the expiration of the permit. The building official is not required to notify the permittee prior to the permits expiration or that the permit has expired. The fee for an extension shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work. 
(Code 1992, § 5-215; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-491. - Suspension or revocation. 
The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of the residential code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the residential code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-216; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-492. - Placement of permit. 
Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the building permit or copy thereof is posted on the site of the work until the completion of the project. The posted permit shall be visible from the street and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-217; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-493. - Responsibility. 
It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for the installation or repair of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which the residential code is applicable, to comply with the residential code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-218; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-494. - Inspection record card and approved construction documents. 
Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the permittee has made available an inspection record card and approved construction documents on the premises and in such a position to allow the building official convenient access and use. These items shall be protected from the elements and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-219; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-495. - Work without a permit; investigation required. 
(a)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The building official shall establish policies and procedures for work without a permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5-220; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-496—102-513. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 102-514. - Submittal documents. 
(a)  Special conditions. Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that the reviewing of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with the residential code. 
(b)  Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be drawn to scale upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the residential code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official. Sketches and pencil or other erasable media used to prepare construction documents shall not be accepted by the building official. 
(c)  Policies and procedures. The building official shall establish policies and procedures for the minimum standards of acceptance for construction documents. 
(d)  Manufacturer's installation instructions. Manufacturer's installation instructions, as required by the residential code, shall be available on the job site at the time of inspection. 
(e)  Information for construction in flood hazard areas. For buildings and structures located in whole or in part in flood hazard areas as established by table R301.2(1) in the residential code, construction documents shall include: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones and the design flood elevation, as appropriate; 
(2)  The elevation of the proposed lowest floor, including basement; in areas of shallow flooding (AO zones), the height of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, above the highest adjacent grade; 
(3)  The elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member in coastal high hazard areas (V zone); and 
(4)  If design flood elevations are not included on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM), the building official and the applicant shall obtain and reasonably utilize any design flood elevation and floodway data available from other sources. 
(Code 1992, § 5-231; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-515. - Site plan. 
The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site and distances from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. 
(Code 1992, § 5-232; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-516. - Examination of documents. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined construction documents for residential code compliance. 
(1)  Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by a stamp which states "REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE." One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(2)  Previous approvals. The residential code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of the residential code and has not been abandoned. 
(3)  Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the residential code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-233; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-517. - Amended construction documents. 
Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. Willful and prejudicial departure from or disregard of construction documents in any material respect without the approval of the building official is unlawful. 
(Code 1992, § 5-234; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-518. - Retention of construction documents. 
One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws. 
(Code 1992, § 5-235; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-519—102-544. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FEES 

Sec. 102-545. - Payment of fees. 
A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
(Code 1992, § 5-241; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-546. - Schedule of permit and other fees. 
(a)  Schedule. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit or other designated activity shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(b)  Investigation fees: work without a permit. Where work, for which a permit is required, has been commenced prior to obtaining a permit, an investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the residential code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum permit fee set forth in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of the residential code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-242; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-547. - Building permit valuations. 
Building permit valuation shall include total value of the work for which a permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other permanent systems, including materials and labor. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-243; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-548. - Other fees. 
The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-244; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-549. - Refunds. 
(a)  The building official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(b)  Refunds shall not be given: 
(1)  For an application or permit that has expired. 
(2)  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the application submittal date. 
(3)  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the permit issuance date. 
(4)  For that component of the permit fee which is representative of the development impact fee. 
(Code 1992, § 5-245; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-550—102-576. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 102-577. - Generally. 
Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the residential code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the residential code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 5-251; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-578. - Preliminary inspection. 
Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine, or cause to be examined, buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-252; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-579. - Types of inspections. 
(a)  On-site construction. For onsite construction, from time to time the building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make or cause to be made any necessary inspections and shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the same fails to comply with the residential code. 
(b)  Foundation inspection. Inspection of the foundation shall be made after poles or piers are set or trenches or basement areas are excavated and any required forms erected and any required reinforcing steel is in place and supported prior to the placing of concrete. The foundation inspection shall include excavations for thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions, structural supports, or equipment and special requirements for wood foundations. 
(c)  Plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems inspection. Rough inspection of plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems shall be made prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection. Exception: Backfilling of ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance with section M2105.1 of the masonry code prior to inspection shall be permitted. 
(d)  Floodplain inspections. For construction in areas prone to flooding as established by table R301.2(1) of the residential code, upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building official shall require submission of documentation, prepared and sealed by a registered design professional, of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, required in section R324 of the residential code. 
(e)  Frame and masonry inspection. Inspection of framing and masonry construction shall be made after the roof, masonry, all framing, firestopping, draftstopping and bracing are in place and after the plumbing, mechanical and electrical rough inspections are approved. 
(f)  Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections above, the building official may make or require any other inspections to ascertain compliance with the residential code and other laws enforced by the building official. 
(1)  Fire-resistance-rated construction inspection. Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to location on property, the building official shall require an inspection of such construction after all lathing and/or wallboard is in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
(2)  Lot and foundation survey. A survey of the lot and foundation shall be required by the building official to verify that the building or structure is located within the designated setbacks and in accordance with the approved plans for the following: 
a.  For all newly constructed single-family dwellings. 
b.  For residential accessory structures, pools and additions located within two feet of the setback, floodplain and/or watershed protection areas. 
The foundation survey shall occur after concrete is placed and shall be submitted to and approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department prior to the commencement of any framing operations or work. It shall be unlawful to commence any framing operations or work until the foundation survey is approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department. Exception: For pools, the survey shall be submitted to and approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department after excavation and the placement of forms and reinforcing steel, but prior to the placement of any concrete, shotcrete or gunite. For pre-manufactured pools, the survey shall be submitted to and approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department after excavation, but prior to the placement of the pool shell. 
(g)  Final inspection. Final inspection shall be made after the permitted work is complete and prior to occupancy. 
(Code 1992, § 5-253; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-580. - Inspection agencies. 
The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(Code 1992, § 5-254; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-581. - Inspection requests. 
It shall be the duty of the permit holder or their agent to notify the building official that such work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by the residential code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work. 
(Code 1992, § 5-255; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-582. - Approval required. 
Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with the residential code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-256; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-583. - Work covered without inspection approval: investigation required. 
(a)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been covered without first obtaining the necessary inspection approval, a special investigation shall be made before subsequent inspections are approved. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The building official shall establish policies and procedures for work covered without inspection approval. 
(Code 1992, § 5-257; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-584—102-614. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 102-615. - Use and occupancy. 
(a)  No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and not change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the residential code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the residential code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Certificates of occupancy are not required for work exempt from permits under section 102-487. 
(2)  Accessory buildings or structures. 
(Code 1992, § 5-261; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-616. - Change in use. 
Changes in the character or use of an existing structure shall not be made except as specified in sections 3406 and 3407 of the International Building Code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-262; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-617. - Certificate issued. 
After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of the residential code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following: 
(1)  The building permit number. 
(2)  The address of the structure. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner. 
(4)  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
(5)  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of the residential code. 
(6)  The name of the building official. 
(7)  The edition of the residential code under which the permit was issued. 
(8)  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided and whether the sprinkler system is required. 
(9)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5-263; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-618. - Revocation. 
The building official shall, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of the residential code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the residential code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-264; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-619—102-639. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SERVICE UTILITIES 

Sec. 102-640. - Connection of service utilities. 
No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to ay building or system that is regulated by the residential code for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-271; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-641. - Temporary connection. 
The building official shall have the authority to authorize and approve the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility, source of energy, fuel or power. 
(Code 1992, § 5-272; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-642. - Authority to disconnect. 
The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of the utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the residential code and the referenced codes and standards in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without the approval required by section 102-640 or 102-641. The building official shall notify the serving utility and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action if not notified prior to disconnection. The owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Code 1992, § 5-273; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-643—102-672. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 102-673. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by the residential code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the residential code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-281; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-674. - Notice. 
The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the residential code, or in violation of a detail statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the residential code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-282; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-675. - Prosecution. 
If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to request the solicitor general of the county state court to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the residential code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 5-283; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-676. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates a provision of the residential code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the residential code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 5-284; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-677—102-695. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - STOP WORK ORDER 

Sec. 102-696. - Notice to owner. 
Upon notice from the building official that work on any building or structure is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of the residential code, other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of the residential code, or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work will be permitted to resume. 
(Code 1992, § 5-291; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-697. - Unlawful continuance. 
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-292; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-698—102-722. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - EMERGENCY MEASURES 

Sec. 102-723. - Imminent danger. 
When, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building that endangers life, or when any building or part of a building has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the building official is hereby authorized an empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "DANGER!—NO ENTRY." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same. 
(Code 1992, § 5-293; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-724. - Temporary safeguards. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of the residential code, whenever, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the building official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the building official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(Code 1992, § 5-294; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-725. - Closing streets. 
When necessary for public safety, the building official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(Code 1992, § 5-295; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-726. - Emergency repairs. 
For the purposes of this section, the building official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(Code 1992, § 5-296; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-727. - Costs of emergency repairs. 
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1992, § 5-297; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-728. - Hearing. 
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the board of commissioners of the county, be afforded a hearing as described in the residential code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-298; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-729. - Emergency declaration. 
In the event of a national, state, or local emergency declaration, the building official may waive or augment the provisions of this chapter as needed during the periods of emergency to protect public safety. 
(Code 1992, § 5-299; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-730. - Disaster assessment. 
(a)  Notification. Upon notification from emergency first responder personnel, law enforcement personnel or others of a disaster to a building or structure, the building official shall make or cause to be made any necessary visual, nondestructive inspections to determine: 
(1)  Immediate hazards that jeopardize public safety, health or general welfare; 
(2)  Extent of damage; 
(3)  Necessity to evacuate or condemn the building or structure; 
(4)  Necessity to disconnect or authorize reestablishment of utilities; 
(5)  What permits will be required; and 
(6)  Whether plans are necessary. 
(b)  Posting of placards. Placards shall be clearly posted at each entrance of the building or structure immediately upon completion of a disaster assessment as follows: 
(1)  Inspected—No Restriction on Lawful Use or Occupancy (Green); 
(2)  Danger!—Limited Entry (Yellow); or 
(3)  Danger!—No Entry (Red). 
It shall be unlawful to remove placards posted by the building official. 
(c)  Policies and procedures. The building official shall establish policies and procedures for conducting disaster assessments. 
(Code 1992, § 5-300; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 4, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-731—102-758. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROCEDURES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE MECHANICAL CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-759. - Title. 
The provisions of this article apply to the International Mechanical Code, as adopted in section 102-22. In this article the term "mechanical code" means the International Mechanical Code as adopted in section 102-22. 
(Code 1992, § 5-301; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-760. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of the mechanical code shall apply to the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of environmental conditions and related processes within buildings. This code shall also regulate those mechanical systems, system components, equipment and appliances specifically addressed herein. The installation of fuel gas distribution piping and equipment, fuel-gas-fired appliances and fuel-gas-fired appliance venting systems shall be regulated by the International Fuel Gas Code. Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories high with separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International Residential Code. 
(b)  Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
(c)  Appendix C Design and Installation of Residential Flexible Ductwork Systems—Adopted. Appendix C Design and Installation of Residential Flexible Ductwork Systems of the Georgia State Amendments to the International Mechanical Code (2006 edition), revised January 1, 2007, is hereby adopted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-302; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-761. - Intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the mechanical code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of mechanical systems. The purpose of the mechanical code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of the mechanical code. 
(b)  Public duty, warranty and quality control. The permitting, plans examination or inspection conducted with regard to a mechanical system or equipment in accordance with the mechanical code constitutes a public duty and does not warrant or ensure the absence of any hazard, deficiency or other matter. Any duty created by or based on the mechanical code is transferred to the public, and no private cause of action is created by a breach of such duty. The mechanical shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any mechanical system or equipment for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the department of mechanical inspection or the county be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections or plans examinations authorized by the mechanical code or any permits or certificates issued under the mechanical code. The code official checks for substantial compliance with the mechanical code, but reviews and inspections performed by the code official pursuant to this chapter do not create any guarantee or warranty that mechanical systems or equipment have been constructed in accordance with all provisions of the mechanical code. The permitting, plans examination, or inspection of any mechanical system or equipment or construction document shall not be construed as a warranty of the physical condition or adequacy of such mechanical system or equipment or construction document, including without limitation a representation or warranty that a mechanical system or equipment is complete, that it is in compliance with the mechanical code or any other law, that it was inspected, that it is safe or ready for occupancy or that it meets any particular degree of quality or workmanship. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the mechanical code except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. The amount and quality of inspection and other services provided is discretionary with the code official and may vary in response to the amount of staff, work load, training and experience, funding and other pertinent factors affecting whether and how inspection is made or whether any hazard, deficiency or similar matter is observed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-303; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-762. - Existing installations. 
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, a provision in the mechanical code shall not require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, nor prevent the continued utilization and maintenance of, a mechanical system lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the mechanical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-304; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-763. - Maintenance. 
Mechanical systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design in a safe and sanitary condition. All device or safeguards required by the mechanical code shall be maintained in compliance with the mechanical code edition under which they were installed. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for maintenance of mechanical systems. To determine compliance with this provision, the code official shall have the authority to require a mechanical system to be reinspected. 
(Code 1992, § 5-305; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-764. - Additions, alterations or repairs. 
Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to a mechanical system shall conform to that required for a new mechanical system without requiring the existing mechanical system to comply with all the requirements of the mechanical code. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing mechanical system to become unsafe, unsanitary or overloaded. Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing mechanical systems shall be permitted in the same manner and arrangement as in the existing system, provided that such repairs or replacements are not hazardous and are approved. 
(Code 1992, § 5-306; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-765. - Change in occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful to make any change in the occupancy of any structure that will subject the structure to any special provision of the mechanical code without approval of the code official. The code official shall certify that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupancy and that such change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1992, § 5-307; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-766. - Historic buildings. 
The provisions of the mechanical code relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings. 
(Code 1992, § 5-308; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-767. - Moved buildings. 
Except as determined by section 102-762, mechanical systems that are a part of buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of the mechanical code for new installations. 
(Code 1992, § 5-309; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-768. - Requirements not covered by mechanical code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed mechanical system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the mechanical code shall be determined by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-310; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-769. - Severability. 
If any action, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the mechanical code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the mechanical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-311; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-770—102-791. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 102-792. - When required. 
Any owner, authorized agent or contractor who intends to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace a mechanical system, the installation of which is regulated by the mechanical code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit. Exception: Where equipment and appliance replacements or repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next business day of the department of mechanical inspection. For the purposes of this section, emergency shall be defined as an unexpected situation requiring prompt action to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare. This section shall not be construed as allowing work to be done without a permit to restore comfort and convenience items, equipment or systems. Emergency work performed shall not be done contrary to the provisions of the mechanical code. If a licensed contractor performs work without obtaining any necessary permit, there is a rebuttable presumption that the contractor willfully and deliberately violated the building laws of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-321; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-793. - Permits not required. 
Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Portable heating appliances; 
(2)  Portable ventilation appliances and equipment; 
(3)  Portable cooling units; 
(4)  Steam, hot water or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment or appliances regulated by the mechanical code; 
(5)  The replacement of any minor part that does not alter the approval of equipment or an appliance or make such equipment or appliance unsafe; 
(6)  Portable evaporative coolers; 
(7)  Self-contained refrigeration systems that contain ten pounds (4.5 kg) or less of refrigerant, or that are actuated by motors of one horsepower (0.75 kW) or less; and 
(8)  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
Exemption from the permit requirements of the mechanical code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions the mechanical code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-322; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-794. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be file with the code official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or an authorized agent. The permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure and shall contain such other information required by the code official. 
(b)  Construction documents. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the mechanical code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. Construction documents, engineering calculations, diagrams and other such data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each application for a permit. The code official shall require construction documents, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by a registered design professional where required by state law. Where special conditions exist, the code official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. Construction documents shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that the work conforms to the provisions of the mechanical code. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for mechanical systems and the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking. Sketches and pencil or other erasable media used to prepare construction documents shall not be accepted by the code official. Exception: The code official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with the mechanical code. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for the minimum standards of acceptance for construction documents. 
(c)  Action on application. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the mechanical code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(d)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the code official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not exceeding 180 days. No application shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. A request for an extension must be received by the code official prior to the expiration of the application. The code official is not required to notify the applicant prior to the application(s expiration or that the application has expired. 
(Code 1992, § 5-323; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-795. - Permit issuance. 
(a)  Review by code official. The application, construction documents and other data filed by an applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the code official. If the code official finds that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the mechanical code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and that the fees specified in section 102-796 have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant. 
(b)  Approved construction documents. When the code official issues a permit where construction documents are required, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing and stamped "Reviewed For Code Compliance." Such approved construction documents shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization form the code official. All work shall be done in accordance with the approved construction documents. The code official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of a part of a mechanical system before the construction documents for the whole system have been submitted or approved, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the mechanical code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire mechanical system will be granted. 
(c)  Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. Willful and prejudicial departure from or disregard of construction documents in any material respect without the approval of the code official is unlawful. 
(d)  Validity. The issuance of a permit or approval of construction documents shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the mechanical code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the mechanical code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the code official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of the mechanical code or of other ordinances of this jurisdiction. The code official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of the mechanical code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(e)  Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. A minimum of one inspection approval must be obtained as evidence that work was commenced or that work has continued. The determination as to whether work was suspended shall be based on the most recent inspection approval date. 
(f)  Extensions. The code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for an additional period of not more than 180 days provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work. No permit shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Requests for extensions must be received by the code official prior to the expiration of the permit. The code official is not required to notify the permittee prior to the permit's expiration or that the permit has expired. The fee for an extension shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work. 
(g)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The code official shall revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of the mechanical code in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the construction documents upon which the permit or approval was based. 
(h)  Retention of construction documents. One set of construction documents shall be retained by the code official until final approval of the work covered therein. One set of approved construction documents shall be returned to the applicant, and said set shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. 
(i)  Placement of permit. Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the building permit or copy thereof is posted on the site of the work until the completion of the project. The posted permit shall be visible from the street and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the code official. 
(j)  Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for which the mechanical code is applicable, to comply with the mechanical code. 
(k)  Inspection record card and approved construction documents. Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the permittee has made available an inspection record card and approved construction documents on the premises and in such a position to allow the code official convenient access and use. These items shall be protected from the elements and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the code official. 
(l)  Work without a permit; investigation required. Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
(m)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for work without a permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5-324; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-796. - Fees. 
(a)  Payment of fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in subsection (c) of this section have been paid, and an amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase of the mechanical system, has been paid. 
(b)  Investigation fees; work without a permit. Where work, for which a permit is required, has been commenced prior to obtaining a permit, an investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the mechanical code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum permit fee set forth in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of the mechanical code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(c)  Fee schedule. For mechanical work requiring a permit or other designated activity, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(d)  Fee refunds. 
(1)  The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(2)  Refunds shall not be given: 
a.  For an application or permit that has expired. 
b.  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the application submittal date. 
c.  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the permit issuance date. 
d.  For that component of the permit fee which is representative of the development impact fee. 
(Code 1992, § 5-325; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-797—102-815. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTIONS AND TESTING 

Sec. 102-816. - Generally. 
Work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the code official and such work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the mechanical code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the mechanical code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the code official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 5-331; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-817. - Preliminary inspection. 
(a)  Review by code official. Before issuing a permit, the code official is authorized to examine, or cause to be examined, mechanical systems for which an application has been filed. 
(b)  Required inspections and testing. The code official, upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder's agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of any violations that must be corrected. The holder of the permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of such inspections. 
(1)  Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and other rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the job site. 
(2)  Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other components to be concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the mechanical system. 
(4)  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the code official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the mechanical code and other laws that are enforced by the department of mechanical inspection. Exception: Ground-source heat pump loop systems tested in accordance with section 1208.1.1 of the mechanical code shall be permitted to be backfilled prior to inspection. 
The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit the operation of any heating equipment or appliances installed to replace existing heating equipment or appliances serving an occupied portion of a structure in the event a request for inspection of such heating equipment or appliances has been filed with the department not more than 48 hours after replacement work is completed, and before any portion of such equipment appliances is concealed by any permanent portion of the structure. 
(c)  Approved inspection agencies. Test reports submitted to the code official for consideration shall be developed by approved agencies that have satisfied the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(d)  Evaluation and followup inspection services. Prior to the approval of a closed, prefabricated construction assembly having concealed mechanical work and the issuance of a mechanical permit, the code official shall require the submittal of an evaluation report on each prefabricated construction assembly indicating the complete details of the mechanical system, including a description of the system and its components, the basis upon which the system is being evaluated, test results and similar information, and other data as necessary for the code official to determine conformance to the mechanical code. 
(1)  Evaluation service. The code official shall designate the evaluation service of an approved agency as the evaluation agency, and review such agency(s evaluation report for adequacy and conformance to the mechanical code. 
(2)  Followup inspection. Except where ready access is provided to mechanical systems, service equipment and accessories for complete inspection at the site without disassembly or dismantling, the code official shall conduct the frequency of in-plant inspections necessary to ensure conformance to the approved evaluation report or shall designate an independent, approved inspection agency to conduct such inspections. The inspection agency shall furnish the code official with the followup inspection manual and a report of inspections upon request, and the mechanical system shall have an identifying label permanently affixed to the system indicating that factory inspections have been performed. 
(3)  Test and inspection records. All required test and inspection records shall be available to the code official at all times during the fabrication of the mechanical system and the erection of the building, or such records as the code official designates shall be filed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-332; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-818. - Testing. 
(a)  Required. Mechanical systems shall be tested as required in the mechanical code and in accordance with subsections (b) through (d) of this section. Tests shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the code official. 
(b)  New, altered, extended or repaired systems. New mechanical systems and parts of existing systems that have been altered, extended, renovated or repaired shall be tested as prescribed herein to disclose leaks and defects. 
(c)  Apparatus, material and labor for tests. Apparatus, material and labor required for testing a mechanical system or part thereof shall be furnished by the permit holder. 
(d)  Reinspection and testing. Where any work or installation does not pass any initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made to comply with the mechanical code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for inspection and testing. 
(Code 1992, § 5-333; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-819. - Approval. 
After the prescribed tests and inspections indicate that the work complies in all respects with the mechanical code, a notice of approval shall be issued by the code official. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the code official. The code official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the same fails to comply with the mechanical code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-334; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-820. - Temporary connection. 
The code official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of a mechanical system to the sources of energy for the purpose of testing mechanical systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1992, § 5-335; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-821. - Work covered without inspection approval; investigation required. 
(a)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been covered without first obtaining the necessary inspection approval, a special investigation shall be made before subsequent inspections are approved. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for work covered without inspection approval. 
(Code 1992, § 5-336; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-822. - Inspection requests. 
It shall be the duty of the permit holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the code official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspection of such work that are required by the mechanical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-337; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-823—102-852. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 102-853. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize a mechanical system, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the mechanical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-341; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-854. - Notice. 
The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of mechanical work in violation of the provisions of the mechanical code, or in violation of a detail statement or the approved construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the mechanical code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-342; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-855. - Prosecution. 
If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the code official shall request the solicitor general of the county state court to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the mechanical code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 5-343; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-856. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates a provision of the mechanical code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, installs, alters or repairs mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the mechanical code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 5-344; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-857. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the code official, work on any mechanical system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the mechanical code, other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of the mechanical code, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. When an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-345; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-858. - Abatement. 
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the plumbing on or about any premises. 
(Code 1992, § 5-346; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-859. - Unsafe mechanical systems. 
(a)  Declaration of public nuisance. A mechanical system that is unsafe or that constitutes a fire or health hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life is hereby declared unsafe. Use of a mechanical system regulated by the mechanical code constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Any such unsafe equipment is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. 
(b)  Authority to condemn mechanical systems. Whenever the code official determines that any mechanical system, or portion thereof, regulated by the mechanical code has become hazardous to life, health or property or has become unsanitary, the code official shall order in writing that such plumbing either be removed or restored to a safe or sanitary condition. A time limit for compliance with such order shall be specified in the written notice. No person shall use or maintain a defective mechanical system after receiving such notice. When such mechanical system is to be disconnected, written notice as prescribed in section 102-854 shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life or property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice. 
(c)  Authority to order disconnection of energy sources. The code official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of energy sources supplied to a building, structure or mechanical system regulated by the technical codes in case of an emergency, where necessary, to eliminate an immediate danger to life or property. Where possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified of the decision to disconnect utility service prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service systems shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. Where energy sources are provided by a public utility, the code official shall immediately notify the serving utility of the issuance of such order to disconnect. 
(d)  Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make connection from any energy source to mechanical systems regulated by the mechanical code that have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the code official or the use of which has been ordered to be disconnected by the code official until the code official authorizes the reconnection and use of such mechanical systems. When a mechanical system is maintained in violation of the mechanical code, and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the code official shall institute any appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-347; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-860—102-881. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EMERGENCY MEASURES 

Sec. 102-882. - Imminent danger. 
When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building that endangers life, or when any building or part of a building has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized an empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "DANGER!—NO ENTRY." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same. 
(Code 1992, § 5-351; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-883. - Temporary safeguards. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of the mechanical code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(Code 1992, § 5-352; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-884. - Closing streets. 
When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(Code 1992, § 5-353; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-885. - Emergency repairs. 
For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(Code 1992, § 5-354; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-886. - Costs of emergency repairs. 
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1992, § 5-355; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-887. - Hearing. 
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the board of commissioners of the county, be afforded a hearing as described in the mechanical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-356; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-888. - Emergency declaration. 
In the event of a national, state, or local emergency declaration, the code official may waive or augment the provisions of this chapter as needed during the periods of emergency to protect public safety. 
(Code 1992, § 5-357; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-889. - Disaster assessment. 
(a)  Notification. Upon notification from emergency first responder personnel, law enforcement personnel or others of a disaster to a building or structure, the code official shall make or cause to be made any necessary visual, nondestructive inspections to determine: 
(1)  Immediate hazards that jeopardize public safety, health or general welfare; 
(2)  Extent of damage; 
(3)  Necessity to evacuate or condemn the building or structure; 
(4)  Necessity to disconnect or authorize reestablishment of utilities; 
(5)  What permits will be required; and 
(6)  Whether plans are necessary. 
(b)  Posting of placards. Placards shall be clearly posted at each entrance of the building or structure immediately upon completion of a disaster assessment as follows: 
(1)  Inspected—No Restriction on Lawful Use or Occupancy (Green); 
(2)  Danger!—Limited Entry (Yellow); or 
(3)  Danger!—No Entry (Red). 
It shall be unlawful to remove placards posted by the code official. 
(c)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for conducting disaster assessments. 
(Code 1992, § 5-358; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-890—102-911. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROCEDURES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE PLUMBING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-912. - Title. 
The provisions of this article apply to the International Plumbing Code, as adopted in section 102-22. In this article the term "plumbing code" means the International Plumbing Code as adopted in section 102-22. 
(Code 1992, § 5-361; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-913. - Scope. 
The provisions of the plumbing code shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems within this jurisdiction. The plumbing code shall also regulate nonflammable medical gas, inhalation anesthetic, vacuum piping, nonmedical oxygen systems and sanitary and condensate vacuum collection systems. The installation of fuel gas distribution piping and equipment, fuel-gas-fired water heaters and water heater venting systems shall be regulated by the International Fuel Gas Code. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-362; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-914. - Intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the plumbing code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of plumbing equipment and systems. The purpose of the plumbing code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of the plumbing code. 
(b)  Public duty, warranty and quality control. The permitting, plans examination or inspection conducted with regard to a plumbing system in accordance with the plumbing code constitutes a public duty and does not warrant or ensure the absence of any hazard, deficiency or other matter. Any duty created by or based on the plumbing code is transferred to the public, and no private cause of action is created by a breach of such duty. The plumbing code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any plumbing system for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the department of plumbing inspection or the county be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections or plans examinations authorized by the plumbing code or any permits or certificates issued under the plumbing code. The code official checks for substantial compliance with the plumbing code, but reviews and inspections performed by the code official pursuant to this chapter do not create any guarantee or warranty that plumbing systems have been constructed in accordance with all provisions of the plumbing code. The permitting, plans examination, or inspection of any plumbing system or construction document shall not be construed as a warranty of the physical condition or adequacy of such plumbing system or construction document, including without limitation a representation or warranty that a plumbing system is complete, that it is in compliance with the plumbing code or any other law, that it was inspected, that it is safe or ready for occupancy or that it meets any particular degree of quality or workmanship. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the plumbing code, except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. The amount and quality of inspection and other services provided is discretionary with the code official and may vary in response to the amount of staff, work load, training and experience, funding and other pertinent factors affecting whether and how inspection is made or whether any hazard, deficiency or similar matter is observed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-363; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-915. - Existing installations. 
Plumbing systems lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the plumbing code shall be permitted to have their use and maintenance continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property is created by such plumbing system. 
(Code 1992, § 5-364; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-916. - Maintenance. 
All plumbing systems, materials and appurtenances, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design in a safe and sanitary condition. All device or safeguards required by the plumbing code shall be maintained in compliance with the plumbing code edition under which they were installed. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for maintenance of plumbing systems. To determine compliance with this provision, the code official shall have the authority to require any plumbing system to be reinspected. 
(Code 1992, § 5-365; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-917. - Additions, alterations or repairs. 
Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to any plumbing system shall conform to that required for a new plumbing system without requiring the existing plumbing system to comply with all the requirements of the plumbing code. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing system to become unsafe, unsanitary or overloaded. Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing plumbing systems shall be permitted in the same manner and arrangement as in the existing system, provided that such repairs or replacements are not hazardous and are approved. 
(Code 1992, § 5-366; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-918. - Change in occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful to make any change in the occupancy of any structure that will subject the structure to any special provision of the plumbing code without approval of the code official. The code official shall certify that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupancy and that such change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1992, § 5-366; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-919. - Historic buildings. 
The provisions of the plumbing code relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings. 
(Code 1992, § 5-368; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-920. - Moved buildings. 
Except as determined by section 101.4 of the plumbing code, plumbing systems that are a part of buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of the plumbing code for new installations. 
(Code 1992, § 5-369; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-921. - Requirements not covered by plumbing code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the plumbing code shall be determined by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-370; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-922. - Severability. 
If any action, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the plumbing code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the plumbing code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-371; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-923—102-947. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 102-948. - When required. 
(a)  Required. Any owner, authorized agent or contractor who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the plumbing code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit. 
(b)  Exception. Where equipment and appliance replacements or repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next business day of the department of plumbing inspection. For the purposes of this section, the term "emergency" means an unexpected situation requiring prompt action to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare. This section shall not be construed as allowing work to be done without a permit to restore comfort and convenience items, equipment or systems. Emergency work performed shall not be done contrary to the provisions of the plumbing code. If a licensed contractor performs work without obtaining any necessary permit, there is a rebuttable presumption that the contractor willfully and deliberately violated the building laws of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-381; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-949. - Exempt work. 
The following work shall be exempt from the requirement for a permit: 
(1)  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in the plumbing code. 
(2)  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
Exemption from the permit requirements of the plumbing code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of the plumbing code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-382; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-950. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the code official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or an authorized agent. The permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure and shall contain such other information required by the code official. 
(b)  Construction documents. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the plumbing code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. Construction documents, engineering calculations, diagrams and other such data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each application for a permit. The code official shall require construction documents, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by a registered design professional where required by state law. Construction documents shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that the work conforms to the provisions of the plumbing code. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for pipe, fittings and components an shall indicate the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking. Sketches and pencil or other erasable media used to prepare construction documents shall not be accepted by the code official. 
(1)  Exception. The code official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with the plumbing code. 
(2)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for the minimum standards of acceptance for construction documents. 
(c)  Action on application. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the plumbing code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(d)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the code official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not exceeding 180 days. No application shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. A request for an extension must be received by the code official prior to the expiration of the application. The code official is not required to notify the applicant prior to the application's expiration or that the application has expired. 
(Code 1992, § 5-383; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-951. - By whom application is made. 
Application for a permit shall be made by the person or agent to install all or part of any plumbing system. The applicant shall meet all qualifications established by statute, or by rules promulgated by the plumbing code, or by ordinance or by resolution. The full name and address of the applicant shall be stated in the application. 
(Code 1992, § 5-384; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-952. - Permit issuance. 
(a)  Review by code official. The application, construction documents and other data filed by an applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the code official. If the code official finds that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the plumbing code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and that the fees specified in the plumbing code have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant. 
(1)  Approved. When the code official issues a permit where construction documents are required, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing and stamped "Reviewed For Code Compliance." Such approved construction documents shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization form the code official. All work shall be done in accordance with the approved construction documents. The code official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of a part of a plumbing system before the entire construction documents for the whole system have been submitted or approved, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the plumbing code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire plumbing system will be granted. 
(2)  Amended. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. Willful and prejudicial departure from or disregard of construction documents in any material respect without the approval of the code official is unlawful. 
(b)  Validity. The issuance of a permit or approval of construction documents shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the plumbing code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the plumbing code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the plumbing official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of the plumbing or of other ordinances of this jurisdiction. The code official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of the plumbing code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. A minimum of one inspection approval must be obtained as evidence that work was commenced or that work has continued. The determination as to whether work was suspended shall be based on the most recent inspection approval date. 
(d)  Extensions. The code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for an additional period of not more than 180 days provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work. No permit shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Requests for extensions must be received by the code official prior to the expiration of the permit. The code official is not required to notify the permittee prior to the permits expiration or that the permit has expired. The fee for an extension shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work. 
(e)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The code official shall revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of the plumbing code in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the construction documents upon which the permit or approval was based. 
(f)  Retention of construction documents. One set of construction documents shall be retained by the code official until final approval of the work covered therein. One set of approved construction documents shall be returned to the applicant, and said set shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. 
(g)  Placement of permit. Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the building permit or copy thereof is posted on the site of the work until the completion of the project. The posted permit shall be visible from the street and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the code official. 
(h)  Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for which the plumbing code is applicable, to comply with the plumbing code. 
(i)  Inspection record card and approved construction documents. Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the permittee has made available an inspection record card and approved construction documents on the premises and in such a position to allow the code official convenient access and use. These items shall be protected from the elements and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the code official. 
(j)  Work without a permit; investigation required. Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
(k)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for work without a permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5-385; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-953. - Fees. 
(a)  Payment of fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in subsection (c) of this section have been paid, and an amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase of the plumbing systems, has been paid. 
(b)  Investigation fees: work without a permit. Where work, for which a permit is required, has been commenced prior to obtaining a permit, an investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the plumbing code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum permit fee set forth in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of the plumbing code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(c)  Fee schedule. For plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit or other designated activity, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(d)  Fee refunds. 
(1)  The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(2)  Refunds shall not be given: 
a.  For an application or permit that has expired. 
b.  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the application submittal date. 
c.  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the permit issuance date. 
d.  For that component of the permit fee which is representative of the development impact fee. 
(Code 1992, § 5-386; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-954—102-979. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTIONS AND TESTING 

Sec. 102-980. - Generally. 
Work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the code official and such work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the plumbing code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the plumbing code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the code official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 5-391; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-981. - Preliminary inspection. 
Before issuing a permit, the code official is authorized to examine, or cause to be examined, plumbing systems for which an application has been filed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-392; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-982. - Required inspections and testing. 
(a)  Notification. The code official, upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder's agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of any violations that must be corrected. The holder of the permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of such inspections. 
(1)  Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(2)  Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking, firestopping, draftstopping and bracing is in place and all sanitary, storm and water distribution piping is roughed-in, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final inspection shall be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the code official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the plumbing code and other laws that are enforced by the department of plumbing inspection. 
(b)  Approved agencies. Test reports submitted to the code official for consideration shall be developed by approved agencies that have satisfied the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(c)  Evaluation and followup inspection services. Prior to the approval of a closed, prefabricated plumbing system and the issuance of a plumbing permit, the code official shall require the submittal of an evaluation report on each prefabricated plumbing system indicating the complete details of the plumbing system, including a description of the system and its components, the basis upon which the plumbing system is being evaluated, test results and similar information, and other data as necessary for the code official to determine conformance to the plumbing code. 
(1)  Evaluation service. The code official shall designate the evaluation service of an approved agency as the evaluation agency, and review such agency's evaluation report for adequacy and conformance to the plumbing code. 
(2)  Followup inspection. Except where ready access is provided to all plumbing systems, service equipment and accessories for complete inspection at the site without disassembly or dismantling, the code official shall conduct the frequency of in-plant inspections necessary to ensure conformance to the approved evaluation report or shall designate an independent, approved inspection agency to conduct such inspections. The inspection agency shall furnish the code official with the followup inspection manual and a report of inspections upon request, and the plumbing system shall have an identifying label permanently affixed to the system indicating that factory inspections have been performed. 
(3)  Test and inspection records. All required test and inspection records shall be available to the code official at all times during the fabrication of the plumbing system and the erection of the building, or such records as the code official designates shall be filed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-393; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-983. - Special inspections. 
(a)  Special inspections. Special inspections of alternative engineered design plumbing systems shall be conducted in accordance with subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  Periodic inspection. The registered design professional or designated inspector shall periodically inspect and observe the alternative engineered design to determine that the installation is in accordance with the approved construction documents. All discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the plumbing contractor for correction. Records shall be kept of all inspections. 
(c)  Written report. The registered design professional shall submit a final report in writing to the code official upon completion of the installation, certifying that the alternative engineered design conforms to the approved construction documents. A notice of approval for the plumbing system shall not be issued until a written certification has been submitted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-394; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-984. - Testing. 
(a)  Required. Plumbing work and systems shall be tested as required in section 312 of the plumbing code and in accordance with subsections (b) through (d) of this section. Tests shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the code official. 
(b)  New, altered, extended or repaired systems. New plumbing systems and parts of existing systems that have been altered, extended or repaired shall be tested as prescribed herein to disclose leaks and defects, except that testing is not required in the following cases: 
(1)  In any case that does not include addition to, replacement, alteration or relocation of any water supply, drainage or vent piping. 
(2)  In any case where plumbing equipment is set up temporarily for exhibition purposes. 
(c)  Equipment, material and labor for tests. All equipment, material and labor required for testing a plumbing system or part thereof shall be furnished by the permit holder. 
(d)  Reinspection and testing. Where any work or installation does not pass any initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made to comply with the plumbing code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for inspection and testing. 
(Code 1992, § 5-395; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-985. - Approval. 
After the prescribed tests and inspections indicate that the work complies in all respects with the plumbing code, a notice of approval shall be issued by the code official. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the code official. The code official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the same fails to comply with the plumbing code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-396; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-986. - Temporary connection. 
The code official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source for the purpose of testing plumbing systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1992, § 5-397; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-987. - Work covered without inspection approval: investigation required. 
(a)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been covered without first obtaining the necessary inspection approval, a special investigation shall be made before subsequent inspections are approved. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for work covered without inspection approval. 
(Code 1992, § 5-398; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-988. - Inspection requests. 
It shall be the duty of the permit holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the code official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspection of such work that are required by the plumbing code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-399; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-989. - Alternative engineered design. 
(a)  Alternative design. The design, documentation, inspection, testing and approval of an alternative engineered design plumbing system shall comply with subsections (b) through (g) of this section. 
(b)  Design criteria. An alternative engineered design shall conform to the intent of the provisions of the plumbing code and shall provide an equivalent level of quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. Material, equipment or components shall be designed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(c)  Submittal. The registered design professional shall indicate on the permit application that the plumbing system is an alternative engineered design. The permit and permanent permit records shall indicate that an alternative design was part of the approved installation. 
(d)  Technical data. The registered design professional shall submit sufficient technical data to substantiate the proposed alternative engineered design and to prove that the performance meets the intent of the plumbing code. 
(e)  Construction documents. The registered design professional shall submit to the code official two complete sets of signed and sealed construction documents for the alternative engineered design. The construction documents shall include floor plans and a riser diagram of the work. Where appropriate, the construction documents shall indicate the direction of the flow, all pipe sizes, grade of horizontal piping, loading, and location of fixtures and appliances. 
(f)  Design approval. Where the code official determines that the alternative engineered design conforms to the intent of the plumbing code, the plumbing system shall be approved. If the alternative engineered design is not approved, the code official shall notify the registered design professional in writing, stating the reasons therefor. 
(g)  Inspection and testing. The alternative engineered design shall be tested and inspected in accordance with the requirements of this division and section 312 of the plumbing code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-400; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-990—102-1006. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 102-1007. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish or utilize any plumbing system, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the plumbing code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-411; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1008. - Notice of violation. 
The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of plumbing work in violation of the provisions of the plumbing code, or in violation of a detail statement or the approved construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the plumbing code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-412; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1009. - Prosecution of violation. 
If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the code official shall request the solicitor general of the county state court to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the plumbing code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 5-413; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1010. - Violation penalties. 
Any person who violates a provision of the plumbing code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the plumbing code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 5-414; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1011. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the code official, work on any plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the plumbing code, other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of the plumbing code, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. When an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-415; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1012. - Abatement of violation. 
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the plumbing on or about any premises. 
(Code 1992, § 5-416; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1013. - Unsafe plumbing. 
(a)  Declaration of public nuisance. Any plumbing regulated by the plumbing code that is unsafe or that constitutes a fire or health hazard, unsanitary condition, or is otherwise dangerous to human life is hereby declared unsafe. Any use of plumbing regulated by the plumbing code constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Any such unsafe equipment is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. 
(b)  Authority to condemn equipment. Whenever the code official determines that any plumbing, or portion thereof, regulated by the plumbing code has become hazardous to life, health or property or has become unsanitary, the code official shall order in writing that such plumbing either be removed or restored to a safe or sanitary condition. A time limit for compliance with such order shall be specified in the written notice. No person shall use or maintain defective plumbing after receiving such notice. When such plumbing is to be disconnected, written notice as prescribed in section 102-1008 shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life or property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The code official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes in case of an emergency, where necessary, to eliminate an immediate danger to life or property. Where possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified of the decision to disconnect utility service prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service systems shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(d)  Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make connection form any energy, fuel, power supply or water distribution system or supply energy, fuel or water to any equipment regulated by the plumbing code that has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the code official or the use of which has been ordered to be disconnected by the code official until the code official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment. When any plumbing is maintained in violation of the plumbing code, and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the code official shall institute any appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-417; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1014—102-1039. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EMERGENCY MEASURES 

Sec. 102-1040. - Imminent danger. 
When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building that endangers life, or when any building or part of a building has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized an empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "DANGER—NO ENTRY." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same. 
(Code 1992, § 5-421; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1041. - Temporary safeguards. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of the plumbing code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(Code 1992, § 5-422; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1042. - Closing streets. 
When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(Code 1992, § 5-423; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1043. - Emergency repairs. 
For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(Code 1992, § 5-424; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1044. - Costs of emergency repairs. 
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1992, § 5-425; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1045. - Hearing. 
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the board of commissioners of the county, be afforded a hearing as described in the plumbing code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-426; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1046. - Emergency declaration. 
In the event of a national, state, or local emergency declaration, the code official may waive or augment the provisions of this chapter as needed during the periods of emergency to protect public safety. 
(Code 1992, § 5-427; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1047. - Disaster assessment. 
(a)  Notification. Upon notification from emergency first responder personnel, law enforcement personnel or others of a disaster to a building or structure, the code official shall make or cause to be made any necessary visual, nondestructive inspections to determine: 
(1)  Immediate hazards that jeopardize public safety, health or general welfare; 
(2)  Extent of damage; 
(3)  Necessity to evacuate or condemn the building or structure; 
(4)  Necessity to disconnect or authorize reestablishment of utilities; 
(5)  What permits will be required; and 
(6)  Whether plans are necessary. 
(b)  Posting of placards. Placards shall be clearly posted at each entrance of the building or structure immediately upon completion of a disaster assessment as follows: 
(1)  Inspected—No Restriction on Lawful Use or Occupancy (Green); 
(2)  Danger!—Limited Entry (Yellow); or 
(3)  Danger!—No Entry (Red). 
It shall be unlawful to remove placards posted by the code official. 
(c)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for conducting disaster assessments. 
(Code 1992, § 5-428; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 6, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1048—102-1077. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROCEDURES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE ELECTRICAL CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-1078. - Applicability to electrical code 
The provisions of this article apply to the National Electrical Code, as adopted in section 102-22. In this article the term "electrical code" means the National Electrical Code as adopted in section 102-22. 
(Code 1992, § 5-431; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1079. - Purpose. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the electrical code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of electrical systems and equipment. The purpose of the electrical code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of the electrical code. 
(b)  Public duty, warranty and quality control. The permitting, plans examination or inspection conducted with regard to an electrical system or equipment in accordance with the electrical code constitutes a public duty and does not warrant or ensure the absence of any hazard, deficiency or other matter. Any duty created by or based on the electrical code is transferred to the public, and no private cause of action is created by a breach of such duty. The electrical code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any electrical system or equipment for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the department of electrical inspection or the county be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections or plans examinations authorized by the electrical code or any permits or certificates issued under the electrical code. The code official checks for substantial compliance with the electrical code, but reviews and inspections performed by the code official pursuant to this chapter do not create any guarantee or warranty that electrical systems or equipment have been constructed in accordance with all provisions of the electrical code. The permitting, plans examination, or inspection of any electrical system or equipment or construction document shall not be construed as a warranty of the physical condition or adequacy of such electrical system or equipment or construction document, including without limitation a representation or warranty that an electrical system or equipment is complete, that it is in compliance with the electrical code or any other law, that it was inspected, that it is safe or ready for occupancy or that it meets any particular degree of quality or workmanship. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the electrical code except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. The amount and quality of inspection and other services provided is discretionary with the code official and may vary in response to the amount of staff, work load, training and experience, funding and other pertinent factors affecting whether and how inspection is made or whether any hazard, deficiency or similar matter is observed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-432; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1080. - Scope. 
The electrical code shall regulate the design, construction, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems and equipment. 
(Code 1992, § 5-433; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1081. - Responsibility. 
It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for which the electrical code is applicable, to comply with the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-434; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1082—102-1100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 102-1101. - Generally. 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of the electrical code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in division 1 of this article. 
(b)  Existing installations. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, a provision in the electrical code shall not require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, nor prevent the continued utilization and maintenance of, existing installations lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the electrical code. 
(c)  Maintenance. Electrical systems, equipment, materials and appurtenances, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe hazard-free condition. Devices or safeguards which are required by the electrical code shall be maintained in compliance with the electrical code edition under which they were installed. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for maintenance of the electrical systems and equipment. To determine compliance with this provision, the code official shall have the authority to require the electrical systems and equipment to be reinspected. 
(d)  Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to electrical systems and equipment shall conform to that required for new electrical systems and equipment without requiring the existing electrical systems or equipment comply with all of the requirements of the electrical code. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause existing electrical systems or equipment to become unsafe, hazardous or overloaded. Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing electrical systems and equipment shall meet the provisions for new construction, unless such work is done in the same manner and arrangement as was in the existing system, is not hazardous and is approved. 
(e)  Change in occupancy. It shall be unlawful to make a change in occupancy of any structure which will subject the structure to the special provisions of the electrical code applicable to the new occupancy without approval. The code official shall certify that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupancy and that such change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(f)  Moved buildings. Electrical systems and equipment that are a part of buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of the electrical code for new installations. 
(Code 1992, § 5-441; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1102. - Differences. 
Where, in any specific case, different sections of the electrical code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Code 1992, § 5-442; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1103. - Other laws. 
The provisions of the electrical code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-443; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1104. - Application of references. 
References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapters, sections or provisions of the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-444; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1105. - Appendices. 
Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance. 
(Code 1992, § 5-445; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1106. - Subjects not regulated by electrical code. 
Where no applicable standards or requirements are set forth in the electrical code, or are contained within other laws, codes, regulations, ordinances or bylaws adopted by the jurisdiction, compliance with applicable standards of nationally recognized standards as are approved shall be deemed as prima facie evidence of compliance with the intent of the electrical code. Nothing herein shall derogate from the authority of the code official to determine compliance with codes or standards for those activities or installations within the code official's jurisdiction or responsibility. 
(Code 1992, § 5-446; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1107. - Use and occupancy. 
No building or structure shall be used or occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been provided in accordance with the International Building Code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-447; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1108—102-1137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND FEES 

Sec. 102-1138. - Permits required. 
Permits required by the electrical code shall be obtained from the code official. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the code official. If a licensed contractor performs work without obtaining any necessary permit, there is a rebuttable presumption that the contractor willfully and deliberately violated the building laws of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-451; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1139. - Types of permits. 
(a)  Required. An owner, authorized agent or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace electrical systems or equipment, the installation of which is regulated by the electrical code, or to cause such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(b)  Exception. Where repair or replacement of electrical systems or equipment must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next business day of the department of electrical inspection. For the purposes of this section, the term "emergency" means an unexpected situation requiring prompt action to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare. This section shall not be construed as allowing work to be done without a permit to restore comfort and convenience items, equipment or systems. Emergency work performed shall not be done contrary to the provisions of the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-452; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1140. - Work exempt from permit. 
The following work shall be exempt from the requirement for a permit: 
(1)  Listed cord and plug connected temporary decorative lighting. 
(2)  Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefor. 
(3)  Repair or replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location. 
(4)  Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental laboratories. 
(5)  Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy. 
Exemption from the permit requirements of the electrical code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of the electrical code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-453; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1141—102-1158. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - APPLICATION 

Sec. 102-1159. - Generally. 
The code official is authorized to receive applications for and issue permits as required by the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-461; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1160. - Application. 
Application for a permit shall be made to the code official in such form and detail as prescribed by the code official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as prescribed by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-462; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1161. - Action on application. 
The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the electrical code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(Code 1992, § 5-463; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1162. - Inspection required. 
Before a permit is issued, the code official is authorized to inspect and approve the systems, equipment, buildings, devices, premises and spaces or areas to be used. 
(Code 1992, § 5-464; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1163. - Time limitation of application. 
An application for a permit for any proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the code official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not exceeding 180 days. No application shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. A request for an extension must be received by the code official prior to the expiration of the application. The code official is not required to notify the applicant prior to the applications expiration or that the application has expired. 
(Code 1992, § 5-465; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1164—102-1189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONS 

Sec. 102-1190. - Conditions of permit. 
A permit shall constitute permission to conduct work as set forth in the electrical code in accordance with the provisions of the electrical code. Such permission shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of the electrical code or other applicable regulations or laws of the jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-471; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1191. - Expiration. 
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. A minimum of one inspection approval must be obtained as evidence that work was commenced or that work has continued. The determination as to whether work was suspended shall be based on the most recent inspection approval date. 
(Code 1992, § 5-472; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1192. - Extensions. 
The code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for an additional period of not more than 180 days provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work. No permit shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Requests for extensions must be received by the code official prior to the expiration of the permit. The code official is not required to notify the permittee prior to the permit(s expiration or that the permit has expired. The fee for an extension shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work. 
(Code 1992, § 5-473; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1193. - Posting the permit. 
Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the permit or copy thereof is posted on the site of the work until the completion of the project. The posted permit shall be visible from the street and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-474; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1194. - Validity. 
The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the electrical code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the electrical code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the code official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The code official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of the electrical code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-475; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1195. - Information on the permit. 
The code official shall issue all permits required by the electrical code on an approved form furnished for that purpose. The permit shall contain a general description of the operation or occupancy and its location and any other information required by the code official. Issued permits shall bear the signature of the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-476; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1196. - Suspension or revocation. 
The code official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of the electrical code whenever the permit is issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information; in violation of any ordinance, regulation or any of the provisions of the electrical code; or if any one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  The permit is used for a location or establishment other than that for which it was issued. 
(2)  The permit is used for a condition or activity other than that listed in the permit. 
(3)  Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been violated. 
(4)  There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as to the material fact in the application for permit or plans submitted or a condition of the permit. 
(5)  The permit is used by a different person or firm than the name for which it was issued. 
(6)  The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of the electrical code within the time provide therein. 
(7)  The permit was issued in error or in violation of an ordinance, regulation or the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-477; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1197. - Work without a permit: investigation required. 
(a)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for work without a permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5-478; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1198—102-1227. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FEES 

Sec. 102-1228. - Payment of fees. 
A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
(Code 1992, § 5-481; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1229. - Schedule of permit and other fees. 
A fee for each permit or other designated activity shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 5-482; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1230. - Investigation fees; work without a permit. 
Where work, for which a permit is required, has been commenced prior to obtaining a permit, an investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the electrical code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum permit fee set forth in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of the electrical code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-483; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1231. - Related fees. 
The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with, or concurrently with, the work authorized by a permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-484; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1232. - Refunds. 
(a)  The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(b)  Refunds shall not be given: 
(1)  For an application or permit that has expired. 
(2)  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the application submittal date. 
(3)  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the permit issuance date. 
(4)  For that component of the permit fee which is representative of the development impact fee. 
(Code 1992, § 5-485; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1233—102-1252. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 102-1253. - Submittal documents. 
Construction documents, statement of special inspections and structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the code official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. Exception: The code official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-491; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1254. - Information on construction documents. 
(a)  Contents. Construction documents shall be drawn to scale upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the code official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the electrical code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the code official. Sketches and pencil or other erasable media used to prepare construction documents shall not be accepted by the code official. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for the minimum standards of acceptance for construction documents. 
(c)  Penetrations. Construction documents shall indicate where penetrations will be made for electrical systems and shall indicate the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking. 
(d)  Load calculations. Where an addition or alteration is made to an existing electrical system, and electrical load calculation shall be prepared to determine if the existing electrical service has the capacity to serve the added load. 
(Code 1992, § 5-492; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1255. - Site plan. 
The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The code official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or where otherwise warranted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-493; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1256—102-1283. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - EXAMINATION OF DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 102-1284. - Generally. 
The code official shall examine or cause to be examine the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the electrical code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1992, § 5-501; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1285. - Approval of construction documents. 
(a)  Issuance. When the code official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by a stamp as "REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE." One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the code official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the code official or a duly authorized representative. 
(b)  Previous approvals. The electrical code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or installation of electrical systems or equipment for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of the electrical code and has not been abandoned. 
(c)  Phased approval. The code official is authorized to issue a permit for the installation of part of an electrical system before the construction documents for the electrical system have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the electrical code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire system will be granted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-502; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1286—102-1313. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - DESIGN PROFESSIONAL IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE 

Sec. 102-1314. - Generally. 
When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the code official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The code official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the system. 
(Code 1992, § 5-510; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1315—102-1341. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - HANDLING SUBMITTALS 

Sec. 102-1342. - Deferred submittals. 
For purposes of this section, the term "deferred submittals" means those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the code official within a specified period. Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the code official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the code official. Submittal documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the code official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the system. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design and submittal documents have been approved by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-511; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1343. - Amended construction documents. 
Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. Willful and prejudicial departure from or disregard of construction documents in any material respect without the approval of the code official is unlawful. 
(Code 1992, § 5-512; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1344. - Retention of construction documents. 
One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the code official for a period of not less than 180 days from the date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws. 
(Code 1992, § 5-513; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1345—102-1371. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - APPROVAL 

Sec. 102-1372. - Approved materials and equipment. 
(a)  All materials, equipment and devices approved by the code official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
(b)  Technical assistance. To determine the acceptability of technologies, processes, products, facilities, materials and uses attending the design, operation or use of a building or premises subject to the inspection of the department, the code official is authorized to require the owner or the person in possession or control of the building or premises to provide, without charge to the jurisdiction, a technical opinion and report. The opinion and report shall be prepared by a qualified engineer, specialist, laboratory or organization acceptable to the code official and shall analyze the properties of the design, operation or use of the building or premises and the facilities and appurtenances situated thereon, to recommend necessary changes. The code official is authorized to require design submittals to be prepared by and bear the stamp of a registered design professional. 
(Code 1992, § 5-521; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1373. - Modifications. 
Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the electrical code, the code official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the code official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of the electrical code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of the electrical code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of electrical inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 5-522; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1374. - Alternative materials, methods, equipment and appliances. 
The provisions of the electrical code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by the electrical code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of the electrical code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the electrical code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(Code 1992, § 5-523; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1375. - Material, equipment and appliance reuse. 
Materials, equipment, appliances and devices shall not be reused unless such elements have been reconditioned, tested, placed in good and proper working condition and approved. 
(Code 1992, § 5-524; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1376—102-1403. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - TESTING 

Sec. 102-1404. - Required testing. 
Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of the electrical code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of the electrical code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-531; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1405. - Test methods. 
Test methods shall be as specified in the electrical code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall approve the testing procedures. 
(Code 1992, § 5-532; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1406. - Testing agency. 
All tests shall be performed by an approved agency. 
(Code 1992, § 5-533; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1407. - Test reports. 
Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for retention of public records. 
(Code 1992, § 5-534; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1408—102-1437. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - ALTERNATIVE ENGINEERED DESIGN 

Sec. 102-1438. - Generally. 
The design, documentation, inspection, testing and approval of an alternative engineered design electrical system shall comply with this section. 
(Code 1992, § 5-541; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1439. - Design criteria. 
An alternative engineered design shall conform to the intent of the provisions of the electrical code and shall provide an equivalent level of quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. Materials, equipment or components shall be designated and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(Code 1992, § 5-542; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1440. - Submittal. 
The registered design professional shall indicate on the permit application that the electrical system is an alternative engineered design. The permit and permanent permit records shall indicate that an alternative engineered design was part of the approved installation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-543; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1441. - Technical data. 
The registered design professional shall submit sufficient technical data to substantiate the proposed alternative engineered design and to prove that the performance meets the intent of the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-544; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1442. - Construction documents. 
The registered design professional shall submit to the code official two complete sets of signed and sealed construction documents for the alternative engineered design. The construction documents shall include floor plans and a diagram of the work. 
(Code 1992, § 5-545; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1443. - Design approval. 
Where the code official determines that the alternative engineered design conforms to the intent of the electrical code, the electrical system shall be approved. If the alternative engineered design is not approved, the code official shall notify the registered design professional in writing, stating the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1992, § 5-546; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1444. - Inspection and testing. 
The alternative engineered design shall be tested and inspected in accordance with the requirements of the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-547; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1445—102-1466. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - INSPECTIONS AND TESTING 

Sec. 102-1467. - Generally. 
The code official is authorized to conduct inspections that are deemed necessary to determine the extent of compliance with the provisions of the electrical code and to approve reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be prepared and submitted in writing for review and approval. Inspection reports shall be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual, detailed or complex technical issues subject to the approval of the governing body. 
(1)  Required inspections. The code official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in this section. 
(2)  Evaluation and followup inspection services. Prior to the approval of a prefabricated construction assembly having concealed electrical work and the issuance of an electrical permit, the code official shall require the submittal of an evaluation report on each prefabricated construction assembly indicating the complete details of the electrical system, including a description of the system and its components, the basis upon which the system is being evaluated, test results and similar information, and other data as necessary for the code official to determine conformance to the electrical code. 
a.  Evaluation service. The code official shall designate the evaluation service of an approved agency as the evaluation agency, and review such agency's evaluation report for adequacy and conformance to the electrical code. 
b.  Followup inspection. Except where ready access is provided to electrical systems, service equipment and accessories for complete inspection at the site without disassembly or dismantling, the code official shall conduct the frequency of in-plant inspections necessary to ensure conformance to the approved evaluation report or shall designate an independent, approved inspection agency to conduct such inspections. The inspection agency shall furnish the code official with the followup inspection manual and a report of inspections upon request, and the electrical system shall have an identifying label permanently affixed to the system indicating that factory inspections have been performed. 
c.  Test and inspection records. Required test and inspection records shall be available to the code official at all times during the fabrication of the electrical system and the erection of the building, or such records as the code official designates shall be filed. 
(3)  Concealed work. Work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Wherever any installation subject to inspection prior to use is covered or concealed without having first been inspected, the code official shall have the authority to require that such work be exposed for inspection. Neither the code official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(4)  Underground. Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping and conductors installed, and before any backfill is put in place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and other rubble that would damage or break the raceway, cable or conductors, or where corrosive action will occur, protection shall be provided in the form of granular or selected material, approved running boards, sleeves or other means. 
(5)  Rough-in. Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all wiring and other components to be concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(6)  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the code official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the electrical code and other laws, which are enforced by the department of electrical inspection. 
(7)  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the permit is completed. 
(8)  Inspection record card and approved construction documents. Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the permittee has made available an inspection record card and approved construction documents on the premises and in such a position to allow the code official convenient access and use. These items shall be protected from the elements and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the code official. 
(9)  Approval required. Work shall not be performed beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection and test without first obtaining the approval of the code official. The code official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and tests and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with the electrical code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the code official. 
a.  Work covered without inspection approval: investigation required. Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been covered without first obtaining the necessary inspection approval, a special investigation shall be made before subsequent inspections are approved. 
b.  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for work covered without inspection approval. 
(Code 1992, § 5-551; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1468. - Validity. 
Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the electrical code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the electrical code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
(Code 1992, § 5-552; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1469. - Preliminary inspection. 
Before issuing a permit, the code official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. The code official shall be notified when the installation is ready for inspection and is authorized to conduct the inspection within a reasonable period of time. 
(Code 1992, § 5-553; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1470. - Entry. 
(a)  Authorized. The code official is authorized to enter and examine any building, structure, marine vessel, vehicle or premises in accordance with subsection (c) of this section for the purpose of enforcement of the electrical code. 
(b)  Identification. The code official shall carry proper identification issued by the governing authority where inspecting structures, premises or facilities in the performance of duties under the electrical code and shall be identified by proper credentials issued by this governing authority. 
(c)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of the electrical code, or whenever the code official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon any premises a condition that is contrary to or in violation of the electrical code, which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by the electrical code, provided that if the structure or premises be occupied, that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the code official is authorized to first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the code official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(Code 1992, § 5-554; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1471. - Inspection agencies. 
The code official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(Code 1992, § 5-555; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1472. - Inspection requests. 
It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the code official that such work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by the electrical code to provide access to and means for inspection of such work. 
(Code 1992, § 5-556; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1473. - Assistance from other agencies. 
The assistance and cooperation of police, building, fire and health department officials and all other officials shall be available as required in the performance of duties. 
(Code 1992, § 5-557; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1474. - Contractors responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of every contractor who enters into contracts for the installation or repair of electrical systems for which a permit is required to comply with adopted state and local rules and regulations concerning licensing. 
(Code 1992, § 5-558; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1475—102-1496. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - TESTING 

Sec. 102-1497. - Generally. 
Electrical work shall be tested as required in the electrical code. Tests shall be performed by the permit holder and observed by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-561; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1498. - Apparatus, material and labor for tests. 
Apparatus, material and labor required for testing an electrical system or part thereof shall be furnished by the permit holder. 
(Code 1992, § 5-562; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1499. - Reinspection and testing. 
Where any work or installation does not pass an initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made so as to achieve compliance with the electrical code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for inspection and testing. 
(Code 1992, § 5-563; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1500—102-1516. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - SERVICE UTILITIES 

Sec. 102-1517. - Connection of service utilities. 
No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by the electrical code for which a permit is required, until approved by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-571; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1518. - Temporary connection. 
The code official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility, source of energy, fuel or power. 
(Code 1992, § 5-572; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1519. - Authority to disconnect service utilities. 
(a)  Authorized. The code official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of the utility service to the building, structure or system regulate by the electrical code and the referenced codes in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The code official shall notify the serving utility and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(b)  Connection after order to disconnect. A person shall not make utility service or energy source connections to systems regulated by the electrical code, which have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the code official, or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the code official until the code official authorizes the reconnection and use of such systems. 
(Code 1992, § 5-573; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1520—102-1541. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - UNSAFE SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 102-1542. - Unsafe electrical systems. 
An electrical system that is unsafe, constitutes a fire or health hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life is hereby declared unsafe. Use of an electrical system regulated by the electrical code constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Such unsafe equipment and appliances are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. 
(Code 1992, § 5-581; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1543. - Authority to condemn electrical systems. 
Whenever the code official determines that any electrical system, or portion thereof, regulated by the electrical code has become hazardous to life, health or property, the code official shall order in writing that such electrical systems either be removed or restored to a safe condition. A time limit for compliance with such order shall be specified in the written notice. No person shall use or maintain a defective electrical system after receiving such notice. When such electrical system is to be disconnected, written notice as prescribed in the electrical code shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life or property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice. 
(Code 1992, § 5-582; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1544. - Dangerous conditions. 
Wherever the code official shall find any structure or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials, the code official is authorized to order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied in accordance with the provisions of the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-583; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1545. - Record. 
The code official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition. 
(Code 1992, § 5-458; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1546. - Notice. 
If an unsafe condition is found, the code official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the structure, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe condition to be removed within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the code official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order. 
(Code 1992, § 5-585; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1547. - Method of service. 
Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered to the owner personally; or 
(2)  Sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address with the return receipt requested. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner. 
(Code 1992, § 5-586; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1548—102-1567. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 18. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 102-1568. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any system or equipment regulated by the electrical code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-591; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1569. - Issuance. 
Where the code official finds any building, premises, vehicle, system or equipment that is in violation of the electrical code, the code official is authorized to issue corrective orders. 
(Code 1992, § 5-592; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1570. - Notice. 
Whenever the code official determines violations of the electrical code or observes an apparent or actual violation of a provision of the electrical code or other codes or ordinances under the code official's jurisdiction, the code official is authorized to prepare a written notice of violation describing the conditions deemed unsafe and, where compliance is not immediate, specifying a time for reinspection. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-593; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1571. - Service. 
Any order or notice issued pursuant to the electrical code shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service, mail or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such order or notice shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises, and the order or notice shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested or a certificate of mailing, to the last known address of the owner, occupant or both. 
(Code 1992, § 5-594; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1572. - Compliance with orders and notices. 
Orders and notice issued or served as provided by the electrical code shall be complied with by the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation to which the order or notice pertains. 
(Code 1992, § 5-595; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1573. - Failure to correct violations. 
If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of the electrical code or of any order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 5-596; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1574. - Failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with an abatement notice or other corrective notice issued by the code official shall result in each day that such violation continues being regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 5-597; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1575. - Unauthorized tampering. 
Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the code official shall not be mutilated, destroyed or tampered with or removed without authorization from the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-598; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1576—102-1593. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 19. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 102-1594. - Penalties. 
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of the electrical code or who fails to carry out an order made pursuant of the electrical code or violates any condition attached to a permit, approval or certificate shall be subject to the penalties established by this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-601; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1595. - Abatement of violation. 
The imposition of the penalties herein described shall not prevent the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction; or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises. 
(Code 1992, § 5-602; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1596—102-1618. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 20. - STOP WORK ORDER 

Sec. 102-1619. - Issuance. 
Upon notice from the code official that any electrical work is being done contrary to the provisions of the electrical code, other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of the electrical code, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. 
(Code 1992, § 5-611; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1620. - Emergencies. 
When an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Code 1992, § 5-612; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1621. - Unlawful continuance. 
Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-613; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1622—102-1640. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 21. - EMERGENCY MEASURES 

Sec. 102-1641. - Imminent danger. 
When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building that endangers life, or when any building or part of a building has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized an empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "DANGER!—NO ENTRY." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same. 
(Code 1992, § 5-621; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1642. - Temporary safeguards. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of the electrical code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(Code 1992, § 5-622; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1643. - Closing streets. 
When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(Code 1992, § 5-623; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1644. - Emergency repairs. 
For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(Code 1992, § 5-624; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1645. - Costs of emergency repairs. 
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1992, § 5-625; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1646. - Hearing. 
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the board of commissioners of the county, be afforded a hearing as described in the electrical code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-626; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1647. - Emergency declaration. 
In the event of a national, state, or local emergency declaration, the code official may waive or augment the provisions of this chapter as needed during the periods of emergency to protect public safety. 
(Code 1992, § 5-627; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1648. - Disaster assessment. 
(a)  Notification. Upon notification from emergency first responder personnel, law enforcement personnel or others of a disaster to a building or structure, the code official shall make or cause to be made any necessary visual, nondestructive inspections to determine: 
(1)  Immediate hazards that jeopardize public safety, health or general welfare; and 
(2)  Extent of damage; and 
(3)  Necessity to evacuate or condemn the building or structure; and 
(4)  Necessity to disconnect or authorize reestablishment of utilities; and 
(5)  What permits will be required; and 
(6)  Whether plans are necessary. 
(b)  Posting of placards. Placards shall be clearly posted at each entrance of the building or structure immediately upon completion of a disaster assessment as follows: 
(1)  Inspected—No Restriction on Lawful Use or Occupancy (Green); 
(2)  Danger!—Limited Entry (Yellow); or 
(3)  Danger!—No Entry (Red). 
It shall be unlawful to remove placards posted by the code official. 
(c)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for conducting disaster assessments. 
(Code 1992, § 5-628; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1649—102-1679. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROCEDURES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE FUEL GAS CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-1680. - Applicability to fuel gas code. 
The provisions of this article apply to the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted in section 102-22. In this article the term "gas code" means the International Fuel Gas Code as adopted in section 102-22. 
(Code 1992, § 5-631; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1681. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of the gas code shall apply to the installation of fuel gas piping systems, fuel gas utilization equipment, gaseous hydrogen systems and related accessories in accordance with subsection (1) through (7) of this section. Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures shall comply with the International Residential Code. 
(1)  Gaseous hydrogen systems. Gaseous hydrogen systems shall be regulated by chapter 7 of the gas code. 
(2)  Piping systems. These regulations cover piping systems for natural gas with an operating pressure of 125 pounds per square inch gauge (psig) (862 kPa gauge) or less, and for LP-gas with an operating pressure of 20 psig (140 kPa gauge) or less, except as provided in section 402.6.1 of the gas code. Coverage shall extend from the point of delivery to the outlet of the equipment shutoff valves. Piping systems requirements shall include design, materials, components, fabrication, assembly, installation, testing, inspection, operation and maintenance. 
(3)  Gas utilization equipment. Requirements for gas utilization equipment and related accessories shall include installation, combustion and ventilation air and venting and connections to piping systems. 
(4)  Systems and equipment outside the scope. The gas code shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Portable LP-gas equipment of all types that is not connected to a fixed fuel piping system. 
b.  Installation of farm equipment such as brooders, dehydrators, dryers and irrigation equipment. 
c.  Raw material (feedstock) applications except for piping to special atmosphere generators. 
d.  Oxygen-fuel gas cutting and welding systems. 
e.  Industrial gas applications using gases such as acetylene and acetylenic compounds, hydrogen, ammonia, carbon monoxide, oxygen and nitrogen. 
f.  Petroleum refineries, pipeline compressor or pumping stations, loading terminals, compounding plants, refinery tank farms and natural gas processing plants. 
g.  Integrated chemical plants or portions of such plants where flammable or combustible liquids or gases are produced by, or used in, chemical reactions. 
h.  LP-gas installations at utility gas plants. 
i.  Liquefied natural gas (LNG) installations. 
j.  Fuel gas piping in power and atomic energy plants. 
k.  Proprietary items of equipment, apparatus or instruments such as gas-generating sets, compressors and calorimeters. 
l.  LP-gas equipment for vaporization, gas mixing and gas manufacturing. 
m.  Temporary LP-gas piping for buildings under construction or renovation that is not to become part of the permanent piping system. 
n.  Installation of LP-gas systems for railroad switch heating. 
o.  Installation of hydrogen gas, LP-gas and compressed natural gas (CNG) systems on vehicles. 
p.  Except as provided in section 401.1.1 of the gas code, gas piping, meters, gas pressure regulators and other appurtenances used by the serving gas supplier in the distribution of gas, other than undiluted LP-gas. 
q.  Building design and construction, except as specified herein. 
r.  Piping systems for mixtures of gas and air within the flammable range with an operating pressure greater than ten psig (69 kPa gauge). 
s.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are neither connected to a fixed piping system nor interconnected to a power grid. 
(b)  Other fuels. The requirements for the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems operating with fuels other than fuel gas shall be regulated by the International Mechanical Code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-632; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1682. - Appendices. 
Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. 
(Code 1992, § 5-633; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1683. - Intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the gas code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of fuel gas systems. The purpose of the gas code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of the gas code. 
(b)  Public duty, warranty and quality control. The permitting, plans examination or inspection conducted with regard to a fuel gas system in accordance with the gas code constitutes a public duty and does not warrant or ensure the absence of any hazard, deficiency or other matter. Any duty created by or based on the gas code is transferred to the public, and no private cause of action is created by a breach of such duty. The gas code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any fuel gas system for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the department of inspection or the county be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections or plans examinations authorized by the gas code or any permits or certificates issued under the gas code. The code official checks for substantial compliance with the gas code, but reviews and inspections performed by the code official pursuant to this chapter do not create any guarantee or warranty that fuel gas systems have been constructed in accordance with all provisions of the gas code. The permitting, plans examination, or inspection of any fuel gas system or construction document shall not be construed as a warranty of the physical condition or adequacy of such fuel gas system or construction document, including without limitation a representation or warranty that a fuel gas system is complete, that it is in compliance with the gas code or any other law, that it was inspected, that it is safe or ready for occupancy or that it meets any particular degree of quality or workmanship. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the gas code except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. The amount and quality of inspection and other services provided is discretionary with the code official and may vary in response to the amount of staff, work load, training and experience, funding and other pertinent factors affecting whether and how inspection is made or whether any hazard, deficiency or similar matter is observed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-634; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1684. - Existing installations. 
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, a provision in the gas code shall not require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, nor prevent the continued utilization and maintenance of, existing installations lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the gas code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-635; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1685. - Maintenance. 
Installations, both existing and new, and parts thereof shall be maintained in proper operating condition in accordance with the original design and in a safe condition. Devices or safeguards which are required by the gas code shall be maintained in compliance with the gas code edition under which they were installed. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for maintenance of installations. To determine compliance with this provision, the code official shall have the authority to require an installation to be reinspected. 
(Code 1992, § 5-636; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1686. - Additions, alterations or repairs. 
Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to installations shall conform to that required for new installations without requiring the existing installation to comply with all of the requirements of the gas code. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing installation to become unsafe, hazardous or overloaded. Minor additions, alterations, renovations and repairs to existing installations shall meet the provisions for new construction, unless such work is done in the same manner and arrangement as was in the existing system, is not hazardous and is approved. 
(Code 1992, § 5-637; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1687. - Change in occupancy. 
It shall be unlawful to make a change in the occupancy of a structure which will subject the structure to the special provisions of the gas code applicable to the new occupancy without approval. The code official shall certify that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupancy and that such change of occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 1992, § 5-638; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1688. - Historic buildings. 
The provisions of the gas code relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings. 
(Code 1992, § 5-639; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1689. - Moved buildings. 
Except as determined by section 102-1684, installations that are a part of buildings or structures moved into or within the jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of the gas code for new installations. 
(Code 1992, § 5-640; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1690. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed installation, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the gas code shall be determined by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-641; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1691—102-1718. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 102-1719. - When required. 
(a)  Required. An owner, authorized agent or contractor who intends to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace an installation regulated by the gas code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit. 
(b)  Exception. Where equipment replacements and repairs are required to be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next business day of the department of inspection. For the purposes of this section, the term "emergency" means an unexpected situation requiring prompt action to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare. This section shall not be construed as allowing work to be done without a permit to restore comfort and convenience items, equipment or systems. Emergency work performed shall not be done contrary to the provisions of the gas code. If a licensed contractor performs work without obtaining any necessary permit, there is a rebuttable presumption that the contractor willfully and deliberately violated the building laws of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-651; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1720. - Permits not required. 
Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance. 
(2)  Replacement of any minor component of equipment that does not alter approval of such equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
Exemption from the permit requirements of the gas code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of the gas code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-652; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1721. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the code official on a form furnished for that purpose and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or an authorized agent. The permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure and shall contain such other information required by the code official. 
(b)  Construction documents. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the gas code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. Construction documents, engineering calculations, diagrams and other such data shall be submitted in two or more sets with each application for a permit. The code official shall require construction documents, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by a registered design professional where required by state law. Construction documents shall be drawn to scale and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that the work conforms to the provisions of the gas code. Construction documents for buildings more than two stories in height shall indicate where penetrations will be made for pipe, fittings and components an shall indicate the materials and methods for maintaining required structural safety, fire-resistance rating and fireblocking. Sketches and pencil or other erasable media used to prepare construction documents shall not be accepted by the code official. Exception: The code official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents, calculations or other data if the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to determine compliance with the gas code. 
(c)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for the minimum standards of acceptance for construction documents. 
(d)  Action on application. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the gas code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(e)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work or operation shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the code official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not exceeding 180 days. No application shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. A request for an extension must be received by the code official prior to the expiration of the application. The code official is not required to notify the applicant prior to the application's expiration or that the application has expired. 
(Code 1992, § 5-653; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1722. - Permit issuance. 
(a)  Review by code official. The application, construction documents and other data filed by an applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the code official. If the code official finds that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the gas code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and that the fees specified in section 102-1723 have been paid, a permit shall be issued to the applicant. 
(b)  Construction documents. 
(1)  Approved. When the code official issues a permit where construction documents are required, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing and stamped "REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE." Such approved construction documents shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization form the code official. All work shall be done in accordance with the approved construction documents. The code official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of a part of a plumbing system before the entire construction documents for the whole system have been submitted or approved, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the gas code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire plumbing system will be granted. 
(2)  Amended. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. Willful and prejudicial departure from or disregard of construction documents in any material respect without the approval of the code official is unlawful. 
(c)  Validity. The issuance of a permit or approval of construction documents shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the gas code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the gas code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the code official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of the gas code or of other ordinances of this jurisdiction. The code official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of the gas code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(d)  Expiration. Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. A minimum of one inspection approval must be obtained as evidence that work was commenced or that work has continued. The determination as to whether work was suspended shall be based on the most recent inspection approval date. 
(e)  Extensions. The code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for an additional period of not more than 180 days provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work. No permit shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Requests for extensions must be received by the code official prior to the expiration of the permit. The code official is not required to notify the permittee prior to the permits expiration or that the permit has expired. The fee for an extension shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work. 
(f)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The code official shall revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of the gas code in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the construction documents upon which the permit or approval was based. 
(g)  Retention of construction documents. One set of construction documents shall be retained by the code official until final approval of the work covered therein. One set of approved construction documents shall be returned to the applicant, and said set shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. 
(h)  Placement of permit. Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the building permit or copy thereof is posted on the site of the work until the completion of the project. The posted permit shall be visible from the street and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the code official. 
(i)  Responsibility. It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for which the gas code is applicable, to comply with the gas code. 
(j)  Inspection record card and approved construction documents. Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the permittee has made available an inspection record card and approved construction documents on the premises and in such a position to allow the code official convenient access and use. These items shall be protected from the elements and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the code official. 
(k)  Work without a permit; investigation required. Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
(l)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for work without a permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5-654; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1723. - Fees. 
(a)  Payment of fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed in subsection (c) of this section have been paid, and an amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase of the plumbing systems, has been paid. 
(b)  Investigation fees; work without a permit. Where work, for which a permit is required, has been commenced prior to obtaining a permit, an investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the gas code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum permit fee set forth in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of the gas code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(c)  Fee schedule. For plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit or other designated activity, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(d)  Fee refunds. 
(1)  The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(2)  Refunds shall not be given: 
a.  For an application or permit that has expired. 
b.  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the application submittal date. 
c.  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the permit issuance date. 
d.  For that component of the permit fee which is representative of the development impact fee. 
(Code 1992, § 5-655; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1724—102-1754. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTIONS AND TESTING 

Sec. 102-1755. - Generally. 
Work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the code official and such work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the gas code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the gas code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the code official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 5-661; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1756. - Preliminary inspection. 
(a)  Review by code official. Before issuing a permit, the code official is authorized to examine, or cause to be examined, fuel gas systems for which an application has been filed. 
(b)  Required inspections and testing. The code official, upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder's agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of any violations that must be corrected. The holder of the permit shall be responsible for the scheduling of such inspections. 
(1)  Underground inspection shall be made after trenches or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. When excavated soil contains rocks, broken concrete, frozen chunks and other rubble that would damage or break the piping or cause corrosive action, clean backfill shall be on the job site. 
(2)  Rough-in inspection shall be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and components to be concealed are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the installation. 
(4)  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified in this subsection (b), the code official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the gas code and other laws that are enforced by the department of inspection. The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit the operation of any heating equipment installed to replace existing heating equipment serving an occupied portion of a structure in the event a request for inspection of such heating equipment has been filed with the department not more than 48 hours after replacement work is completed, and before any portion of such equipment is concealed by any permanent portion of the structure. 
(c)  Approved inspection agencies. Test reports submitted to the code official for consideration shall be developed by approved agencies that have satisfied the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(d)  Evaluation and followup inspection services. Prior to the approval of a closed, prefabricated construction assembly having concealed work and the issuance of a permit, the code official shall require the submittal of an evaluation report on each prefabricated construction assembly indicating the complete details of the installation, including a description of the system and its components, the basis upon which the system is being evaluated, test results and similar information, and other data as necessary for the code official to determine conformance to the gas code. 
(1)  Evaluation service. The code official shall designate the evaluation service of an approved agency as the evaluation agency, and review such agency's evaluation report for adequacy and conformance to the gas code. 
(2)  Followup inspection. Except where ready access is provided to installations, service equipment and accessories for complete inspection at the site without disassembly or dismantling, the code official shall conduct the frequency of in-plant inspections necessary to ensure conformance to the approved evaluation report or shall designate an independent, approved inspection agency to conduct such inspections. The inspection agency shall furnish the code official with the followup inspection manual and a report of inspections upon request, and the plumbing system shall have an identifying label permanently affixed to the system indicating that factory inspections have been performed. 
(3)  Test and inspection records. All required test and inspection records shall be available to the code official at all times during the fabrication of the installation and the erection of the building, or such records as the code official designates shall be filed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-662; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1757. - Testing. 
(a)  Required. Installations shall be tested as required in the gas code and in accordance with subsections (b) through (d) of this section. Tests shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the code official. 
(b)  New, altered, extended or repaired installations. New installations and parts of existing installations that have been altered, extended or repaired shall be tested as prescribed herein to disclose leaks and defects. 
(c)  Apparatus, instruments, material and labor for tests. Apparatus, instruments, material and labor required for testing an installation or part thereof shall be furnished by the permit holder. 
(d)  Reinspection and testing. Where any work or installation does not pass any initial test or inspection, the necessary corrections shall be made to comply with the gas code. The work or installation shall then be resubmitted to the code official for inspection and testing. 
(Code 1992, § 5-663; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1758. - Approval. 
After the prescribed tests and inspections indicate that the work complies in all respects with the gas code, a notice of approval shall be issued by the code official. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the code official. The code official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the same fails to comply with the gas code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-664; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1759. - Temporary connection. 
The code official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of an installation to the sources of energy for the purpose of testing the installation or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1992, § 5-665; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1760. - Work covered without inspection approval; investigation required. 
(a)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been covered without first obtaining the necessary inspection approval, a special investigation shall be made before subsequent inspections are approved. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for work covered without inspection approval. 
(Code 1992, § 5-666; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1761. - Inspection requests. 
It shall be the duty of the permit holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the code official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspection of such work that are required by the gas code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-667; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1762—102-1785. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 102-1786. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish or utilize an installation, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the gas code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-671; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1787. - Notice of violation. 
The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of work in violation of the provisions of the gas code, or in violation of a detail statement or the approved construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the gas code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-672; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1788. - Prosecution of violation. 
If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the code official shall request the solicitor general of the county state court to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the gas code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 5-673; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1789. - Violation penalties. 
Any person who violates a provision of the gas code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, installs, alters or repairs work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the gas code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 5-674; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1790. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the code official, work on any plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the gas code, other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of the gas code, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. When an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-675; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1791. - Abatement of violation. 
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the installations on or about any premises. 
(Code 1992, § 5-676; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1792. - Unsafe installations. 
(a)  Declaration of public nuisance. An installation that is unsafe, constitutes a fire or health hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life is hereby declared unsafe. Use of an installation regulated by the gas code constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use. Such unsafe installations are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. 
(b)  Authority to condemn installations. Whenever the code official determines that any installation, or portion thereof, regulated by the gas code has become hazardous to life, health or property, the code official shall order in writing that such installations either be removed or restored to a safe condition. A time limit for compliance with such order shall be specified in the written notice. No person shall use or maintain a defective installation after receiving such notice. When such installation is to be disconnected, written notice as prescribed in section 102-1787 shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life or property, such disconnection shall be made immediately without such notice. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The code official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes in case of an emergency, where necessary, to eliminate an immediate danger to life or property. Where possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified of the decision to disconnect utility service prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service systems shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(d)  Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make connection from any energy source to installations regulated by the gas code that have been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the code official, or the use of which has been ordered to be disconnected by the code official until the code official authorizes the reconnection and use of such installations. When an installation is maintained in violation of the gas code, and in violation of any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the code official shall institute any appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-677; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1793—102-1817. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EMERGENCY MEASURES 

Sec. 102-1818. - Imminent danger. 
When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building that endangers life, or when any building or part of a building has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized an empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "DANGER!—NO ENTRY." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same. 
(Code 1992, § 5-681; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1819. - Temporary safeguards. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of the gas code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(Code 1992, § 5-682; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1820. - Closing streets. 
When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(Code 1992, § 5-683; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1821. - Emergency repairs. 
For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(Code 1992, § 5-684; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1822. - Costs of emergency repairs. 
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1992, § 5-685; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1823. - Hearing. 
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the board of commissioners of the county, be afforded a hearing as described in the gas code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-686; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1824. - Emergency declaration. 
In the event of a national, state, or local emergency declaration, the code official may waive or augment the provisions of this chapter as needed during the periods of emergency to protect public safety. 
(Code 1992, § 5-687; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1825. - Disaster assessment. 
(a)  Notification. Upon notification from emergency first responder personnel, law enforcement personnel or others of a disaster to a building or structure, the code official shall make or cause to be made any necessary visual, nondestructive inspections to determine: 
(1)  Immediate hazards that jeopardize public safety, health or general welfare; and 
(2)  Extent of damage; 
(3)  Necessity to evacuate or condemn the building or structure; 
(4)  Necessity to disconnect or authorize reestablishment of utilities; 
(5)  What permits will be required; and 
(6)  Whether plans are necessary. 
(b)  Posting of placards. Placards shall be clearly posted at each entrance of the building or structure immediately upon completion of a disaster assessment as follows: 
(1)  Inspected—No Restriction on Lawful use or Occupancy (Green); or 
(2)  Danger!—Limited Entry (Yellow); or 
(3)  Danger!—No Entry (Red). 
It shall be unlawful to remove placards posted by the code official. 
(c)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for conducting disaster assessments. 
(Code 1992, § 5-688; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1826—102-1853. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PROCEDURES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-1854. - Applicability to property maintenance code. 
The provisions of this article apply to the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in section 102-22. In this article the term "property maintenance code" means the International Property Maintenance Code as adopted in section 102-22. 
(Code 1992, § 5-691; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1855. - Scope. 
The provisions of property maintenance code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(Code 1992, § 5-692; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1856. - Intent. 
The property maintenance code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with the International Existing Building Code. The purpose of property maintenance code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of property maintenance code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-693; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1857. - Maintenance. 
Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by property maintenance code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for an occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of property maintenance code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner(s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises. 
(Code 1992, § 5-694; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1858. - Application of other codes. 
Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Existing Building Code. Nothing in property maintenance code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of chapter 110, zoning. 
(Code 1992, § 5-695; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1859. - Workmanship. 
Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are cause directly or indirectly by the enforcement of property maintenance code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(Code 1992, § 5-696; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1860. - Historic buildings. 
The provisions of property maintenance code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1992, § 5-69; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1861. - Requirements not covered by property maintenance code. 
Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by property maintenance code, shall be determined by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-698; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1862. - Fees. 
The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under property maintenance code shall be set by the board of commissioners of the county, a schedule of which is kept in the office of permits and inspections. 
(Code 1992, § 5-699; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1863. - Severability. 
If any action, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of property maintenance code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of property maintenance code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-700; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1864—102-1884. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 102-1885. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of property maintenance code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-711; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1886. - Notice of violation. 
The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with division 3 of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 5-712; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1887. - Prosecution of violation. 
Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with division 3 of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of property maintenance code or the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
(Code 1992, § 5-713; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1888. - Violation penalties. 
Any person who violates a provision of property maintenance code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 5-714; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1889. - Abatement of violation. 
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the installations on or about any premises. 
(Code 1992, § 5-715; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1890—102-1906. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NOTICES AND ORDERS 

Sec. 102-1907. - Notice to person responsible. 
Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of property maintenance code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in sections 102-1908 and 102-1909 to the person responsible for the violation as specified in property maintenance code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-721; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1908. - Form. 
Such notice prescribed in section 102-1907 shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
(3)  Include a statement of the violations and why the notice is being issued. 
(4)  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of property maintenance code. 
(5)  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal. 
(6)  Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with section 102-1887. 
(Code 1992, § 5-722; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1909. - Method of service. 
Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
(1)  Delivered personally; 
(2)  Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or 
(3)  If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(Code 1992, § 5-723; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1910. - Penalties. 
Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be set forth in section 102-1888. 
(Code 1992, § 5-724; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1911. - Transfer of ownership. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the correction or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-725; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1912—102-1935. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EMERGENCY MEASURES 

Sec. 102-1936. - Imminent danger. 
When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is an actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "DANGER!—NO ENTRY." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same. 
(Code 1992, § 5-731; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1937. - Temporary safeguards. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of the property maintenance code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(Code 1992, § 5-731; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1938. - Closing streets. 
When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(Code 1992, § 5-733; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1939. - Emergency repairs. 
For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(Code 1992, § 5-734; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1940. - Costs of emergency repairs. 
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1992, § 5-735; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1941. - Hearing. 
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the board of commissioners of the county, be afforded a hearing as described in property maintenance code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-736; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1942. - Emergency declaration. 
In the event of a national, state, or local emergency declaration, the code official may waive or augment the provisions of this chapter as needed during the periods of emergency to protect public safety. 
(Code 1992, § 5-737; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1943—102-1967. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROCEDURES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-1968. - Applicability to existing building code. 
The provisions of this article apply to the International Existing Building Code, as adopted in section 102-22. In this article the term "existing building code" means the International Existing Building Code as adopted in section 102-22. 
(Code 1992, § 5-741; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1969. - Scope. 
The provisions of the existing building code shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings. A building or portion of a building that has not been previously occupied or used for its intended purpose shall comply with the provisions of the International Building Code for new construction. Repairs, alterations, change in occupancy, existing buildings to which additions are made, historic buildings, and relocated buildings complying with the provisions of the International Building Code, International Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, and International Residential Code as applicable shall be considered in compliance with the provisions of the existing building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-742; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1970. - Intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the existing building code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare insofar as they are affected by the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and relocation of existing buildings. The purpose of the existing building code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefitted by the terms of the existing building code. 
(b)  Public duty, warranty and quality control. The permitting, plans examination or inspection conducted with regard to a building or structure in accordance with the existing building code constitutes a public duty and does not warrant or ensure the absence of any hazard, deficiency or other matter. Any duty created by or based on the existing building code is transferred to the public, and no private cause of action is created by a breach of such duty. The existing building code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any building or structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the department of building safety or the county be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections or plans examinations authorized by the existing building code or any permits or certificates issued under the existing building code. The code official checks for substantial compliance with the existing building code, but reviews and inspections performed by the code official pursuant to this chapter do not create any guarantee or warranty that buildings, structures or service equipment have been constructed in accordance with all provisions of the existing building code. The permitting, plans examination, or inspection of any building, structure, system, element, or construction document shall not be construed as a warranty of the physical condition or adequacy of such building, structure, system, element, or construction document, including without limitation a representation or warranty that a building or structure is complete, that it is in compliance with the existing building code or any other law, that it was inspected, that it is safe or ready for occupancy or that it meets any particular degree of quality or workmanship. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the existing building code except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. The amount and quality of inspection and other services provided is discretionary with the code official and may vary in response to the amount of staff, work load, training and experience, funding and other pertinent factors affecting whether and how inspection is made or whether any hazard, deficiency or similar matter is observed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-743; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1971. - Existing buildings. 
The legal occupancy of any building existing on the date of adoption of the existing building code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in the existing building code, the International Fire Code, or the International Property Maintenance Code, or as is deemed necessary by the code official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
(Code 1992, § 5-744; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1972. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Buildings and parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall apply to the maintenance of existing buildings and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators, and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and buildings. All existing devices or safeguards shall be maintained in all existing buildings. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the building. To determine compliance with this subsection, the code official shall have the authority to require a building to be reinspected. Except where specifically permitted by the existing building code, the existing building code shall not provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing buildings. 
(b)  Work on individual components or portions. Where the code official determines that a component or a portion of a building or structure is in need of repair, strengthening or replacement by provisions of the existing building code, only that specific component or portion shall be required to be repaired, strengthened, or replaced unless specifically required by other provisions of the existing building code. 
(c)  Design values for existing materials and construction. The incorporation of existing materials, construction, and detailing into the structural system shall be permitted when approved by the code official. Minimum quality levels and maximum strength values shall comply with the existing building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-745; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1973. - Safeguards during construction. 
All construction work covered in the existing building code, including any related demolition, shall comply with the requirements of chapter 13 of the existing building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-746; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1974. - Appendices. 
The code official is authorized to require rehabilitation and retrofit of buildings, structures, or individual structural members in accordance with the appendices of the existing building code if such appendices have been individually adopted. When any of such appendices is specifically referenced in the text of the existing building code, it becomes a part of the existing building code without any special adoption by the local jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-747; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1975. - Correction of violations of other codes. 
Repairs or alterations mandated by any property, housing, or fire safety maintenance code or mandated by any licensing rule or ordinance adopted pursuant to law shall conform only to the requirements of that code, rule, or ordinance and shall not be required to conform to the existing building code unless the code requiring such repair or alteration so provides. 
(Code 1992, § 5-748; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-1976. - Standards and guidelines for structural evaluation. 
The code official shall allow structural evaluation, condition assessment, and rehabilitation of buildings, structures, or individual structural members based on the existing building code's appendix chapters, referenced standards, guidelines, or other approved standards and procedures. Compliance with the structural provisions of the 2006 International Building Code shall be deemed exceeding or equivalent to compliance with the structural provisions of the existing building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-749; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-1977—102-2005. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 102-2006. - Required. 
Any owner or authorized agent who intends to repair, add to, alter, relocate, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or to repair, install, add, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the existing building code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the code official and obtain the required permit. If a licensed contractor performs construction without obtaining any necessary permit, there is a rebuttable presumption that the contractor willfully and deliberately violated the building laws of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-761; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2007. - Work exempt from permit. 
Exemptions from permit requirements of the existing building code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of the existing building code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Building. 
a.  Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route. 
b.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work. 
c.  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
d.  Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems. 
e.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R-3 or Group U occupancies. 
f.  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) in height. 
(2)  Electrical. 
a.  Repairs and maintenance. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
b.  Radio and television transmitting stations. The provisions of the existing building code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas. 
c.  Temporary testing systems. A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
(3)  Gas. 
a.  Portable heating appliance. 
b.  Replacement of any part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Portable heating appliance. 
b.  Portable ventilation equipment. 
c.  Portable cooling unit. 
d.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the existing building code. 
e.  Replacement of any part that does not alter approval or make it unsafe. 
f.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
g.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(5)  Plumbing. 
a.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with the new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in the existing building code. 
b.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(6)  Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the code official. For the purposes of this section, the term "emergency" means an unexpected situation requiring prompt action to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare. This section shall not be construed as allowing work to be done without a permit to restore comfort and convenience items, equipment or systems. Emergency work performed shall not be done contrary to the provisions of the existing building code. 
(7)  Repairs. Application or notice to the code official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures and items listed in this section. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. 
(8)  Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution, metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right. 
(Code 1992, § 5-762; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2008. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Required. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the department of building safety for that purpose. Such application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the work in accordance with chapter 3 of the existing building code to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in section 102-2041. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the code official. 
(b)  Action on application. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the code official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the code official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the existing building code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the code official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(c)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the code official is authorized to grant one extension of time for an additional period not exceeding 180 days. No application shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. A request for an extension must be received by the code official prior to the expiration of the application. The code official is not required to notify the applicant prior to the application's expiration or that the application has expired. 
(Code 1992, § 5-763; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2009. - Validity of permit. 
The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the existing building code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the existing building code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the code official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The code official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of the existing building code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-764; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2010. - Expiration. 
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. A minimum of one inspection approval must be obtained as evidence that work was commenced or that work has continued. The determination as to whether work was suspended shall be based on the most recent inspection approval date. The code official is authorized to grant, in writing, one extension of time for an additional period of not more than 180 days provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work. No permit shall be extended more than once. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Requests for extensions must be received by the code official prior to the expiration of the permit. The code official is not required to notify the permittee prior to the permit's expiration or that the permit has expired. The fee for an extension shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work. 
(Code 1992, § 5-765; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2011. - Suspension or revocation. 
The code official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of the existing building code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the existing building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-766; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2012. - Placement of permit. 
Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the building permit or copy thereof is posted on the site of the work until the completion of the project. The posted permit shall be visible from the street and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-767; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2013. - Responsibility. 
It shall be the duty of every person who performs work for which the existing building code is applicable, to comply with the existing building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-768; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2014. - Inspection record card and approved construction documents. 
Work for which a permit is required shall not be commenced until the permittee has made available an inspection record card and approved construction documents on the premises and in such a position to allow the code official convenient access and use. These items shall be protected from the elements and maintained in such location by the permittee until final approval has been granted by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-769; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2015. - Work without a permit: investigation required. 
(a)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for work without a permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5-770; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-2016—102-2038. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 102-2039. - Submittal documents. 
(a)  Special conditions. Construction documents, statement of special inspections and structural observation programs, investigation and evaluation reports, and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the code official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. Exception: The code official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with the existing building code. 
(b)  Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn to scale upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the code official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the existing building code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the code official. The work areas shall be shown. Sketches and pencil or other erasable media used to prepare construction documents shall not be accepted by the code official. 
(1)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for the minimum standards of acceptance for construction documents. 
(2)  Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection systems shall be submitted to indicate conformance with the existing building code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in chapter 9 of the International Building Code. 
(c)  Means of egress. The construction documents for alterations Level 2, alterations Level 3, additions, and changes of occupancy shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of the existing building code. The construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated in every work area of every floor, and in all affected rooms and spaces. 
(d)  Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all work affecting the exterior wall envelope shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with the existing building code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including windows, doors, flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings. The construction documents shall include manufacturer's installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the wind and weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as, the test procedure used. 
(Code 1992, § 5-781; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2040. - Site plan. 
The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The code official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration, repair, or change of occupancy. 
(Code 1992, § 5-782; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2041. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Review by code official. The code official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the existing building code and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Approval of construction documents. When the code official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by a stamp as "REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE." One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the code official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the code official or a duly authorized representative. 
(c)  Previous approvals. The existing building code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of the existing building code and has not been abandoned. 
(d)  Phased approval. The code official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of the existing building code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. 
(e)  Deferred submittals. For purposes of this section, the term "deferred submittals" mean those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the code official within a specified period. Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the code official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the code official. Submittal documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the code official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design and submittal documents have been approved by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-783; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2042. - Amended construction documents. 
Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents. Willful and prejudicial departure from or disregard of construction documents in any material respect without the approval of the code official is unlawful. 
(Code 1992, § 5-784; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2043. - Retention of construction documents. 
One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the code official for a period of not less than the period required for retention of public records. 
(Code 1992, § 5-785; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2044. - Design professional in responsible charge. 
When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the code official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The code official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. Where structural observation is required, the inspection program shall name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur. 
(Code 1992, § 5-786; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-2045—102-2066. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FEES 

Sec. 102-2067. - Payment of fees. 
A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. 
(Code 1992, § 5-791; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2068. - Schedule of permit and other fees. 
(a)  Payment of fees. On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit or other designated activity shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. 
(b)  Investigation fees; work without a permit. Where work, for which a permit is required, has been commenced prior to obtaining a permit, an investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by the existing building code. The minimum investigation fee shall be the same as the minimum permit fee set forth in accordance with the schedule as established by the board of commissioners of the county. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of the existing building code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-792; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2069. - Building permit valuations. 
The applicant for a permit shall provide an estimated permit value at time of application. Permit valuations shall include total value of the work, including materials and labor, for which a permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other permanent systems. If, in the opinion of the code official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the code official. Final building permit valuation shall be set by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-793; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2070. - Related fees. 
The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection to or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-794; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2071. - Refunds. 
(a)  The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(b)  Refunds shall not be given: 
(1)  For an application or permit that has expired. 
(2)  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the application submittal date. 
(3)  If more than 180 days has elapsed from the permit issuance date. 
(4)  For that component of the permit fee which is representative of the development impact fee. 
(Code 1992, § 5-795; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-2072—102-2090. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 102-2091. - Generally. 
Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the code official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of the existing building code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the existing building code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the code official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection. 
(Code 1992, § 5-801; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2092. - Preliminary inspection. 
Before issuing a permit, the code official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-802; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2093. - Required inspections. 
(a)  Required. The code official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in subsections (b) through (j) of this section. 
(b)  Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspection shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C94, the concrete need not be on the job. 
(c)  Concrete slab or under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor. 
(d)  Lowest floor elevation. For additions and substantial improvements to existing buildings in flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in the International Building Code shall be submitted to the code official. 
(e)  Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved. 
(f)  Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished. Exception: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear assembly. 
(g)  Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 
(h)  Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the code official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the existing building code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety. 
(1)  Lot and foundation survey. A survey of the lot and foundation shall be required by the building official to verify that the building or structure is located within the designated setbacks and in accordance with the approved plans for the following: 
a.  For all newly constructed single-family dwellings. 
b.  For residential accessory structures, pools and additions located within two feet of the setback, floodplain and/or watershed protection areas. 
(2)  The foundation survey shall occur after concrete is placed and shall be submitted to and approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department prior to the commencement of any framing operations or work. It shall be unlawful to commence any framing operations or work until the foundation survey is approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department. 
(3)  Exception. For pools, the survey shall be submitted to and approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department after excavation and the placement of forms and reinforcing steel, but prior to the placement of any concrete, shotcrete or gunite. For pre-manufactured pools, the survey shall be submitted to and approved by the county planning and zoning department and engineering department after excavation, but prior to the placement of the pool shell. 
(i)  Special inspections. Special inspections shall be required in accordance with the International Building Code. 
(j)  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-803; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2094. - Inspection agencies. 
The code official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(Code 1992, § 5-804; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2095. - Inspection requests. 
It shall be the duty of the permit holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the code official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspection of such work that are required by the existing building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-805; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2096. - Approval required. 
Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the code official. The code official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the same fails to comply with the existing building code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-806; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2097. - Work covered without inspection approval: investigation required. 
(a)  Whenever any work for which a permit is required has been covered without first obtaining the necessary inspection approval, a special investigation shall be made before subsequent inspections are approved. 
(b)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for work covered without inspection approval. 
(Code 1992, § 5-807; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-2098—102-2127. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 102-2128. - Attended use and occupancy classification change. 
No altered area of a building and no relocated building shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or portion thereof shall be made until the code official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of the existing building code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 5-811; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2129. - Certificate issued. 
After the code official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of the existing building code or other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety, the code official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following: 
(1)  The building permit number. 
(2)  The address of the structure. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner. 
(4)  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
(5)  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of the existing building code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified. 
(6)  The name of the code official. 
(7)  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
(8)  The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code. 
(9)  The type of construction as defined in the International Building Code. 
(10)  The design occupant load and any impact the alteration has on the design occupant load of the area not within the scope of the work. 
(11)  If an automatic sprinkler system is provided and whether the sprinkler system is required. 
(12)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5-812; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2130. - Temporary certificate of occupancy prohibited. 
The board of commissioners finds that certain nonresidential structures may be of such a size that requiring 100 percent completion of the structures can impact the timely legitimate and safe use of a substantial part of the structures. Components of this type of structures could be safe for persons to use, work in, or visit so long as certain minimum standards are met. The minimum standards within this chapter have been developed in recognition of the need to facilitate the early use of certain structures where requiring 100 percent of project completion could impact the timely legitimate and safe use of the structures based upon its size. 
(Code 1992, § 5-813; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 4(5-813), 1-15-2014) 
Sec. 102-2131. - Temporary certificate of occupancy. 
The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for nonresidential structures when all conditions for such issuance have been satisfied. The following criteria are minimum standards which must be met prior to any structure being eligible for a temporary certificate of occupancy: 
(1)  The development shall be an approved nonresidential use being constructed within a nonresidential zoning district. 
(2)  The development shall be a minimum of 50 acres. 
(3)  The building shall total a minimum of 25,000 square feet. 
(4)  All fees and every other charge due the county for the structure shall be current and paid in full. 
(5)  The area of the structure for which a temporary certificate of occupancy is being sought comprises at least 75 percent of the structure. 
(6)  Every part of a structure for which a temporary certificate of occupancy is being requested shall meet all minimum standard codes (building, fire, etc.) applicable to all nonresidential structures in the county. Separation of the area specified by the temporary certificate of occupancy from any area of ongoing construction will be required. Fire marshal release shall also be required. The building official shall identify the limits of the occupied area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 6(5-814), 1-15-2014) 
Sec. 102-2132. - Request for temporary certificate of occupancy. 
The owner/licensed contractor, to which a nonresidential Building Permit was issued, must submit in writing a request for issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy. This request shall include justification of the proposed need, construction plans identifying the requested area, and signed agreement holding the county harmless in the event of any claims that may arise during the period that the temporary certificate is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 6(5-815), 1-15-2014) 
Sec. 102-2133. - Time limit for temporary certificate of occupancy. 
The duration of the temporary certificate of occupancy shall not exceed 45 days. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 6(5-816), 1-15-2014) 
Sec. 102-2134. - Expiration of temporary certificate of occupancy. 
The temporary certificate of occupancy shall expire on the date provided thereon or on the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is first to occur. However, if the temporary certificate of occupancy expires prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the property owner acknowledges that the property owner is subject to a daily fine for every day after the expiration of the temporary certificate of occupancy until the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § 6(5-817), 1-15-2014) 
Sec. 102-2135. - Revocation. 
The code official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of the existing building code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of the existing building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-814; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 2014-01, § 5, 1-15-2014) 
Secs. 102-2136—102-2150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SERVICE UTILITIES 

Sec. 102-2151. - Connection of service utilities. 
No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by the existing building code for which a permit is required, until approved by the code official. 
(Code 1992, § 5-821; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2152. - Temporary connection. 
The code official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility, source of energy, fuel or power. 
(Code 1992, § 5-822; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2153. - Authority to disconnect service utilities. 
The code official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of the utility service to the building, structure or system regulate by the existing building code and the referenced codes in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The code official shall notify the serving utility and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Code 1992, § 5-823; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-2154—102-2179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 102-2180. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to repair, alter, extend, add, move, remove, demolish or change occupancy of any building or equipment regulated by the existing building code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of the existing building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-831; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2181. - Notice of violation. 
The code official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the repair, alteration, extension, addition, moving, removal, demolition or change in the occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the provisions of the existing building code, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the existing building code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-823; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2182. - Prosecution of violation. 
If the notice of violation is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the code official is authorized to request the solicitor general of the county state court to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of the existing building code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 5-833; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2183. - Violation penalties. 
Any person who violates a provision of the existing building code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who repairs or alters or changes the occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the existing building code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 5-834; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-2184—102-2209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - STOP WORK ORDER 

Sec. 102-2210. - Authority. 
Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by the existing building code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of the existing building code, other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of the existing building code, or dangerous or unsafe, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(Code 1992, § 5-841; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2211. - Issuance. 
The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
(Code 1992, § 5-842; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2212. - Unlawful continuance. 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Code 1992, § 5-843; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-2213—102-2237. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - EMERGENCY MEASURES 

Sec. 102-2238. - Imminent danger. 
When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building that endangers life, or when any building or part of a building has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases, or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby authorized an empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "DANGER!—NO ENTRY." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of demolishing the same. 
(Code 1992, § 5-851; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2239. - Temporary safeguards. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of the existing building code, whenever, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(Code 1992, § 5-852; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2240. - Closing streets. 
When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(Code 1992, § 5-853; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2241. - Emergency repairs. 
For the purposes of this section, the code official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(Code 1992, § 5-854; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2242. - Costs of emergency repairs. 
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1992, § 5-855; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2243. - Hearing. 
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the board of commissioners of the county, be afforded a hearing as described in the existing building code. 
(Code 1992, § 5-856; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2244. - Emergency declaration. 
In the event of a national, state, or local emergency declaration, the code official may waive or augment the provisions of this chapter as needed during the periods of emergency to protect public safety. 
(Code 1992, § 5-857; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2245. - Disaster assessment. 
(a)  Notification. Upon notification from emergency first responder personnel, law enforcement personnel or others of a disaster to a building or structure, the code official shall make or cause to be made any necessary visual, nondestructive inspections to determine: 
(1)  Immediate hazards that jeopardize public safety, health or general welfare; 
(2)  Extent of damage; 
(3)  Necessity to evacuate or condemn the building or structure; 
(4)  Necessity to disconnect or authorize reestablishment of utilities; 
(5)  What permits will be required; and 
(6)  Whether plans are necessary. 
(b)  Posting of placards. Placards shall be clearly posted at each entrance of the building or structure immediately upon completion of a disaster assessment as follows: 
(1)  Inspected—No Restriction on Lawful Use or Occupancy (Green); 
(2)  Danger!—Limited Entry (Yellow); or 
(3)  Danger!—No Entry (Red). 
It shall be unlawful to remove placards posted by the code official. 
(c)  Policies and procedures. The code official shall establish policies and procedures for conducting disaster assessments. 
(Code 1992, § 5-858; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 102-2246—102-2273. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 102-2274. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The board of commissioners finds and declares that within the county there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use, and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes; or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements; or general nuisance law, and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolitions of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the county there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation; such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the county; and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The board of commissioners finds that there exists in the county dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation, and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county; or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed; and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the board of commissioners that this article shall and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 4-2-9(a) as findings that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the county. 
(Code 1992, § 5-901; Ord. No. 2002-09, § 1, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 11, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2275. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or any department of the county to enforce the provisions of any local enabling Act, ordinance, or regulation; nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance or regulation. 
(Code 1992, § 5-902; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 3, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 11, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2276. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.) as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.); and 
(3)  The minimum standard codes adopted in section 102-22, provided that such building or minimum standard code for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.). 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department of the county or the state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, and by this article to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the county and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(Code 1992, § 5-903; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 4, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 1, 10-6-2004; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 11, 12-14-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 102-2277. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the county to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the county, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property, and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The board of commissioners appoints or designates the director of the building department and his designees, hereinafter the "director," as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the director by a public authority or by at least five residents of the county charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use, and is not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the director shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the director's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use, and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the director may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated, or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists, and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the director to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain and at a place within the county. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation, or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served an order upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing: 
(1)  That if the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, then requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation, and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  That if the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure, in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, then requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property; or 
(3)  For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs for the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in (O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the county. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the director may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The director shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling, building, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use, and does not comply with the applicable codes, or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the director has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The director and the board of commissioners are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such costs were incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in this subsection (g) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(2)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the director shall transmit to the tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The director's statement shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the county Tax Commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.); provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority. 
(3)  Enforcements of liens pursuant to this article shall be initiated at any time following receipt by the tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. Enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(4)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this article together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the board of commissioners and/or tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of the property from the lien may be in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(5)  The board of commissioners may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(6)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(7)  The director may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes; optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance; and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(8)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Code 1992, § 5-904; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 5, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 3, 10-6-2004; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 11, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2278. - Determination by director that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant; sample conditions of nuisances. 
The director may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if the director finds that conditions exist in such dwelling, building, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of the county. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted. 
The director may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or by report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Code 1992, § 5-905; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 6, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 11, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2279. - Powers of director. 
The director shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation; or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use; or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon any premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as the director deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of these functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as the director may designate. 
(Code 1992, § 5-906; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 7, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 11, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 102-2280. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by the director pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing the director shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable, copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing of the complaint, and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in the county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Code 1992, § 5-907; Ord. No. 2002-10, § 8, 9-26-2002; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 3, 10-6-2004; Ord. No. 2006-16, § 11, 12-14-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
Secs. 102-2281—102-2298. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - REGISTRATION OF VACANT OR FORECLOSED REAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 102-2299. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in the state at which he is authorized to accept inquiries, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by the county and is held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 9-26-2013) 
Sec. 102-2300. - Registration. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, there is hereby created in the county a registry of vacant or foreclosed real properties located within the county, with the exception of territory located within the boundaries of any municipal corporation unless otherwise allowed by intergovernmental agreement between the county and said municipal corporation. 
(b)  All vacant or foreclosed real property located within the area described in subsection (a) of this section must be registered as provided in this section and article, except as provided in section 102-2301. 
(c)  Each registrant shall file with the county administrator or his designee, a registration form setting out the following information: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  If applicable, the agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 9-26-2013) 
Sec. 102-2301. - Transfers. 
(a)  When any real property is acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure, the transferee shall not be required to register such foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or pay any of the administrative fees provided for in section 102-2304 where: 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in section 102-2300(c)(1) through (c)(5); 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk of superior court within 60 days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the county administrator, or his designee: 
a.  A filing date stamp or a receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(b)  Registration of vacant or foreclosed real property is not required within 90 days of such real property's transfer: 
(1)  Pursuant to a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; or 
(2)  To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
Once the aforementioned 90-day period has expired, registration of such vacant or foreclosed property must be made within 30 days of said expiration. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 9-26-2013) 
Sec. 102-2302. - Updating of information. 
The owner of vacant or foreclosed real property registered with the county shall update the information specified in section 102-2300(c)(1) through (c)(5) within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 9-26-2013) 
Sec. 102-2303. - Removal from registry. 
The owner of vacant or foreclosed real property registered with the county, or the agent of such owner, may apply to remove such vacant or foreclosed real property from the registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes vacant or foreclosed real property. Such application shall be considered by the county administrator or his designee, whose determination shall be issued within 30 days of the receipt of said application. If no such determination is made within 30 days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 9-26-2013) 
Sec. 102-2304. - Administrative fees. 
Upon the submission of the registration required in section 102-2300, the owner of such vacant or foreclosed real property, or the agent of such owner, shall pay to the county an administrative fee which shall be established by the board of commissioners and which shall not exceed $100.00 per registration. Said fee shall reasonably approximate the cost to the county of the establishment, maintenance, operation, and administration of the registry. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 9-26-2013) 
Sec. 102-2305. - Violations. 
Failure to register vacant or foreclosed real property or failure to update the information specified in section 102-2300(c)(1) through (c)(5) shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 9-26-2013) 
Sec. 102-2306. - Appeals. 
Any vacant or foreclosed real property owner affected by this article may challenge any determination made by the county or its officials pursuant to this article by appealing said determination to the magistrate court of the county. Such appeal shall be filed with the court no later than 30 days after receipt of said determination. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 9-26-2013) 
Chapter 104 - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Clearance, rehabilitation, etc., of blighted areas, O.C.G.A. § 8-4-1 et seq.; urban redevelopment, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq.; development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; conduct of directors and members of downtown development authorities, etc., O.C.G.A. § 36-62A-1; resource recovery development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; state department of community affairs, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq.; regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq.; rural economic development, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-120 et seq.; office of rural development, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-140 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 104-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall he known and may be cited as the "development regulations of Fayette County, Georgia." 
(Code 1992, § 8-1; Ord. No. 86-13, § 1-1, 7-24-1986; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 1, 8-26-2010) 
Sec. 104-2. - Landfill regulations. 
Prior to approval of zoning for a landfill, the board shall be provided sufficient data, acceptable to the department of natural resources, indicating that soil types, groundwater levels, etc., are conducive to landfilling operations. A site plan covering the entire tract under consideration showing access, buffer or screening areas, existing streams and non-usable lands, adjacent property owners, etc., shall be submitted for review. A 500-foot buffer shall be provided around the periphery of the tract. If restriction of movement of trash and debris is necessary, a fence at least six feet in height shall be provided around the periphery. 
(Code 1992, § 8-2; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 1-14-1998; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 1, 8-26-2010) 
Sec. 104-3. - Community sewer system regulations. 
Community sewer systems used must be approved by the county board of health. Treatment and discharge areas shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats. All community residential sewer systems must comply with the rules and regulations proposed by the water protection branch of the environmental protection division, department of natural resources for the state entitled "Land Application by Drip Irrigation" revised as of May 1, 1995, and as hereinafter amended, and containing the local amendment entitled "Sanitary Sewer System Specifications." 
(Code 1992, § 8-3; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 1-14-1998; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 1, 8-26-2010) 
Sec. 104-4. - Wetlands protection. 
(a)  Jurisdictional wetlands are areas that meet the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Jurisdictional wetlands determination is a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended. Any development project which, in the determination of the county stormwater management department, will disturb any wetlands area, either indicated on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) maps or by field determination of the county stormwater management director, must be submitted to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for a jurisdictional wetlands determination and permit if necessary. 
(b)  The NWI maps are on display in the county stormwater management department. If the official determination by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers indicates that jurisdictional wetlands will be affected/altered by the proposed activity, the applicant must obtain a permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers prior to the issuance of any permits from the county. The NWI map does not represent all of the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. No local government action under this chapter relieves the land owner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Code 1992, § 8-4; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 1, 8-26-2010) 
Secs. 104-5—104-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 104-27. - Use and structures. 
Property shall not be used and structures shall not be constructed or modified unless it is shown that a proposed use or storage is in compliance with all county regulations as verified by a certificate of zoning compliance. 
(1)  Building permit. Before issuing any type of building permit for the site, the building official must receive a certificate of zoning compliance approved by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Site plan required. Prior to the issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance by the zoning administrator, a site plan must be approved for any new nonresidential structure (including additions), use, and/or a change or expansion of a use, except as otherwise exempted in the Zoning Ordinance. Exemption of the requirement for a site plan approval for a new nonessential storage structure or a minor addition to an existing structure shall be granted by the zoning administrator upon determination that it does not affect septic, stormwater, parking, circulation and/or lot coverage requirements. Exemption of the requirement for a site plan approval for a change or expansion of a use shall be granted by the zoning administrator upon determination of compliance with all of the following criteria: 
a.  New structures, additions, and/or expansions are not proposed for the new use, except as otherwise provided herein. 
b.  The proposed use is a permitted use in the zoning district (conditional uses not exempt, except as otherwise exempted in the Zoning Ordinance). 
c.  The proposed use is a similar or less intensive use than the last authorized use of the property. 
d.  Thresholds for water use, septic systems, etc., are similar or less intensive than the last authorized use of the property. 
e.  The site complies with the minimum parking requirements for the proposed use and all other existing uses on site. 
f.  The site is in compliance with all conditions of approval, and site standard in effect at the time the pervious use was authorized. 
Exemption from the site plan approval process for a change of use does not also exempt the requirement for all other necessary permits and inspections. 
(Code 1992, § 8-26; Ord. No. 99-08, 6-24-1999; Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 6-28-2001; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 1, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-28. - Site plans. 
(a)  Filing of site plan. The site plan shall be submitted in accordance with the schedule of established application deadlines and meeting dates, a copy of which is available in the planning and zoning department. The site plan shall be deemed filed when it has been submitted to the zoning administrator. 
(b)  Site plan distribution. Fifteen copies of a 24 inches by 36 inches site plan shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department for distribution and review by the applicable departments. 
(c)  Site plan contents. The site plan shall: 
(1)  Be prepared by an engineer of architect registered in the state; 
(2)  Include a recorded signed and sealed survey indicating metes and bounds; and 
(3)  Contain all applicable information as required on the site plan review checklist, a copy of which is available at the planning and zoning department. 
(d)  Department approval. Upon completion of site plan review by the required departments, each department will return its comments to the planning and zoning department, who will make the appropriate entries on the site plan review checklist and notify applicant of approval, administrative conditions of approval, or additional requirements. 
(e)  Fee. A site plan review and compliance fee as specified in this Code will be collected and a receipt provided at the time of issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance by the zoning administrator and prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(f)  Other plans required. The following plans if applicable shall be submitted at the time of site plan submittal and shall be approved prior to site plan approval: 
(1)  Floodplain management plan. Reference article IV of this chapter of the development regulations for applicability and plan requirements (two sets). 
(2)  Landscape plan. Reference article V of this chapter for applicability and plan requirements (two sets). 
(3)  Tree protection plan. Reference article VI of this chapter for applicability and plan requirements (two sets). 
(4)  Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. Reference article IX of this chapter for applicability and plan requirements (three sets). 
(5)  Grading plan. Required only when a land disturbance permit is not applicable (two sets). 
a.  Clearing, grubbing or grading shall not be undertaken until a land disturbance permit has been approved by the environmental management department. If a land disturbance permit is not required, a grading plan shall be approved prior to any clearing, grubbing, or grading. 
b.  No clearing, grubbing or grading involving the use of explosive may be undertaken until a permit has been issued by the fire marshal. 
c.  No installation or removal of underground tanks for class I, II, or III flammable liquids shall be undertaken until appropriate permits and inspections have been conducted by the fire marshal. 
(6)  Water plan. If required by the water system (two sets). 
(g)  Verification of lot. In addition to an approved site plan, an applicant must provide verification that a plat of subdivision has been approved and recorded if required by article XV of this chapter. 
(h)  Approval by zoning administrator. Upon approval of the site plan by all the applicable departments, the zoning administrator may approve the certificate of zoning compliance. 
(i)  Certification of building official and fire marshal. The applicant will be notified by the zoning administrator's issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance that the site plan has been approved. A copy of the certificate of zoning compliance will be presented to the building official and fire marshal. 
(j)  Building construction plans. Two sets of building construction plans including one set in electronic media format known as a PDF (portable document file) format on a CD/RW shall be submitted to the fire marshal for review and approval by both the fire marshal and building official. Construction plans shall not be submitted to the fire marshal prior to the site plan approval process. Building construction plan documents should include: 
(1)  One PDF file on CD/RW with project manual PDF (complete set of construction drawings including site plans). Architect/engineer signed/scaled stamp required. 
(2)  Two complete sets of architectural construction drawings with appropriate architect/engineer signed/sealed stamp. Architectural drawings—floor plans; elevations; mechanical plans; plumbing plans; fire protection plans—fire extinguishers; alarm; smoke/heat detection; sprinkler plans. Construction type by International Building Code and building square footage should be noted. In addition to the fire marshal's requirements, the permits and inspection department requirements shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
a.  COM check; use and occupancy classification; occupant load; electrical panels and panel schedules; ARC fault current calculations and interrupt ratings for equipment; electrical load calculations; structural load packages; engineered trust/joist packages; framing details; statement of special inspections; footing/foundation specifications; gas line isometric details; ventilation, outside air, and makeup air schedules; specific hazardous area details; energy code details/specifications. 
b.  Check with the permits and inspections department for specific details/requirements for the project. 
c.  If applicable, two sets of project manuals with specifications. 
(k)  Site plan changes. Any deviations from an approved site plan must be shown on a revised site plan and approved by the applicable departments. Changes shall be authorized in writing on the revised site plan by the applicable departments. A copy of the revised site plan will then be given to the building official for inclusion in the project file. 
(l)  Fire marshal approval. The fire marshal shall approve all construction plans and submit to the building official a written report of compliance with chapter 12, fire prevention. Prior to any building construction, the applicant must obtain a construction permit through the bureau of lire prevention. This permit will not be in lieu of required permits through the building official. 
(m)  Certificate of occupancy. In no case shall a certificate of occupancy be issued by the building official unless an as-built condition is reflected on an approved site plan. 
(n)  Expiration of certificate of zoning compliance. If no application is made to obtain a building permit from the building official within 12 months of the date of zoning compliance, then said compliance shall be deemed null and void. 
(Code 1992, § 8-27; Ord. No. 1986-13, § 2-1, 7-24-1986; Ord. of 3-24-1988; Ord. No. 1997-08, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. 1998-08; Ord. No. 2001-06, 6-28-2001; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 1, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-29. - Compliance. 
(a)  Foundation survey. A signed and sealed foundation survey by a registered land surveyor shall be required after the foundation is poured. The planning and zoning department and the environmental management department shall review each structure's foundation survey for compliance. The planning and zoning department and environmental management department shall certify to the permits and inspections department that the building location and other aspects of the site comply with the approved site plan. Approval of a foundation survey is required prior to the framing of the structure. 
(b)  Final and 80 percent inspections. The building official shall notify the planning and zoning department and the environmental management department, and the fire marshal whenever a final inspection is requested. The planning and zoning department, the environmental management department, and the fire marshal shall inspect the project and shall certify to the building official that the site is in compliance, or that proper surety, as provided for in various county ordinances, has been posted. The building official shall not allow a structure to be occupied nor issue a certificate of occupancy prior to receiving certification of approval from the above named county employees. The fire marshal shall be notified directly by the owner or contractor whenever an 80 percent inspection is due. 
(c)  Fire marshal inspections. In addition to requesting an 80 percent inspection directly from the bureau of fire prevention, an applicant shall notify the bureau of fire prevention for other scheduled inspections. The fire marshal shall report in writing to the building official any deficiencies noted during the inspections. Certificates of fire safety compliance issued by the tire marshal shall not grant authority to occupy a building until the appropriate certificates have been issued by the building official. 
(Code 1992, § 8-27; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 1, 7-28-2016) 
Secs. 104-30—104-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Acquisition of property by counties for public road construction and other transportation purposes, O.C.G.A. § 32-3-1 et seq.; classification, designation, etc., of public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; county powers as to public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; reimbursement of counties in regard to acquisition of rights-of-way, O.C.G.A. § 32-5-26; acquisition by county of unauthorized outdoor advertising, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-83; limited-access roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-110 et seq.; commercial driveways leading to or from state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-130 et seq.; elimination of grade crossings, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-193 et seq.; reimbursement of counties for property, interests and rights-of-way conveyed to Georgia Highway Authority, O.C.G.A. § 32-10-6; county roads, bridges and ferries, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1. 

Sec. 104-47. - Definitions and acronyms. 
For the purpose of this article the following words, terms, acronyms, phrases and their derivations shall have the meaning provided in this section: 
AASHTO means the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, which publishes documents referenced in this article. 
Access means entrance to or exit from land adjacent to a public road. 
ADT means average daily traffic, which is the total volume (i.e., number of vehicles) during a given time period (in whole days), greater than one day and less than a year, divided by the number of days in that time period. 
Board of commissioners means the board of commissioners of the county. 
Construction plans means any plans required for the review, permitting and construction of a subdivision, including, but not limited to: site; grading; street profiles; stormwater management; floodplain management; utility; soil erosion, sediment, and pollution control; soil surveys; and construction details. 
County engineer means the official to whom the responsibilities normally associated with this title has been delegated. 
County thoroughfare plan is approved by the board of commissioners, indicating the designation of street type and is maintained by the county planning and zoning department. 
Cul-de-sac means a street, or segment of a street, with only one way in or out and which terminates at a turnaround constructed in accordance with the county development regulations. 
Development means a manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to any activity, action, or alteration that fundamentally alters the current use and/or density on the property and/or construction of buildings or other structures. 
Developments of regional impact means development projects that are likely to have an impact beyond the host local government's jurisdiction and are subject to review and evaluation pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act. 
Easement means an interest in land granted by a land owner to another person, consisting of the right to use or control the land, or an area above or below it, for a specific limited purpose, such as to cross for access to a public road. 
FHWA means the federal highway administration. 
GDOT means the Georgia Department of Transportation. References to on-line GDOT information is available at www.dot.ga.gov. 
Gravel road means an unpaved public road maintained by the county. Gravel roads may operate within public rights-of-way or prescriptive easements. 
ITE means the Institute of Transportation Engineers. ITE publishes trip generation rates that shall be used in estimating daily trips associated with a proposed development. 
Lot means a tract of land of varying sizes which is designated as a single unit of property. 
MUTCD means the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, current edition. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Phase means a portion or section of a larger development delineated on an approved, recorded final plat. 
Plat, final, means all divisions of a tract of land into two or more lots where the lots are less than five acres in size and/or new streets are created. 
PROWAG means proposed right-of-way accessibility guidelines developed by the public rights-of-way access advisory committee which provides technical assistance to transportation agencies and design professionals. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land, often of uniform width, that is owned by the county and used, or may be used for transportation, utilities, or similar purposes. 
Road, see Street. For purposes of this article, the terms "road" and "street" are used interchangeably. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare or road used for vehicular access to other streets and/or properties. Streets may be: 
(1)  Owned, operated and maintained by the county (i.e., those within a public right-of-way); 
(2)  Privately owned but open for public use and maintained by the county (i.e., those within a prescriptive easement); or 
(3)  Privately owned and maintained (i.e., a private road). 
Public streets are designated by type on the county thoroughfare plan. 
Subdivider means any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership or any agent thereof who undertakes or proposes to undertake the subdivision of land so as to create a subdivision as defined herein. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract of land into a minimum of two or more lots. 
Technical review committee means a committee of county staff that performs monthly reviews of preliminary and final plats prior to submittal to the planning commission. 
Tract means a specified parcel of land. 
Utility means any service available to the public by means of an overhead or underground distribution and/or collection systems such as electricity, telephone, water, wastewater, stormwater, cable, natural gas, etc. 
Zoning administrator means the official to whom the responsibilities normally associated with this title have been delegated. 
Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance enacted by the board of commissioners of the county, which is maintained and implemented by the county planning and zoning department and set forth in chapter 110. 
(Code 1992, § 8-46; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-48. - Design standards and specifications. 
(a)  All roads and bridges constructed in the unincorporated county shall conform to the standards and specifications set forth in this chapter as well as the following references: 
(1)  The GDOT Design Policy Manual, latest edition, as maintained by the division of engineering office of design policy and support and available on the GDOT webpage; 
(2)  GDOT Bridge and Structures Design Manual, latest edition as maintained by the office of bridges and structures and available on the GDOT webpage; 
(3)  GDOT Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control, latest edition as maintained by the office of traffic safety and design and available on the GDOT webpage; 
(4)  GDOT standard specifications, as applicable to the materials, methods of construction and workmanship used for street drainage and bridge construction. The standards and specifications are available on the GDOT webpage and the most recent edition shall apply; 
(5)  A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, latest edition, published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO); 
(6)  Guidelines for geometric design of very low-volume local roads (ADT ≤ 400), latest edition, published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO); 
(7)  Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition, published by the federal highway administration; and 
(8)  U.S. Traffic Calming Manual, latest edition, published by the American Planning Association. 
(b)  For all applicable sections of this article, sight distances shall be determined using the methods provided in AASHTO's Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, latest edition. 
(c)  In the event of a conflict between the design standards and specifications set forth in this article and one of the above-referenced documents, this code shall control. In the event of a conflict between two or more of the above-referenced documents the county engineer shall determine which controls. 
(Code 1992, § 8-47; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-49. - Roadway functional classification. 
For purposes of this article, roadway classifications are established by the county's thoroughfare plan. The thoroughfare plan is maintained by the county department of planning and zoning. Any street not shown on the thoroughfare plan shall be classified by the county engineer. 
(1)  Major arterial. All state routes within the county. The primary purpose of these roads is to provide regional traffic movement. Freight and truck traffic shall be directed to major arterials. 
(2)  Minor arterial. Streets that provide traffic movement within the county and intersect one or move major arterials. 
(3)  Collector. Streets whose primary function is to collect traffic from lower functional roadways and provide connectivity to minor and major arterials. 
(4)  County local. Streets that provide access to adjoining properties and traffic circulation within a limited area. Freight and truck through traffic is prohibited on county local roads. 
(5)  Low-volume local. A county local road with an average daily traffic volume of 400 vehicles per day or less. A road shall be designated as low-volume local if: 
a.  There is a specific request for such designation by county staff, property owners along an existing road, or the owner of a proposed new road; 
b.  It meets the ADT criteria; and 
c.  The designation is approved by the board of commissioners. 
(6)  Internal local. Streets that primarily serve an individual development and provides traffic circulation within that development. 
(Code 1992, § 8-48; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-50. - Traffic impact studies. 
(a)  Effective May 1, 2012, all subdivisions or site plans for proposed developments shall include an estimate of the average gross daily trips expected as a result of the project once fully developed and built-out. The number of trips shall be estimated using the ITE's trip generation rates. A traffic impact study shall be required for all developments estimated to generate a number of gross daily trips equal to or greater than threshold values established by the engineering department. The ADT of existing roads shall be determined by the engineering department and the data and means used to do so shall be shared with the project's owner upon request. 
(b)  Traffic impact studies shall be prepared under the supervision of a professional engineer licensed in the state and with appropriate experience and knowledge of the subject matter. The final report shall he stamped and signed by the engineer. 
(c)  The studies shall include, at a minimum, an assessment of existing and proposed traffic volumes and level of service for all existing roads and intersections within a "zone of influence" proposed by the design engineer and approved by the county's engineering department. Mitigation measures, to be agreed upon between the owner and the board of commissioners, shall be required for developments causing a significant impact to the county's transportation system, as determined by the engineering department. This may include, but is not limited to, a drop in level of service (LOS) of two letter grades (e.g., from LOS B to D) or any drop to a LOS of E or below that is not predicted without the proposed development, LOS values shall be established for both roadway segments and intersections. 
(d)  Traffic impact studies shall provide options for mitigation that at least maintain the LOS that are predicted without the proposed subdivision or development in the year full build-out is expected. Concept-level cost estimates for the mitigation measures shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Traffic impact studies, if applicable, shall be submittal with the preliminary plat for subdivisions or with the site plan for other types of developments. Additional guidance on the development of gross daily trips and traffic impact studies is available through the county's engineering department. 
(f)  Rezoning applications. At the request of the technical review committee, a concept-level traffic impact study may be required by the applicant during the rezoning process. The purpose of the concept-level study is to ensure the applicant and county have: 
(1)  A mutual understanding of the expected traffic impacts associated with the project; 
(2)  Agreement on the probable need for mitigation measures; and 
(3)  Similar expectations on the order-of-magnitude for the mitigation measures, if needed, development of a concept-level traffic impact study does not preclude the need for a full study at lime of subdivision or site plan submittal nor in any way limit the ultimate findings and conclusions of the full study. 
(Code 1992, § 8-49; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-51. - Exemptions. 
At the discretion of the county engineer, the following types of projects may be exempted from the traffic impact study requirements: 
(1)  Developments of regional impact (DRI); 
(2)  Projects with one or more access point on a state route; and 
(3)  Projects initiated by, or partially funded by, the county or one of the county's incorporated areas. 
(Code 1992, § 8-49.1; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-52. - Right-of-way. 
(a)  When permits/approvals are required. Approval from the county public works department is required prior to performing any construction work or nonroutine maintenance work within the county right-of-way. This includes but is not limited to the following: grading, landscaping, drainage work, and temporary access to land. Approval may be provided in the form of a driveway application permit, utility permit, construction plans, land disturbance permit (issued by stormwater management department) or written approval from the county engineer for unique circumstances that are not covered by the aforementioned. Work performed within county right-of-way without proper permits/approvals is subject to a stop work order and/or barricade, displacement or closure by public works. Any costs incurred to correct work perform unlawfully shall be reimbursed to the county by the adjacent property owner. 
(b)  Right-of-way minimum widths. The following table serves a guide for planning, design and acquisition: 

 
The values in this subsection are recommended minimum widths. Additional right-of-way may be required based on a road's characteristics. In all cases the right-of-way shall extend at least 12 feet beyond the edge of pavement. 
(c)  Right-of-way donation and acquisition. Owners shall donate right-of-way to the county, as needed, when developing or improving a property in one of the manners identified below. The amount of right-of-way required for donation shall be determined by public works using the functional classification minimum standards prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Compensation. No compensation shall be provided to the property owner for improvements (e.g., fences), landscaping, trees or other items located on the land to be donated, although the county shall be responsible for removing such items, as needed, once the donation is made. 
(e)  Subdivisions. Right-of-way donation shall be provided, as needed, pursuant to article XV of this chapter, pertaining to subdivision regulations, for any subdivision that is creating one or more new lots. 
(f)  Nonresidential developments. Any nonresidential development requiring new or improved access to a public road and a site plan or land disturbance permit from the county shall donate right-of-way, as needed. Developments that front both sides of a public road that does not have the minimum right-of-way width shall donate the necessary land along the development's road frontage to meet the requirements. The donation shall be made equally on both sides of the road such that the road's centerline is the center of the right-of-way. Developments abutting only one side of such a road shall donate the necessary land to provide a minimum of one-half the required right-of-way, as measured from the road's centerline. 
(g)  Development along gravel roads. Any development along a gravel road maintained by the county and requiring new or improved access and a site plan or land disturbance permit from the county shall donate right-of-way, as needed. Developments along both sides of a gravel road shall donate the necessary land along the development's road frontage to meet the requirements. The donation shall be made equally on both sides of the road such that the road's centerline is the center of the right-of-way. Developments abutting only one side of such a road shall donate the necessary land to provide a minimum of one-half the required right-of-way, as measured from the road's centerline. This requirement applies to residential as well as nonresidential developments since any amount of development along a gravel road furthers the need for maintenance and increases the likelihood of paving the road in the future. 
(h)  Future transportation projects. The public works department shall maintain a list of transportation projects supported by the board of commissioners and planned for implementation at some point in the future. These projects may include, but are not limited to, new road construction, road widening, multiuse path construction, and intersection improvement projects. When a future transportation project adjoins or traverses a proposed subdivision or development project, the county may require the appropriate future right-of-way needed for the project to be platted as part of the subdivision or development project. Unless, the "future transportation project" is required to support the proposed subdivision or development, the county shall purchase the property from the owner following the county's policy for right-of-way acquisition. 
(i)  Building line setbacks for future right-of-way. This section establishes requirements for right-of-way donation and acquisition associated with various land development and improvements projects. The purpose of this section is to establish appropriate building line setbacks for developments located along roads with right-of-way needs, pursuant to the thoroughfare plan, but exempt from providing the required right-of-way at the time of development or subdivision. Examples include residential building permit applications on paved roads and minor revisions to final plats. These developments shall establish building line setbacks from the required future right-of-way line or existing right-of-way line, whichever is greater. Doing so ensures the building or other improvement will be located a sufficient distance from the road once anticipated safely, operational, or capacity improvements are made to the road. For example, a building application permit for construction of a new home on a paved road with 60 feet of right-of-way shall establish setbacks using a future right-of-way line measured 40 feet from road centerline if the road is shown as a collector per the county's thoroughfare plan. For situations in which this requirement causes undue hardship, a variance may be sought through the county zoning board of appeals pursuant to article IX of chapter 110, zoning. 
(Code 1992, § 8-50; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-53. - Construction requirements for roads and streets. 
(a)  General information. Placement of the base material and asphalt shall be inspected and approved by the engineering department as specified below. The owner of the project shall be responsible for requesting such inspections by the county. A minimum advance notice of 24 hours shall be provided when scheduling inspections. Placement of base and/or asphalt shall not be done until such inspections have been conducted. Unless noted otherwise, all tests and data, as required per this section, shall be provided by the owner at no cost to the county. All inspections shall be documented and include pertinent information such as date, time, inspector, weather, station numbers, results of inspection, required action, etc. 
(b)  Subgrade. Kill areas shall be deconstructed in eight- to 12-inch lifts. Individual lifts shall be compacted using sheepsfoot rollers (or pneumatic tire rollers for cohesionless and low-cohesion soils) or similar equipment capable of obtaining the required compaction. The centerline profile shall conform to the established elevations within an acceptable tolerance of 0.1 foot. A surveyed as-built centerline profile shall be provided to the county for all collectors and arterials, and for any segment of a local road identified by the engineering department as having potential safety or drainage concerns. 
(1)  Soil density tests shall be performed on roadway fills four feet in height or greater. Compaction tests shall be performed on every other lift (i.e., every 16 to 24 inches) at 100-foot intervals along the fill section. Compaction tests shall be performed to within 12 inches of the final grade of the subgrade. Fill areas shall be compacted to 95 percent maximum dry density per the standard proctor test (ASTM D698. AASHTO T99). The locations of the density tests are subject to county approval and additional test locations may be required if there are areas of questionable compaction. 
(2)  The density testing shall be conducted by an independent third party selected by the owner and approved by the engineering department. If the subgrade compaction is less than the required percentage the owner shall remove, replace, and/or recompact the area in question, or use other means approved by the engineering department, until the density meets the required standards. Signed copies of all test results shall be submitted to the engineering department. 
(3)  The compaction of the top 12 inches of subgrade shall be inspected by a proof roll inspection (see below). The proof roll inspection of the subgrade shall not be conducted until all applicable density test results have been submitted to, and approved by, the engineering department. 
(c)  Lateral subdrains. Lateral subdrains shall be installed at locations shown on the approved construction plans. Unless approved otherwise, subdrains shall be placed at a minimum interval of every 500 feet for roads with a continuous grade of two percent or less and in all sag vertical curves and cul-de-sacs. The top of the stone surrounding the subdrain shall be at the interface of the subgrade and base. The subdrains shall extend from the road's centerline to the nearest drop inlet or ditch on either side of the road. In cul-de-sacs, the subdrain shall be designed to accommodate the location of the drop inlet and expected groundwater flow. Subdrains shall consist of a six-inch perforated plastic pipe placed near the bottom of a two feet wide by two feet deep ditch backfilled with clean No. 57 stone. Filter fabric shall be placed around the perimeter of the ditch prior to backfilling and the fabric folded over the top prior to placement of base material. A lateral subdrain detail is available from the engineering department to assist with design and installation. 
(d)  Base. Base thickness shall be verified by field measurement and shall not be deficient in any area by more than one-half inch from the specifications on the approved construction drawings. Deficient areas shall be corrected by adding additional quantities of the same base material and rebuilt to the desired thickness. The owner, at his expense, shall prepare the holes for measurement. Measuring holes shall be dug every 500 feet, or less, to confirm the required base thickness. At least one additional measurement shall be taken for every measurement that is less than the minimum base thickness (excluding the one-half-inch tolerance). A representative from the county engineering or road department shall determine the measuring hole locations and confirm the depth of base. 
(e)  Proof-rolls. Proof-roll inspections shall be conducted on the subgrade prior to placing base and on the base prior to pacing asphalt. The purpose of the proof-roll inspection is to ensure the subgrade and compacted based course have sufficient stability to support any and all types of heavy equipment used to build the road without pumping (i.e., vertical or horizontal displacement of the material due to a variety of factors, including too much water, not enough compaction, etc.). Proof-roll compaction inspections of the subgrade and base (two independent inspections) shall be by a loaded tandem-axle dump truck having a total weight of 56,000 pounds (28 tons). Any area not passing the proof-roll inspection shall be corrected by the owner at no cost to the county and then scheduled for reinspection. 
(f)  Asphaltic and Portland cement concrete construction of roads and streets. The following table indicates the minimum material type and thicknesses for various types of roads within the county. At the discretion of the engineering department, the pavement design may be dictated by the anticipated surrounding land use rather than functional classification. Specifically, roads serving office-institutional and commercial uses shall be built to "collector" standards; and roads serving manufacturing or industrial uses shall be built to "arterial" standards: 
ASPHALTIC CONCRETE ROADS AND STREETS  (minimum standards) 

 
*Note. The design for improvements to an arterial road or for the construction of a new arterial roadway shall include a pavement design that includes projected truck volumes. The pavement analysis shall follow current GDOT procedures and methods. Up to a ten percent under-design may be allowed if approved by the county engineer. In no case shall the pavement thickness be less than those shown in this table. 
The materials, methods and quality control used for installation of asphaltic concrete shall meet all applicable GDOT standards and specifications including, but not limited to, section 400—Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete Construction. 
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE ROADS AND STREETS  (minimum standards) 

 
The materials, methods and quality control used for installation of Portland cement concrete shall meet all applicable standards and specifications provided in the document titled section 439-Portland Cement Concrete pavement for Local Roads, Streets and Parking Lots, dated July 13, 2010. A copy of these standards and specifications are available through the county's engineering department. Pavement and base thickness shall be established in the concrete design and paving plans prepared for each project and alternate designs (i.e., from those specified above) may be used if approved by the engineering department. 
Exceptions to applicable GDOT standards and specifications, for either asphaltic concrete or Portland cement concrete, may be provided, upon request, by the engineering department exceptions shall only be valid if requested in writing and approved by the engineering department prior to start of paving operations. 
(g)  Core samples. Pavement thickness shall be verified by core samples. The pavement thickness shall be considered unacceptable if it is deficient in any sample by more than one-fourth inch from the requirements on the approved construction drawings. Samples shall be taken every 500 feet from the center of a travel lane, alternating lanes between samples. A minimum of three samples shall be collected for every street (if less than 1,500 feet) with one of the three samples taken from the cul-de-sac, if present. Additional samples may also be required at pavement joint lines (typically road centerline) if field observations indicate a concern about thickness in these locations. At the discretion of the engineering department, additional samples may be required to isolate areas of concern around samples with asphalt thicknesses below the tolerance level. 
(1)  The remedy to correct areas with insufficient pavement shall vary depending on the road type. For roads with no curb and gutter, the remedy shall include an overlay of an asphalt mix that matches the existing road surface and placed at a lift thickness within the accepted range for that mix type. Joints shall be milled to allow for a smooth transition between existing and new asphalt. The overlay shall extend to the nearest intersection if it is located within 100 feet of the problem area. 
(2)  For roads with curb and gutter, the asphalt, base and subgrade shall be removed, as needed, to allow room for placement of base and asphalt in accordance with the county standards and approved construction plans. The finish elevation of the top course of asphalt shall be flush with the gutter. Joints shall be milled to allow for a smooth transition between existing and new asphalt. The overlay shall extend to the nearest intersection if it is located within 100 feet of the problem area. 
(Code 1992, § 8-51; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-54. - Design standards. 
(a)  The latest edition of the AASHTO A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets is incorporated into this regulation by reference. The rules and requirements contained within the AASHTO document shall apply to county roads and streets unless a regulation is in conflict or superseded by other text in this article. On county roads and streets, the county engineering department shall act as the implementing body in lieu of the state department of transportation or AASHTO. 
(b)  Applicable design standards established in A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Sight distance; 
(2)  Horizontal alignment; 
(3)  Vertical alignment; and 
(4)  Other elements affecting geometric design. 
AASHTO's Guidelines for Geometric Design of Very Low Volume Local Roads may be used to establish standards when the average daily traffic is expected to be less than 400 vehicles per day. 
(c)  General road specifications. 
(1)  Centerline crown. Except in areas of super elevation, all roads shall have a crown with a side slope of one-fourth inch per foot (or approximately two percent). 
(2)  Tangents. Between reverse horizontal curves there shall be a minimum tangent of 50 feet for local roads and 100 feet for collectors and streets within business parks. The minimum tangent for arterials shall be set by AASHTO. 
(3)  Superelevation. Superelevation is not required for internal local and low volume local roads. 
(4)  Sight distance. Stopping sight distance shall be used for all applicable design criteria associated with internal local and low volume local roads. 
(5)  Sag vertical curves. Minimum rates of vertical curvature (K values) less than those required by AASHTO may be approved by the engineering department for internal local and low-volume local roads if doing improves the overall drainage characteristics of that section of road and/or minimizes impacts to streams or wetlands without an unacceptable impact to sight distance. 
(6)  Horizontal curves. The radius of horizontal curves on internal local streets shall be no less than 175 feet. The minimum horizontal radius for all other functional classifications shall be set by applicable AASHTO standards. 
(7)  Intersections. The minimum angle of intersection shall be set by applicable GDOT standards. (See Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control.) 
(8)  Design speed, grades and pavement width. See the following table: 

 
Note: 
1. A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Street, latest edition. 
2. Guidelines for Geometric Design of Very Low Volume Local Roads, latest edition. 
Minimum grades as low as 1.5 percent and maximum grades as high as 15 percent may be used for short segments if needed to accommodate site-specific characteristics and the use is approved by the engineering department. It is the responsibility of the design engineer to provide sufficient justification for the variance. 
(d)  Cul-de-sac specifications. 
(1)  Dimensions. Cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum paved radius of 40 feet, excluding curb and gutter. Larger minimum radii may be required for nonresidential settings. 
(2)  Right-of-way. The minimum right of way around a cul-de-sac shall be either based on a 60-foot radius from the center of the cul-de-sac or set such that the distance between edge of pavement and the right-of-way line along the roadway is maintained around the cul-de-sac, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Islands. Landscape islands in cul-de-sacs are allowed however they shall be considered "common space" to the development and the ownership and maintenance responsibilities shall be clearly defined on the final plat. A minimum travel lane of 18 feet shall be provided around the island. The construction drawings shall verify appropriate turning areas for school buses, tractor-trailers (53 feet) and emergency response vehicles. 
(4)  Alternatives to cul-de-sacs. All streets shall terminate at an intersection, cul-de-sac or other county-approved design that allows for safe and efficient turn around for emergency response vehicles, school buses, delivery vehicles, etc. 
(e)  Stormwater management plan. Stormwater management requirements applicable to road design and construction are codified in article XIV of this chapter, pertaining to post-development stormwater management for new development and redevelopment. 
(Code 1992, § 8-52; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-55. - Driveway and encroachment control. 
(a)  The latest edition of the GDOT Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control is incorporated into this section by reference. The rules and requirements contained within the GDOT document shall apply to county roads and streets unless a regulation is in conflict or superseded by other text in this article. On county roads and streets, the county engineering department shall act as the implementing body in lieu of the state department of transportation. 
(b)  In situations where the following provisions: Residential access, nonresidential access, access for new road construction and auxiliary turn lanes, cannot be satisfied due to unusual site characteristics, technical, or legal reasons, the number and location of curb cuts or turn lanes shall be approved by the county engineer with input from the county's technical review committee. 
(c)  Residential access. 
(1)  Zoning ordinance reference. Every residential lot shall meet the minimum requirements of section 110-67, street frontage for access. 
(2)  Driveway application permits. No new driveway to county right-of-way or prescriptive casement shall be made without an approved driveway application permit from the engineering department. Residential developments on internal local roads are exempt from the driveway application permit requirement. 
(3)  Numbers of driveways. Residential lots shall have at least one (unless a shared driveway is authorized) and no more than two driveway cuts. Driveways to agricultural-residential (A-R) zoned properties for agricultural or other nonresidential purposes are exempt from the two-per-lot limit but shall meet all other residential access standards. 
(4)  Location. Driveways shall be located at least two feet from any side or rear property line. 
(5)  Maximum width. The maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed 24 feet at the right-of-way line. For roads with prescriptive casement, the width measurement shall be made 18 feet hack from the edge of existing road. 
(6)  Multiple road frontage. Residential lots with road frontage on multiple roads shall have the driveways located on the street with the lowest functional classification unless authorized otherwise by the county engineer. Exceptions may be provided if doing so improves safety, minimizes environmental impacts, or is appropriate based on site-specific physical characteristics of the property. 
(7)  Sight distance. Minimum sight distances shall be satisfied for all new driveways. Properties on local roads, or any other county road with a posted speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less, shall have a minimum sight distance of 200 feet in either direction. Sight distance requirements and measurements for all other roads shall be per GDOT's Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
(8)  Shared driveways. A maximum of two residential lots may share a single driveway if the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  The shared driveway is justified by either insufficient sight distance at one of the lots or otherwise authorized by the county engineer because doing so improves safety, minimizes environmental impacts, or is appropriate based on site-specific physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The width of the shared driveway shall be a minimum of 12 feet and constructed of an all-weather surface approved by the engineering department; 
c.  The driveway shall have a minimum clear zone of 20 feet that extends, continuous, from the right-of-way to both homes served by the driveway. The purpose of the clear zone is to ensure unobstructed emergency access to the homes; 
d.  A permanent cross-access easement shall be recorded and the easement reflected on the plat and deed of both properties; and 
e.  The street address of each lot shall be clearly marked at the road and at all forks in the shared driveway. 
(9)  Circular driveways. Each lot may have one circular (e.g., a horseshoe drive) if the sight distance requirements can be satisfied for both entrances. Circular driveways may also connect multiple frontages if both streets have the same functional classification. Circular driveways shall count as one driveway cut with respect to limits on the number of driveways per lot. 
(10)  Mailing address. Mailing addresses arc issued by the county's building permits and inspections department. 
(d)  Nonresidential access. 
(1)  Zoning ordinance reference. Every nonresidential lot shall meet the minimum requirements of section 110-67, street frontage for access. 
(2)  Driveway application permits. No new driveway to county right-of-way or prescriptive casement shall be made without an approved site plan and/or certificate of zoning compliance from the planning and zoning department. This requirement may be waived by the engineering department if the reason for the new driveway is a result of a county initiated project. 
(3)  Numbers of driveways. The number of driveways for nonresidential lots shall be determined by the available road frontage and the minimum spacing criteria established in the GDOT's Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
(4)  Multiple road frontage. Nonresidential lots with road frontage on multiple roads shall have the driveway located in a manner consistent with GDOT's Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
(5)  Sight distance. Minimum sight distances shall be satisfied for all new driveways. Properties on local roads, or any other county road with a posted speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less, shall have a minimum sight distance of 200 feet in either direction. Sight distance requirements and measurements for all other roads shall be per GDOT's Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
(6)  Design criteria. All new or modified nonresidential driveways shall meet all applicable standards as established in the GDOT's Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. Developments with site plans that requires changes to the parking area or internal drives shall improve existing driveways to meet current standards, including addition of left or right turn lanes, as applicable. 
(7)  Driveway offset from property line. All driveways for nonresidential lots shall be no closer than 20 feet to any property line. 
(8)  Shared driveways. Shared driveways for nonresidential lots are encouraged, although the following criteria shall be satisfied. 
a.  The width of the shared driveway shall be a minimum of 24 feet (if two-way) and paved with asphalt or concrete per the approved site plan; 
b.  A permanent cross-access casement shall he recorded and the easement reflected on the plat and deed of both properties; 
c.  The street address of each lot shall be clearly marked at locations and with markers approved by the fire and emergency services department; 
d.  Each lot shall have the minimum required road frontage; and 
e.  Shared driveways are exempt from the 20-foot minimum offset from property lines as specified above in (7). 
(9)  Interparcel access. Interparcel access shall be provided between adjacent nonresidential properties. If the neighboring property does not have an existing stub, parking lot or driveway feasible for tie-in, then a stub shall be constructed to the side or rear property line. Access easements shall be provided, as described in subsection (d) (7) of this section for shared driveways, to allow for through traffic. This requirement may be waived by the county engineer if site circumstances make interparcel access impractical, such as natural grades in excess of 15 percent, sensitive environmental areas, incompatible uses, excessive distances, etc. 
(10)  Mailing address. Mailing addresses are issued by the county's building permits and inspections department. 
(Code 1992, § 8-53; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 2, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-56. - Resurfacing of county roads and streets. 
The following requirements shall apply to resurfacing projects of county roads and streets by an owner as a result of a related subdivision or development project. Unless noted otherwise, all work shall be provided by the owner at no cost to the county. 
(1)  All work and material shall meet minimum GDOT Standard Specifications, as available on the GDOT webpage. 
(2)  All weak areas, as identified by the road department, shall be removed and repaired with proper full depth patches. All debris (e.g., soil, GAB, asphalt, etc.) shall be removed and disposed of properly. 
(3)  The surface to be overlaid shall be thoroughly cleaned and all debris removed. 
(4)  A lack coat of asphalt, meeting GDOT standards, shall be applied to the entire suffice to be overlaid. 
(5)  Prior to placing the overlay, a county-approved leveling course shall be used where necessary or as determined by the engineering department. 
(6)  The county road department will evaluate the existing pavement conditions and determine the overlay thickness using the methods in the asphalt institute's manual, asphalt overlays for highway and street rehabilitation. For all streets other than residential, actual traffic counts will be obtained and coring (by owner), or other acceptable methods of obtaining the actual existing pavement thickness, will be utilized. In no case shall an overlay thickness be less than one inch. 
(7)  For roads with curb and gutter, the top layers of asphalt shall be removed by milling if the top elevation of the proposed overlay will be 1.5 inches or more above the top of gutter. The county may elect to share milling costs if it is desired to remove more than the minimum thickness required for the resurfacing. 
(Code 1992, § 8-54; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-57. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  The fabrication and placement of all street names, signs, traffic control signs, posts, striping, pavement markings, raised pavement markers (RPMs), traffic signals and associated signage shall conform to the standards, materials, and requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition and the GDOT standards and specifications. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface or take down any street name, property number, traffic control sign, or signal placed in accordance with this provision except for repair or replacement. 
(c)  Street names and property address numbers. Street names shall not duplicate or be similar in sound or spelling to the names of existing streets in the county. Hyphenating, dividing one word into two words, affixing "Drive" for "Road," etc., or other manipulations of an existing street name shall not constitute an acceptable street name. Similar sounding names shall be unacceptable regardless of spelling. 
(1)  Continuity of street names. A continuous street, one proposed to be continuous, or one proposed to continue an existing street shall bear the same name throughout. 
(2)  Subdivision street address numbering. The county's established street address numbering system shall be utilized for all subdivisions in the county. 
(3)  Maximum character count. Street names shall be such that the maximum number of characters or spaces required on a sign is 20. (For example, "Brooks Woolsey Road" has a character count of 19.) 
(4)  Address numbers. Every building shall be assigned and display an address number. The size and location of the address number shall meet the International Fire Code requirements. If a mailbox is located at the street, such mailbox shall have the property number affixed thereto with numerals measuring at least three inches in height. 
See article XV of this chapter for additional information on property addresses and approval of street names and subdivision names. 
(d)  Street signs and traffic control signs. 
(1)  Installation responsibility. Street name sign, traffic control signs, and posts shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense per a sign and marking plan approved the engineering department. 
(2)  Decorative posts and frames. Ornamental posts and frames may be used within Developments, pending approval by the engineering department, however all signs shall conform to the MUTCD with respect to size, shape, color, material and reflectivity. The county will not maintain or provide material replacements to match decorative frames and posts. If replacement of any ornamental traffic control sign within the right-of-way is required. The county road department will provide a standard post, frame and sign. 
(3)  Field approval. All traffic control devices shall be installed and functional prior to final plat approval unless written exception is provided by the county engineer, in which case installation requirements shall be incorporated into a performance bond for the subdivision. 
(4)  Intersection ahead warning sign. For each new subdivision entrance, the sign and marking plan shall include two intersection wanting signs (e.g., W2-2L) with accompanying intersecting street name placards for placement on the main road. 
(e)  Pavement markings. 
(1)  Specifications. Pavement markings shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense per a sign and marking plan approved by the engineering department. Striping and marking materials shall meet all applicable GDOT standards and specifications. 
(2)  Thermoplastic. Thermoplastic pavement markings are required for all striping work on state routes, arterials, collectors and at subdivision entrances. 
(3)  Internal local roads. No pavement markings are required on internal local roads except for those indicated on the county's subdivision entrance sign and striping detail. 
(f)  Traffic signals. 
(1)  Specifications. Traffic signal requirements vary dependent upon field conditions and proximity to other signals, however, GDOT and MUTCD standards shall be satisfied. 
(2)  Interconnectivity. When, in the opinion of the road department, it is necessary to provide traffic signal interconnectivity, coordination and/or signal timing optimization due to the close proximity of a proposed signal (required for an owner's project) with an existing signal, the owner shall prepare and submit appropriate plans and traffic studies to the road department for review. Once approved, the owner shall perform the work per the plans and schedule agreed to by the county. Performance bonds may be required for delayed work. 
(3)  Warrant study. A warrant study satisfying MUTCD criteria may be required prior to approval for installation of a traffic signal on a county road. Signal installation on county roads shall be permitted at the discretion of the road department. 
(Code 1992, § 8-55; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-58. - Utilities. 
(a)  Locations. In order to promote uniformity in installation and more effective and less damaging maintenance, utilities shall be located per the locations specified in the county typical utility locations detail, available from the engineering department. Exceptions to the designated utility location shall be made, in writing, to the county engineer for consideration. 
(b)  Utility permits. No utility work shall be performed within county right-of-way without a utility permit approved by the engineering or road department. Supporting information for the permit shall include a description of the proposed work, location (with starting and ending limits) and timeframe. In addition, the utility shall agree to the following conditions: 
(1)  Any damaged caused to the existing pavement or shoulders of road will be repaired and guaranteed, at no cost to the county, by the utility company; 
(2)  The county shall not be liable for any unwillful damage to the utility by county maintenance forces in the future; and 
(3)  The utility shall be relocated and/or adjusted by the utility company at no cost to the county if it is ever necessary or desired to rebuild, widen or improve the road in a manner that conflicts with the utility. A fee may be required for the permit. 
(Code 1992, § 8-56; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-59. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks may be installed by an owner within county right-of-way in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Location. The location of proposed sidewalks shall be shown on the project's construction plans and are subject to county approval. Consideration should be given to utility placement and any proposed trees. Water meters, valves and other access points shall be located outside the sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be located a minimum of four feet from back of curb to allow for sign placement and at least eight feet from back of curb if street trees are proposed. 
(2)  Dimensions. Sidewalks shall be between four and six feet wide and a minimum thickness of four inches. A standard width shall be maintained around all obstacles such as poles, utility boxes, etc. 
(3)  Material and finish. Sidewalks shall be Portland cement concrete with a minimum 28-day compressive strength of 3,000 psi. The concrete shall be finished with tamps, floats and stiff-bristle brooms. 
(4)  Cross-slope. The maximum allowable cross-slope shall not exceed 2.0 percent (PROWAG R301.4.1). 
(5)  Longitudinal slope. The longitudinal slope (grade) of a sidewalk shall not exceed the general grade established for the adjacent street (PROWAG R301.4.2). In cases where the sidewalk alignment deviates from the adjacent roadway, the longitudinal slope shall not exceed 8.3 percent (PROWAG 303.2.1.1). 
(6)  Curb ramps. In accordance with the ADA, accessible curb ramps shall be included on pedestrian facilities. The ramp profile shall have a running slope between 5.0 and 8.3 percent (PROWAG R406.2). The ramp shall be placed in line with pedestrian flow and crosswalks, and the edges of a diagonal curb ramp shall be parallel to the direction of pedestrian flow, refer to GDOT Construction Standards and Details for additional information regarding the typical location, design and construction of sidewalks and curb ramps. 
(7)  Sidewalk surface. The surface of the sidewalk shall be firm, stable and slip resistant. Surface discontinuities shall not exceed one-half inch maximum vertical or horizontal (PROWAG R301.5.2). 
(8)  Expansion joints. One-half inch expansion joints shall be constructed with a preformed or pre-molded elastic and resilient material. Expansion joints shall be provided wherever a sidewalk abuts an existing structure, such as another sidewalk, curb, ramp or driveway, and at a maximum 60 feet interval along a sidewalk. 
(9)  Traverse contraction joints. Contraction joints, or false joints, shall be spaced every five to six feet along the sidewalk. The joints shall be perpendicular to the edge and straight. All edges shall be rounded to one-fourth-inch radius. 
(10)  ADA compliance. Sidewalks shall be designed in accordance with the Americans with Disability Act's Title II requirements. 
(11)  Sidewalk repair. The county shall repair sidewalks that are damaged if located within the county right-of-way. Repairs shall be made in a prioritized manner and as funds allow. The responsibility and cost for repair may be deferred to the adjacent property owner if the damage was a result of negligence by the property owner. The county shall not be responsible for the maintenance of sidewalks, including work such as edging of vegetation, insect control, or cleaning. 
(Code 1992, § 8-57; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-60. - Roundabouts. 
The use of roundabouts for intersection control is encouraged. Design criteria shall follow the most recent guidelines available from the Federal Highway Administration, however exceptions to standard design criteria shall be considered by the engineering department if they are not appropriate or applicable for internal local or low-volume roads. Conflicts among one or more sources shall be discussed with the engineering department during concept design (i.e., at the preliminary plat for subdivision projects). The project owner shall provide a traffic study to help determine the functionality and required design characteristics of the proposed roundabout. The study may be limited to demonstrating adequate turning radii for roundabouts within internal local or low-volume roads. 
(Code 1992, § 8-58; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-61. - Traffic calming. 
(a)  The use of traffic calming measures on local roads, particularly internal locals, is encouraged. The American Planning Association's U.S. Traffic Calming Manual is one guideline for determining appropriate use of and design of traffic calming methods, although other sources of reference material will be considered when evaluating designs. Physical traffic calming measures shall be provided within any section of new road having a tangent section of 750 feet or more and a functional classification of county local or less. 
(b)  Additional information on the use of nonphysical and physical deterrents for traffic calming on county roads is available through the engineering department. 
(Code 1992, § 8-59; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-62. - Landscape islands. 
Landscape islands within a road may be installed by an owner within county right-of-way in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Location. The landscape island shall not restrict sight distance for vehicles making turns onto or off the road with the landscape island. 
(2)  Right-of-way. Right-of-way shall be increased to a minimum of 80 feet around the island and include appropriate transitions back to the standard right-of-way width. 
(3)  Curb and gutter. Landscape islands shall be delineated with curb and gutter regardless of whether curb and gutter is required in the remainder of the subdivision. 
(4)  Drainage. The construction plans for the project shall provide positive drainage (two percent minimum) away from the landscape island or provide catchbasins on either side of the island. 
(5)  Island width. Landscape islands shall have a maximum width of 18 feet, measured back of curb to back of curb. Proposed green space wider than 18 feet shall be considered a median and addressed on a case-by-case basis by the engineering department. 
(6)  Travel lanes. Single travel lanes adjacent to landscape islands at the entrance of a subdivision shall have a minimum width of 16 feet, although the pavement shall be striped to maintain a 12-foot drive lane. Two lanes or more in the same direction may have the standard lane width used throughout the subdivision. 
(7)  Ownership and maintenance. The county does not accept ownership of a landscape island within right-of-way as county property. The county shall not be responsible for the maintenance or repair of the island or its vegetation. Instead, maintenance and repair of island are the responsibility of the property owner (typically a homeowners' association). 
(8)  Easements. A permanent easement shall be provided from the owner of the landscape island to the county. The purpose of the casement shall be to provide the county the right to clear vegetation and structures from landscape areas if needed to maintain appropriate sight distance around the island. A minimum ten-day notice shall be provided to the owner prior to the county performing any clearing in a landscape island. The easement shall also specify that the county shall not be responsible for replacing or compensating for any vegetation or structures cleared or damage as a result of the effort to restore necessary sight distance. 
(Code 1992, § 8-60; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 4-12-2012) 
Sec. 104-63. - Road and intersection visibility. 
In order to ensure adequate sight distance on roads and intersections no vegetation or obstruction shall block the view of oncoming traffic. Sight distance requirements and measurements shall be per GDOT's regulations for driveway and encroachment control. The county shall be responsible for removing vegetation or obstructions within the county right-of-way if sight distance is restricted below the required amount. On private properties, the property owner shall be responsible for removing vegetation or obstructions if sight distance is restricted below the required amount. 
(Ord. No. 2016-13, § 3, 7-28-2016) 
Secs. 104-64—104-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, adopted August 23, 2015, repealed the former art. IV, §§ 104-83—104-91, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1992, §§ 8-1, 8-81, 8-84—8-89; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 3, 8-26-2010. 

Sec. 104-83. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation that may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect public health, safety and general welfare; 
(2)  Flood hazard areas serve important stormwater management, water quality, stream corridor and bank protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas; 
(3)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
a.  Protect human life and health; 
b.  Minimize damage to private property; 
c.  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
d.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  Article IX, section II of the constitution of the state and section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a)) delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the county does ordain this article and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction provisions for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage is in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 104-84. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure or facility means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Adjacent means those areas located within the defined horizontal distance from the future-conditions floodplain boundary that are at or lower in elevation than either three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
Appeal means a request for a review of the environmental management director's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (designated as zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM)). For drainage areas less than 100 acres, the area of special flood hazard shall be delineated at the discretion of the environmental management director. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means the same as structure. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a building without a basement that has its lowest floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, posts, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls. 
Environmental management department means the department so designated by the county board of commissioners to interpret and implement this article. 
Environmental management director means the person so appointed by the county board of commissioners and his or her employees designated to enforce and interpret this article. 
Existing construction means any structure where the "start-of-construction" commenced before June 23, 1983 (the effective date of the county's initial floodplain management regulation). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of street, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before June 23, 1983 (the effective date of the county's initial floodplain management regulation). 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report by FEMA that provides an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards, corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding during the base flood. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally-dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities. It does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology, also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge or culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest-adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by: 
a.  An approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this article. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's FIRM are referenced. For purposes of this article the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after June 23, 1983, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 23, 1983. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means a building permit, land disturbance permit, certificate of zoning compliance, subdivision plat or parcel reconfiguration issued and/or approved by the county to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily for use us temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use and not for use as a permanent dwelling. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period where the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. A minimum of one inspection approval must be obtained as evidence that work, was commenced or that work has continued. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations , erection of temporary forms, or installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means a division of a tract of land into a minimum of two (2) or more lots. 
Substantial damage means the damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged-condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, where the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value or the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the structure means: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure as determined by the county tax assessor prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, that have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and are not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this article. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 104-85. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection. This article seeks to meet this purpose through the following provisions: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable in floods, including facilities that serve such uses, are protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or that increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development that may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers that accommodate floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the functions of stormwater management; water quality, stream banks and corridors, wetlands, ecological functions of natural floodplain areas, and dams or impoundments. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard and all areas "adjacent" to an area of special flood hazard, within the county, as defined herein. A property shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this article whenever a permit or approval is required by the county or when other development is proposed. 
(c)  Administration of article. The environmental management director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, casement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order provision of law and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics - flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of defining and determining areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard, base flood elevations, floodplains, floodways, future-conditions flood elevations, future-conditions floodplain, potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this article, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The September 26, 2008, flood insurance study (FIS) on file with the environmental management department, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
(2)  The Fayette County 2013 Limited Detailed Future Conditions Flood Study on file with the environmental management department, with accompanying maps and other supporting data. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood prone areas including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United Suites Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the county; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer that which has been prepared utilizing FEMA-approved methodology and approved by the environmental management department. 
(4)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the county; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study that is conducted by a licensed professional engineer in the state that has been prepared utilitizing FEMA-approved methodology and approved by the environmental management department. Fayette County will only accept independent studies indicating a 100 year elevation different from the Fayette County 2013 Limited Detailed Future Conditions Flood Study if a HEC-RAS qualified independent engineer can demonstrate to Fayette County that results are accurate. This demonstration will include incorporating agreed upon independent parameters into the Fayette County 2013 Limited Detailed Future Conditions Flood Study HEC-RAS model in such a manner that there are no hydraulic jumps. The altered HEC-RAS model must be submitted to environmental management department in the electronic HEC-RAS file format. 
(5)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the county environmental management department. 
(f)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur, flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the county or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 104-86. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Determination of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the environmental management department. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the environmental management department, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the environmental management department. 
(3)  For streams or other drainage basins with drainage areas less than 100 acres, areas of special flood hazard shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by the environmental management department, as required by the environmental management director. 
(4)  The area of special flood hazard shall be delineated for all manmade flood hazards (e.g., yard drains, stormwater management structures, inlets to storm sewer systems, dams or impoundments, etc.) by a licensed professional engineer. 
(b)  Determination of floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS, the Fayette County 2013 Future-conditions Flood Study or other FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the environmental management department. If floodway data is not available from the environmental management department, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the environmental management department. 
(c)  General standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within an area of special flood hazard or an area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than one 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base-flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within an area of special flood hazard or an area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under subsection (c)(1) of this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions, [0.01 foot or less], flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall he provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 104-88(e); 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall he submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Environmental Management Department using the community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 104-87. - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
In all areas of special flood hazard and all areas of future-conditions flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  General standards. 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvement of structures (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of subsection (g) of this section and sections 104-86(a) and 104-88(e) have been met; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall he constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed as an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to or contamination from such systems during flooding; 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure that is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
(13)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of article XIV, Fayette County Development Regulation to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(14)  Public utilities, such as gas and electric systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage or public safety hazards; and 
(15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future-conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. The following provisions, in addition to those in subsection (a) of this section, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential and nonresidential building structures. 
a.  New construction of any structure shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsection (g) of this section and sections 104-86(c) and 104-88(e) have been met. If all of the requirements of subsection (g) of this section, and sections 104-86(c) and 104-88(e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5) of this section. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the environmental management department. 
b.  Substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5) of this section. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Environmental Management Department. 
c.  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar nonhabitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of sections 104-86(c), 104-88(e) and 104-87(g) and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with subsection (a)(5)(a) of this section and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  [Reserved.] 
(3)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements in subsection (b)(1) of this section, including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(4)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsection (g) of this section and sections 104-86(e) and 104-88(e) have been met. If all the requirements of these sections have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with section 104-87(5)a. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(7) of this section. 
(c)  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term "adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain" includes: all buildings and structures on a property that contains (partially or entirely) an area of special flood hazard; or all buildings and structures on a property that shares a common property line with another parcel that contains an area of special flood hazard. Residential and nonresidential buildings and structures adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain shall meet the following: 
(1)  For new and substantial improvement construction, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Compliance with the above requirement shall be submittal of an as-built elevation certificate and submitted immediately upon completion of floodproofing or survey work. The elevation certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. 
a.  Buildings and structures authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain may be exempt from the requirements of this section if the following conditions apply: 
1.  The building or structure is not within the same sub-basin as the area of special flood hazard and the drainage divide between the area of special flood hazard and the building or structure of concern is at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The area of special flood hazard is a manmade hazard associated with a storm sewer system (e.g., a yard drain) and the grading within the sub-basin provides unconstrained, positive drainage away from the building or structure at a minimum slope of two percent. 
b.  The environmental management department shall determine if either of these conditions is applicable to a structure. Alternatively, the owner/developer may provide a letter justifying applicability of the exemptions. The letter shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and shall be reviewed and approved by the environmental management department in order for the exemption to be valid. In either case, the owner/applicant shall be solely responsible for providing any as-built elevation data necessary to determine applicability of the exemptions. The elevation data shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. 
(d)  Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without an established base flood elevations and floodway (A-zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that contains an area of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the environmental management department shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the ground immediately around the building and positive drainage must be provided at a minimum two percent slope away from the building. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood prone enclosures in accordance with subsection (a)(5) of this section. 
(e)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazards and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; and 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 104-88(b). 
(f)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, and debris or erosion potential. Floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (g)(2) of this section; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the environmental management department until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the environmental management department. 
(g)  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The environmental management department may direct the property owner (at no cost to the county) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the environmental management department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 104-88. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall be approved for or perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the applicable requirements, restrictions, and criteria of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the environmental management department documentation showing compliance with this article. 
(b)  Floodplain management plan requirements. A floodplain management plan shall be required for all projects with development activities within, either partially or completely, an area of special flood hazard or an area of future-conditions flood hazard. The plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 104-87(b)(2); and 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in section 104-87(a)5. 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including but not limited to permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and, 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
The approved floodplain management plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Construction stage submittals. For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management plan, the permit holder shall provide to the environmental management department a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction that includes the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is constructed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The environmental management department shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work proceeding. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the environmental management department shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Review of all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal and/or state law, including but not limited to, section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, No. 33 USC 1334; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the environmental management department shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in order to meet the provisions of sections 104-86 and 104-87; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the environmental management department shall review the design and operation and maintenance plans and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA; 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the environmental management director shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained by the county and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the Fayette County Planning Commission. 
(e)  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 104-87(d) apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently licensed professional engineer in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the environmental management department prior to the approval of any permit authorizing the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the stormwater management department. Cross sections and flow information shall be obtained whenever available and supplemented by the applicant or by the stormwater management department. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; and 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 104-89. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the environmental management department. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the environmental management department. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the environmental management department shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Fayette County Planning Commission as established by the county in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the county planning commission. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Fayette County Planning Commission may appeal such decision to the county state court, as provided in section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1). 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the environmental management department and the Fayette County Planning Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances. 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when all of the following conditions are met; 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property and such costs may be as high as $25 or $100 of insurance coverage provided. 
d.  The environmental management department shall maintain the records of all variance actions and report them to the GA DNR upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as environmental management department and the Fayette County Planning Commission shall deem necessary for consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsection (8) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the environmental management department and the Fayette County Planning Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 104-90. - Violations, enforcement and notice. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the environmental management department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 4-23-2015) 
Sec. 104-91. - Penalties. 
(a)  In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of actions or penalties set forth in subsection (c) of this section may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
(b)  Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the stormwater management department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. 
(c)  In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the stormwater management department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The environmental management department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The environmental management department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The environmental management department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the stormwater management department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the environmental management department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the environmental management department has taken one or more of the actions described in subsection (c)(1)—(3) of this section, the stormwater management department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation is not remediated after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional violations of this chapter, the environmental management department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the county state court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 4-23-2015) 
Secs. 104-92—104-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 104-111. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish minimum landscape requirements for nonresidential development. It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Landscaping preserves the aesthetic character of communities, improves the aesthetic quality of the built environment, and increases property values. 
(2)  Trees and landscaping replace vegetative cover lost during land development. Vegetation slows soil erosion, helping to reduce nonpoint source pollution found in stormwater runoff. 
(3)  Well-chosen landscaping can improve the compatibility between different types or intensities of land uses by providing a visual buffer. 
(4)  Landscaping visually interrupts the barren expanse of large parking lots and provides shade that cools air and surface temperatures helping negate the "heat island" effect of pave parking lots. 
(b)  This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Improve the appearance of the county's nonresidential properties; 
(2)  Minimize noise, glare, and erosion; 
(3)  Provide a visual separation between incompatible uses; 
(4)  Establish measures for water conservation; and 
(5)  Reduce the adverse environmental effects of impervious parking areas. 
(Code 1992, § 8-156; Ord. No. 2008-08, § II, 9-25-2008; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 4, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-112. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arterial road means a major arterial or minor arterial in article III of this chapter. 
Caliper means a method of measuring the diameter of a tree trunk to determine size, grading, and/or classification of nursery stock. Caliper measurement of the trunk shall be taken six inches above the ground up to and including four-inch caliper size. If the caliper at six inches above the ground exceeds four inches, the caliper should be measured at 12 inches above the ground. 
Canopy (overstory) tree means any tree that, under normal forest conditions, will compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and generally will reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
Collector road is defined as collector road in article III of this chapter. 
Deciduous means plants that annually lose their leaves. 
Evergreen means plants that retain foliage throughout the year. 
Exterior parking aisle means a parking aisle adjoining a property line, required landscape area, and/or zoning buffer along a property line. 
Ground cover means a plant with a low-growing, spreading habit, grown specifically to cover the ground, generally not attaining a height of more than two feet. 
Interior parking aisle means a parking aisle that does not adjoin a property line, required zoning buffer, or building wall. 
Landscape island means a minimum ten by 20-foot island placed in parking lots to guide traffic, preserve vegetation, and increase aesthetic quality. 
Landscape plan means a scaled plan that clearly delineates vehicular use areas and displays and describes all landscaping. 
Local road means defined as county local or internal local in article III of this chapter. 
Native plants means plants indigenous or naturalized to a given area. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Shrub means a plant with persistent woody stems and a relatively low growth habit, distinguished from a tree by producing several basal stems instead of a single trunk. 
Side yard landscape area means the landscape area adjacent to a side lot line. 
Street frontage landscape area means the landscape area adjacent to street frontage. 
Tree means a self-supporting woody perennial plant that, at maturity, has one or more stems or trunks that attain a diameter of at least three inches; a more or less definitely formed crown of foliage; and a height of ten feet or more. 
Zoning buffer is defined in chapter 110, zoning. 
(Code 1992, § 8-157; Ord. No. 2008-08, § II, 9-25-2008) 
Sec. 104-113. - General provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all nonresidential zoning districts; all nonresidential uses allowed within residential zoning districts; and all existing nonpaved areas that are to be developed into paved parking areas, except as otherwise exempted in the Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Exemptions. Existing parking areas where additional parking spaces are not required. 
(c)  Administration of article. The county environmental management department shall administer this article. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environmental shall control. 
(c)  Technical standards. Standards for plant selection and installation listed as follows are incorporated by reference: 
(1)  "American Standard for Nursery Stock" (ANSI Z60.1-2004); 
(2)  "Manual for Woody Landscape Plants" (Michael Dirr, 2009, Stipes); 
(3)  "Principles and Practices of Planting Trees and Shrubs" (Watson and Himelick, 1997, ISA). 
(Code 1992, § 8-158; Ord. No. 2008-08, § II, 9-25-2008; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 4, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-114. - Landscape requirements and submittals. 
(a)  Submittals. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing any land development activity, shall submit a landscape plan with the grading plan to the environmental management department. The environmental management department shall have a maximum of 14 calendar days from the submittal date, or each resubmittal date, for plan review. If the plan is not approved a deficiency checklist will be submitted back to the applicant. 
(1)  Landscape plans shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect, or other licensed professional of similar design discipline. 
(2)  Any deviations from the approved landscape plan must be approved by the county environmental management department prior to installation. 
(3)  A final inspection and approval by the county environmental management department is required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Trees shall have minimum caliper requirements of 2½ inches measures at six inches above ground at time of planting. 
(5)  Plants with vigorous root systems shall not be planted within the dripline area of said plant next to any nitrification field, sanitary sewer, or public water easement including but not limited to the eastern cottonwood, willow, and Lombardy poplar. 
(6)  Allow at least 200 square feet of contiguous soil space per overstory tree. No parking space shall be more than 40 feet from a tree. 
(7)  Ground covers, flowers, stones, and mulch shall be utilized as needed to meet vegetative ground cover requirements. 
(b)  Landscape plan requirements. The landscape plan shall include: 
(1)  Project name, design professional's name, and contact information; 
(2)  Property boundary lines, all zoning buffer and landscape areas, and entire septic systems; 
(3)  Locations of existing plant materials to be retained and/or new plant materials to be installed, with all details drawn at a scale of one inch to 100 feet or greater; 
(4)  Plant material list, that shall include: Common and/or botanical names of all proposed plants; 
(5)  Plant quantities; 
(6)  Spacing; 
(7)  Remarks, as necessary, for proper plant selection at installation; and 
(8)  Caliper, height, and condition of plants. 
(Code 1992, § 8-159; Ord. No. 2008-08, § II, 9-25-2008; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 4, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-115. - Landscape and buffer categories. 
(a)  Street frontage landscape areas. Landscape areas fronting on county maintained roads shall be measured from the right-of-way, or from where county maintenances stops on prescriptive easements. Trees/shrubs may be planted in groups provided that the required number of trees/shrubs is distributed along the entire length of the area to be landscaped. 
(b)  Parking lot landscape areas. Landscape areas shall be provided for every other interior parking aisle. Exterior and interior parking aisles shall be terminated at both ends by a landscape island. Landscape islands shall be provided for each 150 feet of continuous parking length. All trees planted in parking lot landscape areas shall be canopy trees. 
(c)  Side yard landscape areas. A landscape area shall be established along the side property lines of all lots. A side-yard landscape area may not be substituted when a zoning buffer landscape area is required. 
(d)  Zoning buffer areas. Zoning buffer areas shall be established and maintained subject to the requirements listed as follows: 
(1)  Zoning buffer areas shall consist of evergreen plant material planted in staggered double rows that will provide a screen for the purpose of visual privacy. If existing vegetation is requested to count toward the zoning buffer area landscape requirements, such information shall be indicated on the landscape plan as required by the environmental management department. 
(2)  Listed below are suggested evergreen plant combinations characteristic of buffer area plantings. Additional plant choices can be found at the county website under environmental management. 
a.  Trees, shrubs, groundcovers; 
b.  Virginia pine, abelia, liriope; 
c.  Red cedar, Burfordi holly, euonymus; 
d.  Nellie R. Stevens holly, cleyera, wintercreeper; 
e.  Cherry laurel, Asiatic jasmine; 
f.  Cryptomeria, hetzi juniper, evergreen ferns; 
g.  Lusterleaf holly, leucothoe, creeping raspberry; 
h.  Loblolly pine, loropetalum, vinca, evergreen dogwood, pfitzer juniper, mondo grass; 
i.  Laurel oak, pragense viburnum, asiatic jasmine, 
j.  Chinese evergreen, osmanthus; 
k.  Oak, wax myrtle; 
l.  Leyland cypress, yaupon holly; 
m.  Green giant; 
n.  Arborbvitae; 
o.  Southern magnolia; and 
p.  Eastern red cedar. 
(Code 1992, § 8-160; Ord. No. 2008-08, § II, 9-25-2008; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 4, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-116. - Suggested planting materials. 
(a)  Native plants. 
TREES (1 TO 8 FEET) 

 
SMALL SHRUBS (1 TO 8 FEET) 

 
LARGE SHRUBS (8 FEET AND UP) 

 
(b)  Ground covers. 
(1)  Liriope. 
(2)  Creeping liriope. 
(3)  Daylilly. 
(4)  Mondo grass. 
(5)  Native ferns. 
(6)  Miscanthus. 
(7)  Penisetum. 
(c)  Vines. 
(1)  Carolina yellow jessamine. 
(2)  Swamp jessamine. 
(3)  Crossvine. 
(4)  Trumpet honeysuckle. 
(d)  Other suitable plants. 
TREES 

 
SHRUBS 

 
PERENNIALS AND GROUND COVERS 

 
In addition to those listed in this section, acceptable plant choices can be found at the county website under stormwater management. 
(Code 1992, § 8-161; Ord. No. 2008-08, § II, 9-25-2008) 
Sec. 104-117. - Landscape performance surety. 
(a)  In the event that the requirements of this article have not been met at the time that a final building inspection request is made, the owner or his agent shall post a landscape performance bond or other county approved surety in an amount equal to 110 percent of the cost of materials, labor, and other attendant costs, incidental to the installation of the required landscaping. Said surety shall: 
(1)  Be drawn in favor of the board of commissioners; 
(2)  Be in a form satisfactory to the county attorney. 
(b)  Specify the time for the completion of the landscaping requirements of this article which shall not be longer than six months following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1992, § 8-162; Ord. No. 2008-08, § II, 9-25-2008) 
Sec. 104-118. - General maintenance. 
Plants required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be attractively maintained. All dead and/or diseased plants shall be replaced annually as a condition of occupancy. 
(Code 1992, § 8-163; Ord. No. 2008-08, § II, 9-25-2008) 
Secs. 104-119—104-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TREE RETENTION, PROTECTION AND REPLACEMENT 

Sec. 104-150. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Trees are a valuable asset to the rural/urban environment of the county and can generate such benefits as: the purification of air; moderation of the microclimate; reduction of noise and glare; conservation of energy in terms of heating and cooling; prevention of soil erosion; reduced stormwater management costs; minimization of flood potential; improved water quality; enhancement and stabilization of property values; increased aesthetics; and preservation of the rural character of the unincorporated county. 
(2)  Therefore, the county adopts this article to provide requirements to protect the rural and wooded character of unincorporated the county through the preservation and replanting of trees when new development occurs. 
(Code 1992, § 8-176; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 1, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 104-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certified arborist means an arborist certified by the international society of arboriculture (ISA). 
Clearing means an activity that removes or disturbs the vegetative cover including trees. 
Critical root zone (CRZ) means the minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed. The critical root zone shall be equal to 1½ feet of radial distance for every inch of the tree's DBH, with a minimum of eight feet. 
Deciduous tree means any tree which drops its leaves at the end of the growing season or a tree that annually loses leaves. 
Diameter-at-breast-height (DBH) means standard measure of existing tree size and is the trunk diameter measured in inches at height of 4½ feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4½ feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. A tree that splits into multiple trunk above 4½ feet is measured as a single tree at 4½ feet. 
Dripline means a line on the ground established by a vertical plane extending from a tree's outermost branch tips down to the ground; i.e., the line enclosing the area directly beneath the tree's crown from which rainfall would drip. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., that includes, at a minimum, protections at least as stringent as this article. 
Evergreen tree means tree that retains its green foliage throughout the year. 
Existing density unit (EDU) means a tree density unit assigned for the preservation of existing trees that will remain on site and protected during construction and where EDU is equivalent to inch of DBH when the DBH is a minimum size of four inches. 
Land disturbance permit means authorization to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of article IX of this chapter, soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control. 
Land disturbing activity means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediment into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, other than federal lands. 
Landscape areas means an area set aside for the installation and maintenance of ornamental planting materials. 
Landscaping means any additions to the natural features of a plot of ground to restore construction disturbance and to make an area more attractive. 
Overstory (canopy) tree means any tree that, under normal forest conditions, will compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and generally will reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. Examples include: oak, maple, elm, bald cypress, cryptomeria. 
Replacement density unit (RDU) means a tree density unit assigned to a new tree planted to achieve the site density unit (SDU) and is equivalent to the number of inches of trunk diameter measures at six inches above the ground. 
Shrub means a plant with persistent woody stems and a relatively low growth habit, distinguished from a tree by producing several basal stems instead of a single trunk. 
Site means that portion of a tract of land that will be dedicated to a proposed development, including the land containing trees that will be counted toward satisfying the requirements of these provisions. 
Site density unit (SDU) means the minimum number of tree density units which must be achieved on a nonresidential site after development and is equal to existing density units (EDU) plus replacement density units (RDU). 
Specimen tree or stand means any tree or grouping of trees that is determined to be of high value and qualifies for special consideration for preservation because of its species, size, or historical significance. 
Tree means a self-supporting woody perennial plant that, at maturity, has one or more stems or trunks that attain a diameter of at least three inches; a more or less definitely formed crown of foliage; and a height of ten feet or more. 
Tree density units (TDU) means a unit of measurement for tree density based on the diameter of the tree. 
Tree protection area means a barrier constructed around trees at construction sites sufficient to prevent damage or injury to tree trunks, limbs, and roots. The tree protection area shall be either the dripline of the tree or the critical root zone of a tree or clusters of trees to be retained, whichever is greater. 
Understory tree means a tree that, under normal forest conditions, grows to maturity beneath overstory trees and will generally reach a mature height of at least ten feet, but less than 40 feet. Examples include dogwood, red bud, fringe tree, lusterleaf holly, and red cedar. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems, railroads, or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the CRZ requirements of this article that permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(Code 1992, § 8-177; Code 1992, § 8-177; Ord. No. 2000-02, 1-27-2000; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 1, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 104-152. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum requirements for tree retention, protection and replacement in the county and to protect the rural and wooded character of the county through the preservation and replanting of trees when new development occurs. It is the intent of this article that all site planning and design for development of land be undertaken with a survey of trees on the property and that the grading, final placement of buildings, structures, and roads, utilities, and other features minimizes the removal of existing trees, and insures aesthetic replacement and distribution. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to any activity that requires a preliminary plat, erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan or site plan as defined in article II of this chapter (except as otherwise exempted in the Zoning Ordinance). Residential subdivisions without common infrastructure are still required to submit a tree protection plan but are not required to submit tree density units. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Trees determined to be dead, diseased, or infested as determined by the state forestry commission or a certified arborist and approved by the environmental management department. 
(2)  Orchards and tree nurseries in active commercial operation. 
(3)  Agricultural operation as defined in article IX of this chapter. 
(4)  Nonresidential subdivisions development projects without common infrastructure. 
(5)  Public roads as exempted in section 104-266. 
(6)  Public utilities, as exempted in section 104-266(10) and (11), including telecommunication towers. 
(7)  Commercial forestry operations, including timber harvesting. 
(8)  Residential and nonresidential subdivision development projects are exempt from tree density requirements, but are required to submit a TPP. 
(d)  Designation of article administrator. The county environmental management department shall administer this article. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environmental shall control. 
(f)  Technical standards. Standards for plant selection and installation listed below are incorporated by reference: 
(1)  "American Standard for Nursery Stock" (ANSI Z60.1-2004). 
(2)  "Manual for Woody Landscape Plants" (Michael Dirr, 2009, Stipes)." 
(3)  "Principles and Practices of Planting Trees and Shrubs" (Watson and Himelick, 1997, ISA). 
(4)  "American National Standards for Tree Care Operations" (ANSI A300). 
(5)  University of Georgia Cooperative Extension Service Bulletin No. 625 Landscape Plants for Georgia 
(Code 1992, § 8-178; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 1, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 5, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-153. - Tree retention, protection and replacement requirements. 
For all sites with three acres or less, all trees used in the SDU calculation shall be individually inventoried. For all sites over three acres industry standard sampling methods may be used to prepare a tree survey when trees are of such density to make individual tree identification impractical. In such cases the tree surveyor shall show tree stands and provide estimates of size and species on the tree protection plan. 
(1)  Site density requirements. The required tree density for each nonresidential site is referred to as the site density unit (SDU). Each property subject to this article shall have a minimum required SDU based on total number of disturbed acres on the project site. 
a.  The total SDU required equals existing density units (EDU) plus replacement density units (RDU). 
b.  Property subject to this article that is greater than or equal to three acres shall have or exceed an average SDU of 100 TDUs per acre. 
c.  Property subject to this article that is less than three acres shall have or exceed an average SDU of 50 TDUs per acre. 
d.  Credit will be given to trees retained on a property having a DBH of four inches or more. 
e.  At least 50 percent of the EDUs per acre must be located outside of any zoning or watershed protection buffers as referenced in articles V and VII of this chapter. 
f.  Palm trees are not acceptable for SDU credit. 
(2)  Specimen trees. 
a.  Criteria for determination of specimen trees or stands are as follows: 
1.  Any deciduous canopy tree whose DBH equals or exceeds 24 inches. 
2.  Any evergreen canopy tree whose DBH equals or exceeds 30 inches. 
3.  Any understory tree whose DBH equals or exceeds ten inches. 
4.  Any tree which has significant historical value and can be documented through historical records or otherwise. 
b.  Removal. Any specimen tree removed without prior approval of the environmental management department will be replaced by trees equaling two times an inch-for inch replacement of the tree removed. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition. Such action may result in a stop work order issued by the environmental management department. 
c.  Written justification must be given for any specimen tree designated for removal. The county environmental management department may require additional information including, but not limited to, a certified arborist's appraisal of the tree's viability and anticipated life span. 
d.  Any specimen tree may be removed if it is shown that at least one of the following conditions is met: 
1.  The location of the tree prevents the opening of reasonable and necessary vehicular traffic lanes. 
2.  The location of the tree prevents the construction of utility lines or drainage facilities which may not feasibly be relocated. 
3.  The location of the tree prevents reasonable access to the property, if no alternate exists. 
4.  The tree is diseased, dead, or dying to the point that repair or restoration is not practical or the disease may be transmitted to other trees. 
5.  here is no reasonable assurance that if the tree is saved with proper construction precautions, it will continue to live as an asset to the site. 
e.  Preservation. All reasonable efforts should be made to preserve specimen trees and incorporate them into the design of the project. Specimen trees saved by a specifically designed feature of the building, hardscape, or utilities shall be given EDU credit of two inches per inch of DBH. 
(3)  Replacement tree requirements. All trees selected for replacement density units must meet the following requirements: 
a.  Trees must be free of disease, injury, or infestation, and must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing area, and planted in accordance with standards established by the international society of arboriculture. 
b.  At a minimum, four species mixture of different trees, with at least three being deciduous hardwoods should be utilized. 
c.  No more than 30 percent of replacement trees may be of a single species. 
d.  A 50 percent mix of overstory and understory trees shall be maintained. 
e.  Trees shall have a minimum caliper requirement of 2½ inches in diameter as measured at six inches above the ground at time of planting. 
f.  All trees planted to fulfill the replacement tree requirements shall be in place before a certificate of occupancy is granted. In the event that the requirements of this article cannot be met at the time a certificate of occupancy is otherwise granted, refer to "buffer and landscape areas," section 104-117 performance surety, in these development regulations. 
g.  All trees planted under the requirements of this article which do not survive for 24 months after issuance of a certificate of occupancy will be replaced as a condition of occupancy. Trees shall be bonded via a maintenance agreement in the amount of 100 percent of their replacement cost. Bonds will be released after the 24-month period has passed, and the health of the trees have been certified and accepted by the county. Refer to section 104-118, pertaining to general maintenance. 
h.  See sections 104-115(d)(2) and 104-116 for suggested tree species. For additional tree species, especially understory (small) trees, see University of Georgia Cooperative Extension Service Bulletin No. 625 Landscape Plants for Georgia. 
(4)  Tree protection requirements. 
a.  A tree protection area shall be maintained around all trees and stands of trees to be retained throughout the duration of construction by tree protection fencing. 
b.  The tree protection area of stand-alone trees and stands of trees shall be marked with standard tree protection fencing (orange), chainlink fencing, stakes, and/or continuous engineering tape and "Tree Protection Area" signs. At least two "Tree Protection Area" signs shall be posted at each individual tree protection area. 
c.  All tree protection fencing shall be inspected for proper installation by the environmental management department during the initial erosion and sediment control inspection. 
d.  During subdivision street construction, land disturbance allowed by a development permit shall be limited to areas needed for street right-of-way, drainage easements, erosion and sediment control practices and utilities. All other areas shall remain undisturbed for tree protection purposes. 
e.  If utilities must run through the tree protection area and the running of those utilities will encroach into the critical root zone CRZ of any trees to be saved, the utility must be tunneled at a depth of 24 inches. When feasible, utilities will run along streets, roadways, driveways, or sidewalks. Reasonable efforts shall be made to save as many trees as possible. 
If it is determined that irreparable damage has occurred to a tree or trees within a designated tree protection area, as determined by the county environmental management department, the state forestry commission, or a certified arborist, it shall be the responsibility of the developer/builder to remove and replace the tree or trees and guarantee survival after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy as references in subsection (3)(g) of this section and article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Tree protection plan. 
a.  Procedures. 
1.  The TPP shall be submitted with the preliminary plat, erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or the site plan, whichever is the first submittal required by the county planning and zoning department. 
2.  The tree protection plan shall be prepared by either a licensed landscape architect or forester, certified arborist, or other licensed professional of similar design discipline licensed in the state. 
3.  The environmental management department shall have a maximum of 14 calendar days from the submittal date, or each resubmittal date, for plan review. If the plan is not approved a deficiency checklist will be submitted back to the applicant. 
b.  Submittal. The tree protection plan shall be submitted on a scale of no less than one inch to 100 feet and shall include project name, design professional's name and contact information, north arrow, graphic scale, and date. The plan should clearly show and label the following: 
1.  Tree save areas noting the location, size, DBH, dripline, CRZ, and species name (common name) of each tree that will be retained to fulfill the SDU requirements. Five or more trees whose dripline and CRZ combine into one tree protection area may be outlined as a group with the exception of specimen trees. 
2.  Summary table listing the DBH and species name of each RDU and EDU tree used to obtain the required SDU under "Notes." 
3.  If a group of trees is outlined on the plan as a tree save area, include a summary table listing the size, DBH and species name of each tree within that group under "Notes." 
4.  Location of all new replacement trees including species name and DBH that fulfill RDU requirements. 
5.  Location of any specimen tree designated in a tree protection area including the DBH, CRZ and species name even if contained in a group. If construction is limited to streets, drainage easements and utilities the TPP only needs to show all specimen trees located within 100 feet of the centerline of any right-of-way, or drainage/utility easements. 
6.  Location of any specimen trees designated for removal during construction including the size, DBH and species name. 
7.  Location, depth and height of all existing and proposed utility lines. 
8.  Boundaries of property, buffer and landscaped areas, buildings and structures, vehicle use areas, and other impervious areas. 
9.  Calculations for meeting all required site density units under "notes." If a scientific method is used to determine the site density units, label all sample areas and provide estimates of trees by size and species as based on sampling method requirements. 
10.  Under "notes" state the following: "No land disturbance, construction processes, or storage of equipment or materials shall take place within a designated tree protection area in order to prevent direct physical root damage that occurs during site clearing and grading and can cause transport or feeder roots to be cut, torn, or removed; indirect root damage caused from grade changes; and trunk and crown damage caused by direct contact with land clearing machinery or galling of adjacent trees." 
(Code 1992, § 8-179; Ord. No. 2000-02, 1-27-2000; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 1, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 5, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-154. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Requests for variances shall only be given for a reduction in the critical root zone (CRZ). 
(2)  Requests for a variance from the CRZ requirements of this article shall be submitted to the environmental management department. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the environmental management department. 
(3)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the environmental management department shall have the right to appeal such decision to the county zoning board of appeals as established by the county in accordance with article IX of chapter 110, zoning. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(4)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the county zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the county state court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(5)  In reviewing such requests, the environmental management department and the county zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(6)  Variances shall only be considered based on the follow criteria: 
a.  Disturbance of the CRZ of less than 30 percent; 
b.  A reduction in the CRZ based on industry standards less stringent than outlined in this article. 
(7)  Conditions for variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; and 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship. 
b.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall he given written notice specifying the difference between the current CRZs requirements and the CRZs requested in the variance. 
c.  The county environmental management department shall maintain the records of all appeal actions. 
d.  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the county environmental management department and the county zoning board of appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request including, but not limited to, a certified arborist's appraisal of the tree's viability and anticipated life span. 
e.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the county environmental management department and the county zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
1.  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
2.  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
i.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
ii.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
iii.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside CRZ. The exact area of the CRZ to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
iv.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the CRZ be maintained; 
v.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include CRZ disturbance or reduction, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
vi.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
vii.  Proposed mitigation, for the intrusion. If mitigation is not proposed, the request must explain why. 
f.  The following factors may be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
1.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
2.  The location and extent of the proposed CRZ intrusion; 
3.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
4.  The long-term impacts of the proposed variance; and 
5.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(b)  Any applicant who is aggrieved by any decision of the county environmental management department relating to the application of this article shall have the right to appeal as provided under article IX of chapter 110, zoning. 
(Code 1992, § 8-180; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 1, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 5, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-155. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violation of application. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved environmental management application may be subject to the enforcement actions outlines in this section. Any such action or inaction, which is continuous with respect to time, is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in subsection (c) of this section shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the environmental management department determines that all applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved environmental management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner of the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the environmental management action plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(c)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the environmental management department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the environmental management department may take one or more of the following action or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The environmental management department may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The environmental management department may recommend that the county permits and inspection department refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The environmental management department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violations or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the environmental management department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Citations. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, or in the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in previously issued notice of violations or otherwise fails to cure the violations within ten days, the environmental management department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in state court of the county to answer charges of such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 8-181; Ord. No. 2012-02, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2012-12, § 1, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 5, 7-28-2016) 
Secs. 104-156—104-178. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WATERSHED PROTECTION 

Sec. 104-179. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitats; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(Code 1992, § 8-201; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 104-180. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Canopy tree means any tree having reached a relatively tall height compared to surrounding trees and vegetation and providing shade from its foliage mass; also individual or tree groups forming an overhead cover. Examples include oak, maple, hickory, beech, pecan, sycamore, sweet gum, poplar, ash, river birch, long leaf pine, and loblolly pine trees. 
Ground cover means a plant with a low-growing, spreading habit, grown specifically to cover the ground, generally not attaining a height of more than two feet. 
Impervious surface means the area where a manmade structure or surface prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure and/or surface. Examples include buildings, paved roads, paved driveways, paved parking lots, swimming pools, or patios. 
Large water supply watershed means a watershed area which is greater than 100 square miles as defined by the state department of natural resources environmental protection division. 
Natural vegetation means natural vegetation is a generally undisturbed, maintenance-free, self-perpetuating stand of vegetation comprised of indigenous shrubs, flowers, wild grasses, and trees. 
Nitrification field means any area used for the on-site disposal of wastewater. 
Pollutant means any substance as certain chemicals or waste products, that renders the air, soil, water or other natural resource harmful or unsuitable. 
Reservoir means a reservoir shall be an existing or future impoundment of water for water supply purposes as identified by resolution of the county board of commissioners. 
Shrub means a plant with persistent woody stems and a relatively low growth habit, distinguished from a tree by producing several basal stems instead of a single trunk. 
Small water supply watershed means a watershed area which is less than 100 square miles as defined by the state department of natural resources environmental protection division. 
State water means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other water bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state that are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, homeowners' association, partnership, or corporation. (Amended June 9, 2005.) 
Stream bank means the uppermost part of the bank marked by a break in slope (as defined by the state department of natural resources environmental protection division). A stream bank is not necessarily the water's edge. 
Tree means a self-supporting perennial plant having one or more stems or trunks, that, at maturity, has one or more stems or trunks that attain a diameter of at least two inches, a more or less definitely formed crown of foliage; and a height of ten feet or more. 
Tributaries and streams mean state waters, whether named or unnamed, that continuously flow to major water supply streams. 
Understory tree means any tree, which is of relatively lesser height and spread than surrounding canopy trees, but still provides shade and a degree of protection to the earth and vegetation beneath it. Examples include dogwood, cherry, red bud, sassafras, crabapple, pear, American holly, red cedar, and magnolia trees. 
Utility means a public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Watershed buffer means the area of a parcel set aside to provide a separation between the uses on the parcel and adjoining parcels and state waters requiring a buffer through the use of natural vegetation, replanting, and supplemental plantings. 
Watershed setback means the area of a parcel where all structures, septic tanks, nitrification fields and any impervious surfaces shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
Wrested vegetation means wrested vegetation is vegetation that has been disturbed, moved, or removed by flowing water creating a clear demarcation between water flow and vegetative growth. 
(Code 1992, § 8-202; Ord. of 6-5-2005; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 104-181. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. This article is to help ensure the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; to preserve stream water quality; and to comply with the laws of the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 by provisions: 
(1)  Create buffers and setbacks along state waters in the county for stream bank stabilization, water resource protection, and protection of aquatic and riparian habitat. 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers and setbacks by limiting development activities within these protected areas and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(b)  Applicability. The following large and small water supply watersheds, designated major water supply streams, named tributaries, minor unnamed streams, and waters requiring a state buffer located in and out of the large and small water supply watersheds shall be governed by this article. This article shall be applicable to any parcel within the unincorporated county that has been created/reconfigured after May 28, 1987, unless it is a minor revision to a recorded final plat/minor subdivision plat as defined in article XV of this chapter. 
(c)  Administration of article. The stormwater management director shall administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Watershed buffer/setback access. Vegetation within a watershed buffer/setback area shall not be disturbed except for access and utilities approved by the county stormwater management department. 
(f)  Water supply watersheds means the county contains one large water supply watershed and four small water supply watersheds as indicated on the county watershed protection map. 
(1)  The Flint River is the only large water supply watershed in the county where intakes for Fayette County, Clayton County and the City of Griffin are located. This water supply watershed does not contain a reservoir. 
(2)  The four small water supply watersheds are: 
a.  Line Creek Watershed where Fayette County and Coweta County intakes are located. This water supply watershed is the location of the proposed Lake McIntosh (a water supply reservoir); 
b.  Flat Creek Watershed where a county intake is located. Flat Creek is a named tributary that flows into Lake Kedron and then into Lake Peachtree (both are water supply reservoirs); 
c.  Whitewater Creek Watershed where the county and the City of Fayetteville intakes are located. This water supply watershed does not contain a reservoir; and 
d.  Horton Creek Watershed where a county intake is located. Antioch Creek and Woolsey Creek are named tributaries that flow into Lake Horton (a water supply reservoir). 
(g)  State waters determination. For purposes of this article, the stormwater management department shall make state water determinations, but will not delineate said waters. Recorded drainage easements and ditches/swales used for conveying wet weather flows (i.e., no base flow) shall not require a watershed buffer. 
(Code 1992, § 8-203; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 104-182. - Minimum watershed protection requirements. 
(a)  The following watershed buffer and setback requirements shall be required on all state waters requiring a buffer within the unincorporated county: 
(1)  No sewage treatment facility, dumping, discharging, releasing, spraying, distributing of any toxic or other pollutant is allowed onto the watershed buffer and setback. 
(2)  Watershed buffer areas may be hand thinned or hand trimmed of vegetation in accordance with the county soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. 
(3)  Pervious hiking trails and picnic areas will be allowed within the natural watershed buffer and setback. Any land disturbance activities are subject to articles IV and IX of this chapter. 
(4)  The watershed buffer shall only constitute 50 percent of a livestock containment area. 
(5)  The watershed buffer shall only extend for 1,000 feet from the wrested vegetation of state waters requiring a buffer. If the watershed buffer exceeds the said 1,000 feet then the 1,000 feet will become the watershed buffer and watershed setback will not be applied. 
(6)  For subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section only the watershed buffer may be reduced to 100 feet for activities that do not require grubbing or tilling, such as tree harvesting without stump removal, if and only if, a copy of documentation submitted to forestry commission is submitted to the county stormwater management prior to requesting a reduction in the watershed buffer. 
(b)  The following shall apply to any property within 1,000 feet of a reservoir: The minimum watershed buffer shall be 150 feet as measured from the normal pool elevation or base flood elevation, whichever is greater. 
(c)  The following shall apply to Antioch Creek, Flat Creek, Gin Branch, Haddock Creek, Horton Creek, Line Creek, Trickum Creek, and Woolsey Creek located within Lake Horton, Lake Kedron/Lake Peachtree and Line Creek Reservoirs watersheds: 
(1)  Minimum watershed buffer is 100 feet as measured from the wrested vegetation. 
(2)  Minimum watershed setback is 50 feet as measured from the buffer. 
(d)  The following shall apply to the Flint River, Whitewater Creek and all state waters requiring a watershed buffer within 1,000 feet of the above named streams: 
(1)  Minimum watershed buffer is 400 feet as measured from the wrested vegetation or is the 100 feet from the base flood elevation, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Minimum watershed setback is 50 feet as measured from the buffer. 
(e)  The following shall apply to Ginger Cake Creek, Pelham Creek, Perry Creek, South Camp Creek, Sandy Creek, Shoal Creek, Tar Creek, and Whitewater Creek within the Whitewater Creek Watershed; Gay Creek, Morning Creek, Murphy Creek, North Camp Creek, and Nash Creek, within the Flint River Watershed; and all other state waters requiring a buffer within 1,000 feet of the streams set forth in this subsection: 
(1)  Minimum watershed buffer is 200 feet from wrested vegetation or 100 feet from base flood elevation, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Minimum watershed setback is 50 feet as measured from the buffer. 
(f)  The following shall apply to all other perennial streams within the Flint River Watershed, the Whitewater Creek Watershed and all state waters requiring a buffer within 1,000 feet of these minor perennial streams: minimum watershed buffer shall be 100 feet from wrested vegetation or 50 feet from 100-year floodplain elevation, whichever is greater. Minimum watershed setback shall be 50 feet as measured from the buffer. 
(g)  All state waters requiring a buffer not otherwise protected by provisions of this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum watershed buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet from wrested vegetation measured horizontally from both side of the stream. 
(2)  Minimum watershed setback 25 feet as measured from the buffer. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Agricultural operation as defined in section 104-266(5); and 
b.  Forestry land management practices as defined in section 104-266(6). 
(h)  The following restrictions shall apply specifically to large water supply watersheds as identified in this article: new facilities located within seven miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the department of natural resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the department of natural resources. 
(i)  The following restrictions shall apply specifically to small water supply watersheds as identified in this article: 
(1)  New facilities located within seven miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types and amounts determined by the department of natural resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surface having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources. 
(2)  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
(3)  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(Code 1992, § 8-204; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 104-183. - Other water quality considerations; owner responsibility. 
It shall be the responsibility of every owner, developer or builder to present required plans and to comply with article IX of this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 8-205; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 104-184. - Watershed buffer protection and replacement. 
Vegetation within a watershed buffer, as defined in this article, shall not be disturbed except as indicated herein. Where a watershed buffer area is otherwise disturbed, it shall be replanted according to this article. 
(1)  Watershed buffer replacement plan requirements. A watershed buffer replacement plan is required for the replacement/replanting of natural vegetation: 
a.  A landscape plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect registered in the state. 
b.  A landscape plan shall show two canopy trees with a minimum trunk caliper of 2½ inches (at six inches from the ground) for every 1,000 square feet of disturbed buffer area on the site. 
c.  A landscape plan shall show one understory tree with a minimum trunk caliper on one inch (at six inches from the ground) for every 1,000 square feet of disturbed buffer area on the site. 
d.  Required trees shall be randomly placed so that the mature canopy covers the buffer area. All disturbed buffer areas shall be 100 percent covered with deciduous trees, shrubs, and/or ground cover (not requiring mowing). 
(2)  Watershed buffer replacement plan check sheet. A watershed buffer replacement plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name, address, and telephone number of property owner. 
b.  Name, address, telephone number, and seal of landscape architect who prepared the plan. 
c.  Site location map, north point, and scale of drawings. 
d.  Show all pertinent site features: buildings, walks, drives, underground utilities, water bodies, etc. 
e.  Show all property lines, distances to bodies of water and/or streams, and the limits of the natural buffer areas. 
f.  Show calculations on the plan for: total area, buffer area disturbed (in inches and square feet). Indicate numbers of canopy and understory trees required by ordinance. 
g.  Planting key: botanical and common name of all plant materials proposed; quantity of each species, size of plant material (caliper, height, width); condition (i.e., balled and burlapped, container grown, bare root, collected, etc.). 
h.  Submit three copies of plans for review. One will be returned upon approval. 
(Code 1992, § 8-206; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 104-185. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an owner/operator or developer who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this article: 
(1)  A request for a variance may be submitted by an owner/operator who has been denied a permit by the county stormwater management department or by an owner/operator or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated hereinabove. 
(2)  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions prevents land development unless a buffer/setback variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances, that when strict adherence to the minimal buffer/setback requirements in this article would create an extreme hardship. 
1.  Requests for variances from the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the county stormwater management department. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with plan review procedures established by the county stormwater management department. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
2.  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the county stormwater management department shall have the right to appeal such decision to the county planning commission as established by the county in accordance with procedures issued by the county planning commission. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
3.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the county planning commission may appeal such decision to the county state court, as provided in section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1). 
4.  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize buffer disturbances. 
5.  In reviewing such requests, the county stormwater management department and the county planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
6.  Conditions for variances. 
(i)  A variance shall be issued only when all of the following conditions are met: 
A.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; and 
B.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship. 
(ii)  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the current buffers and setbacks requirements and the buffers and setbacks allowed by the variance. 
(iii)  The county stormwater management department shall maintain the records of all appeal actions. 
7.  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the county stormwater management department and the county planning commission shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
8.  Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsection (a)(2)b.6 of this section and the purposes of this article, the county stormwater management department and the county planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
9.  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
10.  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
(i)  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
(ii)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(iii)  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
(iv)  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
(v)  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
(vi)  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
(vii)  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
(viii)  Proposed mitigation, for the intrusion. If mitigation is not proposed, the request must explain why. 
11.  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
(i)  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(ii)  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
(iii)  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
(iv)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
(v)  The long-term and construction water quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
(vi)  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Code 1992, § 8-207; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 104-186. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the county stormwater management department shall first notify the owner/operator or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the owner/operator or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the county stormwater management department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The county stormwater management department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the owner/operator or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the owner/operator or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the owner/operator or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(2)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The county stormwater management department may suspend, revoke or modify any permit authorizing any development on the project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner/operator or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the county stormwater management department may deem necessary) to enable the owner/operator or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(3)  Civil penalties. For intentional violations of this article or in the event the owner/operator or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the county stormwater management department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), the county stormwater management department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation is not remediated after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(4)  Criminal penalties. For intentional violations of this article, or in the event the owner/operator or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the county stormwater management department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), the county stormwater management department may issue a citation to the owner/operator or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the county state court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500.00 per day, per violation or a sentence of imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 8-208; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 11-18-2010) 
Secs. 104-187—104-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 104-211. - Scope of provision. 
Except as provided in this article, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements, or use, a plot plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
(Code 1992, § 8-215; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 1-14-1998) 
Secs. 104-212—104-215. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-13, § 6, adopted July 28, 2016, repealed §§ 104-212—104-215, which pertained to reduction of parking and maximum lot coverage, street access; curb cuts in other than residential districts, state highway department approval, corner visibility clearance and derived from Code 1992, § 8-216; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 1-14-1998; Ord. No. 2000-15, § 1, 10-26-2000; Ord. No. 2001-11, § 1, 7-26-2001; Ord. No. 2001-13, § 1, 10-25-2001. 
Sec. 104-216. - Off-street automobile parking. 
Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 8-220; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 1-14-1998) 
Sec. 104-217. - Design standards. 
All parking facilities, including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, and access drives shall comply with the following provisions, except as otherwise exempted in the Zoning Ordinance: 
(1)  Have access to a public street. Only single-family residences shall be allowed backward egress from a driveway onto a local street. In all other cases, maneuvering and access aisle areas shall be sufficient to permit vehicles to enter and leave the vehicular use area in a forward motion. 
(2)  Be graded and paved, and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control; however, due to their limited hours of operation, parking facilities for churches, charitable or nonprofit organizations and other uses as appropriate, need only be graded and have, at a minimum, an all-weather surface approved by the county engineer, whose approval shall be based on compliance with article IX of this chapter, soil erosion and sedimentation control. Use of pervious types of pavement for required parking spaces and overflow parking areas is encouraged. Pervious types of pavement include but are not limited to pervious concrete, gravel with geo-web reinforcement, brick pavers, etc. All pervious types of pavement are subject to compliance with established specifications for that type of material which will be reviewed and approved by the county engineer. All types of pavement, pervious or impervious, are required to be maintained to the original design by the property owners. 
(3)  Have all spaces marked with painted lines, curb stops, or other similar designations. 
(4)  Parking area. Parking stalls shall have a minimum width of ten feet and length of 20 feet. For any nonresidential use providing 50 or more spaces, a maximum of ten percent of the required parking spaces may be marked for compact cars, which may be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet in size. There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. Interior driveways shall be at least 24 feet wide where used with 90-degree angle parking, at least 18 feet wide where used with 60-degree angle parking, at least 12 feet wide where used with parallel parking, or where there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least 12 feet wide for one-way traffic movement and at least 24 feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
(5)  Curb return radii shall not exceed 15 feet or be less than ten feet. 
(6)  Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night. Such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties. 
(Code 1992, § 8-221; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 1-14-1998; Ord. No. 2000-15, § 2, 10-26-2000; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 7, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-218. - Location. 
All parking facilities shall be located in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The required space shall be provided on the same plot with the use it serves, except as provided herein; 
(2)  The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot but the required space assigned to one may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose attendance will be at night or on Sunday may he assigned to a use which will be closed at nights or Sundays. 
(Code 1992, § 8-222; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 1-14-1998; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 7, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-219. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-13, § 6, adopted July 28, 2016, repealed § 104-219, which pertained to recreational vehicle parking and derived from Code 1992, § 8-224; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 1-14-1998. 
Sec. 104-220. - Minimum number of loading spaces required. 
Industrial, wholesale and retail operations shall provide loading spaces as follows: 
(1)  Spaces appropriate to functions. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as appropriate to the functions and scope of operation of individual or groups of buildings and uses. 
(2)  Design of loading spaces. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering to park vehicles for loading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free and normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress to off-street loading spaces shall conform to driveway entrance regulations of the county. Along state highways, ingress and egress may be limited in order to provide for safe access to the development and to provide for maintenance of adequate sight distances. Where frontage drives are required, these may be extended to the side property line in order to permit joint use by adjacent properties. 
(Code 1992, § 8-226; Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 1-14-1998; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 7, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 104-221. - Number of parking spaces. 
In order to assure a proper and uniform development of public parking areas throughout the area of jurisdiction of this article, to relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and to minimize any detrimental effects on adjacent properties, off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained as called for in the following schedule; the requirements shall be the same as a similar use as mentioned herein. Parking requirements for additions to existing uses shall be based upon the new addition even if the existing use is deficient. 
(1)  Duplex or multi-family dwelling 
Three spaces for each dwelling unit, plus any required spaces for recreation areas, sates office, etc. as required by the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Assembly, public (including auditorium and stage theater): 
One space for every 200 square feet in the main assembly room. 
(3)  Athletic field: 
One space for every four bleacher seats or 30 spaces per field, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Automobile sales and repairs: 
Three spaces for every service area within the garage, or one space for every service employee, whichever is greater. 
(5)  Bowling alley: 
Four spaces per alley, plus requirements for any other use associated with the establishment such as a restaurant, etc. 
(6)  Care home: 
One space for every four beds, plus one space for every employee. 
(7)  Car wash (principal use): 
One space for each employee plus one space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area 
(8)  Church, temple, or place of worship: 
One space for every 150 square feet of occupiable floor area. 
(9)  Club or lodge: 
One space for every 200 square feet of assembly area. 
(10)  Combined uses: 
Parking spaces shall be the total of the spaces required for each separate use established by this schedule. 
(11)  Dance school: 
One space for every employee plus one space for every 150 square feet of gross floor area, plus safe and convenient loading and unloading of students. 
(12)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas: 
One space for every 250 square feet of clubhouse, pool house, pavilion, and swimming pool water surface area; and 
Two spaces for every other amenity provided (including but not limited to tennis, volleyball, basketball, and playgrounds). 
(13)  Dry cleaning/laundry plant: 
One space for every 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for every employee. 
(14)  Entertainment, indoor (except bowling alleys): 
One space for every 250 square feet of floor area devoted to patron use. 
(15)  Entertainment, outdoor: 
Ten spaces for every acre. 
(16)  Fraternity or sorority: 
One parking space for every two residents and one space for every two employees. 
(17)  Funeral parlor: 
One space for every three seats in the chapel plus space for each funeral vehicle. 
(18)  Furniture, appliance, or carpet sales: 
One space for every 500 square feet of showroom, plus one space per 750 square feet of indoor storage space. 
(19)  Gas station 
No parking spaces are required for gas pump uses. All other uses on the site must meet the requirements for retail, service, and repair etc. 
(20)  Gas and fuel, wholesale: 
One space for each employee. 
(21)  Golf course: 
Two spaces for every hole and one space for every two employees, plus requirements for any other use associated with the golf course. 
(22)  Greenhouse or nursery, retail: 
One space for every 10,000 square feet plus one space for every employee. 
(23)  Trade school, college, or university: 
One space for every two students, one space for every 300 square feet of administrative and educational office space, plus safe and convenient loading of students, plus additional spaces for stadium, gymnasium, and auditorium uses. 
(24)  Hospital: 
One and one-half spaces for every two beds plus one space for every employee. 
(25)  Hotel: 
One space for every guest room plus one space for every two employees on the largest shift. 
(26)  Industrial facility, manufacturing or processing establishment: 
One space for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for every employee. 
(27)  Kennel, commercial: 
One space for every 300 square feet of cage and retail area. 
(28)  Kindergarten, nursery school, or day care center: 
One space for every employee, plus a covered, safe, and convenient transient parking area for the loading/unloading of students. 
(29)  Manufactured home park: 
Two spaces for every manufactured home. 
(30)  Medical or dental office: 
One space for every employee, plus one space for every examining room. 
(31)  Motel: 
One space for every guest room. 
(32)  Movie theater: 
One space for every five seats. 
(33)  Moving and storage: 
One  space for every 10,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for every employee. 
(34)  Museum, art gallery, library, or similar use: 
One space for every 400 square feet of gross space to which the public has access. 
(35)  Office, business or professional, bank, or similar use: 
One space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(36)  Personal service establishment: 
One space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than two spaces for every employee/operator. 
(37)  Printing and copying services: 
One space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
(38)  Repair services, limited (small items): 
One space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
(39)  Restaurant or place dispensing food, drink or refreshments: 
One space for every two seats provided for patron use. 
(40)  Retail stores of all types not mentioned otherwise: 
One space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area 
(41)  School, elementary and middle: 
One space for every employee, and one space for every classroom, plus safe and convenient area for loading and unloading of students. 
(42)  School, high: 
One space for every two students, plus one space every employee. 
(43)  Self service storage facility: 
One space for every 75 storage bays plus one space for every employee, plus two customer spaces. 
(44)  Shopping center: 
One space for every300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(45)  Stable, commercial: 
One space for every 300 square feet within stable, plus one space per three animal stalls. 
(46)  Swimming pool, public: 
One space for every 200 square feet of water surface area plus requirements for additional uses in association with establishments such as a restaurant, etc. 
(47)  Upholstery shop: 
One space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
(48)  Vehicle sales and rental: 
One space for every 500 square feet of enclosed area, plus one space for every 5,000 square feet of outdoor sales, rental, and display area, plus one space for every service bay, plus one space for every employee. 
(49)  Veterinarian office or clinic: 
One space for every employee plus one space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area. 
(50)  Warehouse and bulk storage facility: 
One space for every 2,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for every employee. 
(51)  Wholesale, or open yard establishment: 
One space for each employee, one space for every 2,000 square feet of gross floor area, and one space for every company vehicle to be stored on the site. 
(52)  Woodworking or cabinetmaking: 
One space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, 1-22-2015; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 7, 7-28-2016) 
Secs. 104-222—104-248. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL ORDINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 104-249. - Title. 
This article will be known as "Fayette County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Code 1992, § 8-241; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-250. - Definitions; interpretation. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, that are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual For Erosion And Sediment Control in Georgia (manual). 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means an area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., that is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which where earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface; also known as an excavation. 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Towaliga Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material than conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice and/or gravity. 
Erosion sedimentation and pollution control plan ("plan") means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, BMPs, and requirements of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including exempted agricultural practices. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The county is the local issuing authority for the unincorporated county. 
Manual means the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of notice of intent (NOI) submittal. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in where colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of activities necessary to ensure compliance with the plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article, known as a "Land Disturbance Permit." 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Plan means the erosion and sedimentation and pollution control plan. 
Project means the entire proposed development regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the manual 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, organic and/or inorganic, that is in suspension, is transported, and/or is moved from the site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process where eroded material is transported with and deposited by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, and sedimentation, and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Towaliga Soil and Water Conservation District. As of July 12, 1992, a memorandum of agreement between the district, the county, and the state soil and water conservation commission permits the county to review and approve erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plans. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover by the installation of temporary or permanent vegetation and/or structures, for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion and sedimentation process. 
State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state that are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sediment control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the manual. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such practices can be found in the manual. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash where water flows either continuously or intermittently and having a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Code 1992, § 8-242; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 1, 11-10-2016) 
Secs. 104-251—104-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Exceptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 

Sec. 104-266. - Exemptions. 
This division shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land within the unincorporated county, except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardening, individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fence installation, and other related activities resulting in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not exempted under this subsection. Construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in division 4 of this article; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock includes but is not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens and turkey; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products and farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land-management practices, including harvesting, provided when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established herein, no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forestry management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after the completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters. For purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways having water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams that do not have water in them year round; provided, that any person responsible for a project involving less than one acre of land disturbing activity and within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project not specifically exempted herein; 
(9)  Construction and/or maintenance projects undertaken or financed in whole and/or in part by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; and/or any road construction or maintenance project, undertaken by the county; provided, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state road and tollway authority that disturbs one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority. The local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where any previous referenced entities is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued. Violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Code 1992, § 8-243; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Secs. 104-267—104-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL USING BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Best management practices, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6. 

Sec. 104-281. - General provisions. 
Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. Provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of this article. Application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities, and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activities in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(Code 1992, § 8-245; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-282. - Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(a)  Best management practices as set forth herein shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of BMPs shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director/local issuing authority or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(b)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where BMPs have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(c)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain BMPs shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(d)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(Code 1992, § 8-246; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-283. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  Rules, regulations, ordinances, and/or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and BMPs, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, consistent with and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the manual, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts, except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plans shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and for adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments onsite or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified herein; 
(15)  There is an established 25-foot buffer along the banks of any state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except: 
a.  Where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment; 
b.  Where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8; 
c.  Where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; or 
d.  Along any ephemeral stream. As used in this article, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream; that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; where groundwater is not a source of the ephemeral stream; and where runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. 
Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. 
(b)  The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
(1)  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for the owner's own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
(2)  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
a.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
b.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(Code 1992, § 8-247; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-284. - Watershed protection. 
Nothing contained in this article shall supersede the buffer requirements specified in article VII of this chapter, watershed protection. 
(Code 1992, § 8-248; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-285. - Damage to surrounding property. 
The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this division or the terms of the permit. 
(Code 1992, § 8-249; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Secs. 104-286—104-303. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - APPLICATION/PERMIT PROCESS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Permits, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 et seq. 

Sec. 104-304. - Generally. 
The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the county that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review all development ordinances that regulate land within the unincorporated county. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties that can obtain a land disturbance permit. 
(Code 1992, § 8-251; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-305. - Permit required; application requirements; fees. 
(a)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the unincorporated county without first obtaining a permit from the county environmental management department to perform such activity. 
(b)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the environmental management department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified herein. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the plan. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(c)  A fee shall be charged for each application as determined by the county board of commissioners for the disturbed area. 
(d)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) and (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the county being a local issuing authority. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a permit application and plan, the environmental management department shall review the plan within 14 calendar days and approve or disapprove it concerning the adequacy of the plan. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the environmental management department, all necessary variances have been approved, a preconstruction meeting has been conducted where the owner or duly authorized representative is present, and all bonds, if required, have been submitted. 
(1)  When reviewing any application for a land disturbing activity permit, the environmental management department shall consider the past record of the permit applicant in complying with previous land disturbing activity permits and this article. If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the environmental management department may deny the application, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(2)  The environmental management department may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof, up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or a fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the environmental management department may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for a hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the environmental management department with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(Code 1992, § 8-251; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 2, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 104-306. - Plan requirements. 
(a)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained herein, or through the use of more stringent alternate design criteria conforming to sound conservation and engineering practices. 
(b)  The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws, maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(c)  The plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(Code 1992, § 8-252; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-307. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but no later than 15 days after receipt by the environmental management department of a completed application, provided all state and federal permits/variances and local bonding are obtained, as applicable. 
(b)  Any variances required herein must be obtained; bonding requirements, if necessary, must be met; all the county ordinances, rules and regulations in effect must be complied with; and the plan must be approved prior to issuance of a permit by the environmental management department. 
(c)  If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(d)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article. 
(e)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. If a decision is made to plat the subdivision in phases after the permit has been issued, and the rights-of-way have been cleared, the cleared areas outside of the phase to be constructed must be mulched and grassed. A new permit must be issued before work can begin in any subsequent phase, though the work may be continued under the initial NOI if a NOT has not be filed with the state. 
(f)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the environmental management department, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved plan or that the holder or successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(g)  A permit shall not be issued for any lot in a subdivision with a minimum lot size less than two acres unless it is issued in conjunction with a building permit. 
(h)  If the work has not begun within 90 calendar days of the issuance of a permit, then the permit shall expire. The permit will expire if the project is not completed and approved within 24 months of the issuance of the permit. If project is a phased project, as indicated on the approved site plan or preliminary plat, then each phase of the project has a 24-month time limit. When a permit expires, the developer will have to apply for a new permit, however, once a new permit is issued, work may continue under the initial NOI, if a NOT has not be filed with the state. 
(i)  The permit must be posted at the site entrance in a place where it can easily be seen. 
(Code 1992, § 8-253; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 2, 11-10-2016) 
Secs. 104-308—104-332. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 104-333. - Inspection. 
The environmental management department will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which where permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the approved plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the environmental management department shall regulate primary, secondary, and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of BMPs where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of BMPs where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities, as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, permit conditions, or provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, the person shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 8-254; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 2, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 104-334. - Investigations. 
The environmental management department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may be reasonably deemed necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter, at reasonable times, upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(Code 1992, § 8-255; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 2, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 104-335. - Entry. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purpose of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative in the process of carrying out his official duties. Any such person refusing entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division shall be subject to penalties described division 6 of this article, pertaining to penalties and incentives. 
(Code 1992, § 8-256; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Secs. 104-336—104-358. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PENALTIES AND INCENTIVES 

Sec. 104-359. - Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. 
If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 8-259; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-360. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  For the first and second violations of this article the director or local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that all activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. If the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(b)  For a third and any subsequent violation, the director or local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(c)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(d)  All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where BMPs have not been properly designed, installed and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. Such stop work orders shall apply to all activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(Code 1992, § 8-260; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-361. - Bond forfeiture. 
If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply with the time specified, the person shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited the person's performance bond, if required. The environmental management department may call the bond or any part hereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Code 1992, § 8-261; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 2, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 104-362. - Monetary penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this division, or any permit condition or limitations established pursuant to this division or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the environmental management department issued, as provided in this division, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500,00.00 per day, per violation, or a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Code 1992, § 8-262; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 2, 11-10-2016) 
State Law reference— Civil penalties, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-15. 
Secs. 104-363—104-366. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - EDUCATION AND CERTIFICATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Education and training certification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 

Sec. 104-367. - Required of persons involved in land development. 
Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Code 1992, § 8-263; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-368. - Representative. 
(a)  For each site on where land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is responsible for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. 
(b)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 8-264; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Sec. 104-369. - On-site representative. 
If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activities at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said section. 
(Code 1992, § 8-265; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Secs. 104-370—104-388. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL, JUDICIAL REVIEW 

Sec. 104-389. - Administrative remedies. 
The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the environmental management departmentupon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of commissioners of the county within 30 days after receipt by the environmental management department of written notice of appeal. 
(Code 1992, § 8-264; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 2, 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 104-390. - Judicial review. 
Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the environmental management department, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 8-265; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-20, § 2, 11-10-2016) 
Secs. 104-391—104-408. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - LIABILITY 

Sec. 104-409. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the county or the district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this division or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this division shall permit any person to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-2-20 et seq.) or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved hereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined hereunder. 
(Code 1992, § 8-268; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 2-26-2004; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 5-27-2010) 
Secs. 104-410—104-431. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DAM AND ARTIFICIAL BARRIER DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq. 

Sec. 104-432. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish design specifications and permit requirements of dams and impoundments in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of all the county citizens by reducing the risk of failure of dams and/or impoundments to prevent death or injuries to persons. 
(Code 1992, § 8-301; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 104-433. - Definitions. 
The following definitions are restated from the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, chapter 391-3-8, Rules for Dam Safety: 
Category I means the classification of a dam where improper operation or failure would result in probable loss of human life. Situations constituting "probable loss of life" are those situations involving inundation of frequently occupied structures or facilities, including, but not limited to, residences, commercial and manufacturing facilities, schools and churches. 
Category II means the classification of a dam where improper operation or dam failure would not be expected to result in probable loss of human life. 
Dam means, with the exception of the exemptions outlined in Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-372), the following: 
(1)  Any artificial barrier, including appurtenant works, which impounds or diverts water and which the improper operation or failure of such would result in probable loss of human life as determined pursuant to the Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.), and which: 
a.  Is 25 feet or more in height from the downstream toe or lowest elevation of the outside limit of the barrier to the maximum water storage elevation; or 
b.  Has an impounding capacity at maximum water storage elevation of 100 acre-feet or more. 
(2)  Any artificial barrier, including appurtenant works, constructed in conjunction with the reclamation of surface mined land, and meeting the requirements of subsection (1) of this definition, and when improper operation or failure would result in probable loss of human life. 
Embankment means a wall or bank built to impound water. 
Impoundment means the water or liquid substance that is or will be stored by a dam, commonly referred to as the reservoir. 
(Code 1992, § 8-302; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 104-434. - General provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to any person, corporation or other entity proposing to construct a dam or impoundment in unincorporated thee county unless the embankment does not exceed six feet in height regardless of storage capacity, or that has a storage capacity at maximum water storage elevation not in excess of 15-acre-feet regardless of height. 
(b)  Designation of article administrator. The county stormwater management department shall administer this article. 
(c)  Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.). Any person, corporation or other entity proposing to construct a dam or impoundment in the county unless the embankment does not exceed six feet in height regardless of storage capacity, or that has a storage capacity at maximum water storage elevation not in excess of 15-acre-feet regardless of height; must first comply with the state department of natural resources environmental protection division Rules for Dam Safety, chapter 391-3-8. These rules are made part of this article by reference. Additional requirements listed in section 104-435 shall apply to any dams or impoundments proposed for construction that are listed in chapter 391-3-8.04 of the Rules for Dam Safety. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environmental shall control. No local government action under this article relieves the land owner from federal and/or state permitting requirements. 
(Code 1992, § 8-303; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 104-435. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No dam or impoundment shall be constructed that could wash out, by failure of the proposed dam or impoundment, an existing public road or downstream private driveway as determined by the stormwater management department, and thereby restrict emergency vehicles from gaining access to occupied structures. 
(b)  No public roadway, right-of-way, and/or utilities except stormwater shall be located on any dam or impoundment. 
(Code 1992, § 8-304; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 104-436. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Any dam proposed for construction in unincorporated the county must be approved by the state safe dams office under the requirements of the rules for safe dam prior to application for a construction permit. 
(b)  Any dam or impoundment proposed for construction in unincorporated the county must have received all applicable federal and state environmental permits and must be compliant with all state and federal environmental regulations prior to application for a construction permit. 
(c)  All dam design documentation submitted to the state safe dams program shall also be submitted to the county stormwater management department for review. 
(d)  Minimum design requirements. 
(1)  Any dam, as defined in the Safe Dams Act of 1978 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.), proposed for construction in the unincorporated county shall meet all category I design and maintenance requirements as required by the Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 regardless of the state safe dams program classification. 
(2)  Any dam or impoundment constructed to serve as access to a private residence shall have a top width of a minimum of 20 feet unobstructed width of access with an all-weather driving surface capable of supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus and having a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet six inches (reference SFPC 602.6). Nothing contained in these requirements shall be constructed to relieve the design engineer from his responsibility to provide a design that is accurate, adequate, and acceptable according to generally accepted engineering practices. 
(3)  Any dam or impoundment constructed shall meet all requirements for land disturbance as referenced in article IX of this chapter, the county soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control ordinance. 
(e)  Submission of documents. The design documents submitted to the stormwater management department for review shall include: 
(1)  Topographic drawings of the pond or lake site at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet with two-foot contour intervals; 
(2)  Plan, cross section and longitudinal drawings of the proposed dam showing the core, drains, cut-off trenches, spillways and the elevations of the one-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year storm elevations; 
(3)  Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations including those required by the safe dams program for Category I and II dams; 
(4)  Specifications for construction; 
(5)  Detail drawings for appurtenances including principal and emergency spillways; 
(6)  A dam-break analysis as required by the state safe dams program determining the extent and height of the flood wave including the location of any downstream structures and property and the impact of failure on such property and structures; 
(7)  As-built drawings of the dam, sealed by the design engineer, shall be submitted to the stormwater management department prior to recording the final plat for the subdivision, if applicable. Certification of construction to specified compaction requirements shall also be provided, if applicable; 
(8)  Access easement from the nearest street, that may or may not be a part of the development, for maintenance and emergency access purposes; and 
(9)  Maintenance plan for the structure that shall describe the maintenance and the parties responsible for maintenance as required by the Georgia Safe Dams Program for Category I. 
(f)  Emergency action plan. Provide an emergency action plan based on the dam-break analysis. The plan shall include, but is not limited to, a 24-hour emergency point-of-contact; procedures to follow upon detection of possible failure; inundation maps and a list of owner responsibilities including all emergency notifications. 
(g)  Review. The stormwater management department shall have 30 calendar days to review the submitted documents and to either approve them or return them to the engineer with comments. 
(Code 1992, § 8-305; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 104-437. - Ownership of dam. 
The county does not accept the ownership, maintenance or responsibility for any dam or impoundment constructed under these regulations. 
(Code 1992, § 8-306; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 3-22-2012) 
Secs. 104-438—104-457. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION ORDINANCE 

Sec. 104-458. - Introduction. 
In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the county and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of the county's water resources be ensured for public use. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 8-320; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 104-459. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aquifer means any stream (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. (Note: This is the same definition used in the Groundwater Use Act). 
Environmental health manager means this position refers to the current department head holding the title "environmental health county manager." 
Groundwater recharge area (synonymous with aquifer recharge area) means an area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities. 
Pollution susceptibility maps means maps prepared by the state department of natural resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Significant groundwater recharge area means areas mapped by DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition) are. Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of the rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of "karst" topography (sinkholes, caves, and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Code 1992, § 8-321; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 104-460. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers that are permeable, rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)  Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and 
(3)  Protect groundwater by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
(Code 1992, § 8-322; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 104-461. - General provisions. 
(a)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to any person, corporation or other entity performing land disturbing activities that require a building permit, site plan, preliminary plat, or final plat approved by the county. 
(b)  Designation of article administrator. The county stormwater management department shall administer this article. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environmental shall control. No local government action under this article relieves the land owner from federal and/or state permitting requirements. 
(Code 1992, § 8-323; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 104-462. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. 
A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established that shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the county that are mapped as significant groundwater recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. 
(Code 1992, § 8-324; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 104-463. - Determination of pollution susceptibility. 
Each recharge area is determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium or low based on the state pollution susceptibility map prepared by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Groundwater recharge areas in the county are located in low pollution susceptibility areas. 
(Code 1992, § 8-325; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 104-464. - Submittal requirements. 
(a)  With the exception of activities identified in subsection (c) of this section that are exempt from this article, any land disturbing activity in a groundwater recharge area district shall identify the groundwater recharge area district on any submittals to the county including, but not limited to, a site plan, preliminary plat, or a final plat, depending on the nature of the development. 
(b)  The following information, in addition to any other requirements for site plans, preliminary plats, or final plats per the county development regulations, is required for all development within groundwater recharge areas: 
(1)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(2)  All development activities or site work conducted after site plan, preliminary plat, or final plat approval shall conform to specifications of said site plan, preliminary plat, or final plat. Significant changes to the site plan, preliminary plat, or final plat that alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in an increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval by the county. 
(c)  The following activities are exempt from the requirement of this article: 
(1)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(2)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single family residences. 
(Code 1992, § 8-326; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 104-465. - Groundwater protection standards. 
(a)  New waste disposal facilities must have synthetic lines and leachate collection systems. 
(b)  A SCS approved liner must be provided for new agricultural waste impoundments exceeding 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the natural resources conservation service. 
(c)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(d)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials shall take place on an impermeable surface having spill and leak protection approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD). New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in the amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(e)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 650 gallons must have secondary containment of 110 percent of tank volume or 110 percent of the largest tanks in a cluster of tanks. 
(f)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the state department of human resources manual for on-site sewage management systems (hereinafter referred to as DHR Manual) and subsection (g) of this section. 
(g)  Minimum lot size for new homes served by an individual septic tank/drain field system will be based on table MT-1 of the DHR Manual and the criteria for protection of groundwater recharge areas, A through D. Minimum lot or space size for mobile homes served by an individual septic tank/drain field system will be based on table MT-2 of the DHR manual and the criteria for protection of groundwater recharge areas, A through D. Section M, lot sizing of the DHR manual states in the criteria for protection of groundwater area, that if a local government requires a larger lot size than that required by (2A) of the DHR manual for homes or (2B) of the DHR manual for mobile homes, the larger lot size shall be used. Section M, lot sizing of the DHR manual is not printed herein but is on file in the county offices. 
(Code 1992, § 8-327; Ord. of 12-5-2001; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 3-8-2012) 
Sec. 104-466. - Penalties. 
(a)  In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the county stormwater management department shall first notify the owner/operator or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the owner/operator or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the county stormwater management department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The county stormwater management department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the owner/operator or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the owner/operator or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the owner/operator or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(2)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The county stormwater management department may suspend, revoke or modify any permit authorizing any development on the project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner/operator or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the county stormwater management department may deem necessary) to enable the owner/operator or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(b)  Civil penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article or in the event the owner/operator or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the county stormwater management department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), the county stormwater management department may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation is not remediated after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(c)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, or in the event the owner/operator or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the county stormwater management department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), the county stormwater management department may issue a citation to the owner/operator or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the county state court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500.00 per day, per violation or a sentence of imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 8-328; Ord. No. 2012-04, § 1, 3-8-2012) 
Secs. 104-467—104-485. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Development Impact Fee Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. 

Sec. 104-486. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Fayette County, Georgia." 
(b)  This article has been prepared and adopted by the board of commissioners of the county in accordance with the authority provided by article IX, section II, paragraph IV of the constitution of the state and the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq.). 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the county to adopt such an ordinance pursuant to any other source of local authority or to use any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(d)  This article shall apply to all unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 8-351; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. I, §§ 1—4, 5-4-2001) 
Sec. 104-487. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the county comprehensive growth management plan (hereinafter the comprehensive plan) and specifically the capital improvements element included therein. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of real property so that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve new growth and development through the imposition of impact fees. 
(Code 1992, § 8-352; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. II, §§ 1, 2, 5-4-2001) 
Sec. 104-488. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners of the county finds and declares that: 
(1)  Land development shall not be allowed unless adequate public facilities are available or are assured; 
(2)  New land development in identified service areas shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities to serve new growth and development; 
(3)  The imposition of impact fees is the preferred method of regulating land development in order to assure that it bears a proportionate share of the cost of the new public facilities necessary to accommodate the new growth and development, and to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the county; and 
(4)  The county must expand its public facilities in order to maintain current levels of service if new development and growth is to be accommodated without decreasing the level of service. 
(Code 1992, § 8-353; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. III, 5-4-2001) 
Sec. 104-489. - Intent. 
The intent of this article in granting credits and/or refunds is to make such grants to persons or entities who actually paid or will pay fees. 
(Code 1992, § 8-354; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. IV, §§ 1, 2, 5-4-2001) 
Sec. 104-490. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building permit means the permit required for new construction pursuant to the county building code. The term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase the number of units resulting therefrom. 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of public facility. 
Capital improvements element means that portion of the comprehensive plan which sets out projected needs for system improvements during a planning horizon established in the comprehensive plan, a schedule of capital improvements that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement. 
Commencement of construction or commenced construction means expenditure of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, marshaling of forces to undertake a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project, or any action normally found to proceed subsequent to these actions in a typical flow of project construction activities. 
Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Development means any construction of a building or structure. 
Development approval means any written authorization from the county which allows the commencement of construction. 
Development exaction means a requirement attached to a development approval compelling the payment, dedication, or contribution of goods, services, land, or money as a condition of approval. 
Development impact fee means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve new growth and development. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract, or otherwise commit to use by appropriation, or other official act of the county. 
Excess capacity means capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide service at a specified level of service. 
Feepayor means that person who pays a development impact fee, or his successor in interest, where the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. In the absence of an express transfer or assignment of the right or entitlement to any fund of previously paid development impact fees, the right or entitlement shall be deemed "not to run with the land." 
Individual assessment study means the engineering and/or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor to allow determination of a development impact fee other than by use of an applicable fee schedule, as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4(g). 
Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for public facilities in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of public facilities or both. 
Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions or dedication of goods, services, materials, construction, or money. 
Project means a particular development on an identified parcel of land. 
Project improvements means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project, and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project, and are not system improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or system improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on site or off site shall not be considered determinative. If an improvement or facility provides, or will provide, more than incidental service or facilities capacity to persons other than users or occupants of a particular project, the improvement or facility is a system improvement and shall not be considered a project improvement. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities approved by the governing body of the county shall be considered a project improvement. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements which is reasonably related to the service demands and needs of the project within the defined service area. 
Public facilities means: 
(1)  Water supply production, treatment, and distribution facilities; 
(2)  Wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal facilities; 
(3)  Roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping and any local components of state or federal highways; 
(4)  Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment, and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and enhancement improvements; 
(5)  Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; 
(6)  Public safety facilities, including police, fire, emergency medical, rescue, and jail facilities; and 
(7)  Libraries and other related facilities. 
Service area means a geographic area determined by the county in which a defined set of public facilities provides service to development within the area. Service areas shall be designated on the basis of sound planning or engineering principles, or both. 
System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide additional public facilities capacity needed to serve new growth and development for planning, design and construction, land acquisition, land improvement, design and engineering related thereto, including the cost of constructing or reconstructing system improvements or facility expansions, including but not limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvement element, and administrative costs, provided that such administrative costs shall not exceed three percent of the total amount of the costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payments of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the county to finance the capital improvements element, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities and are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements. 
Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment paid to the county from which no amount of money has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of section 104-495(d) within the time specified in section 104-496(a). 
(Code 1992, § 8-355; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. V, 5-4-2001) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2. 
Sec. 104-491. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
(a)  Any person who engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article contained herein, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be subject to development impact fees, so long as the building permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the development impact fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(d)  Development impact fees for stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment, and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and enhancement improvements, shall be collected at the time of issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(Code 1992, § 8-356; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. VI, §§ 1—4, 5-4-2001) 
State Law reference— Authority to impose development impact fee, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-3. 
Sec. 104-492. - Calculation of development impact fees. 
(a)  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this article shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements. 
(b)  Development impact fees shall be calculated on the basis of service areas as provided in the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Development impact fees shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities adopted in the comprehensive plan. 
(d)  To determine the development impact fee for a residential dwelling unit or for a single nonresidential building or structure with a known use, see the impact fee schedule in attachment A. For a single nonresidential building or structure with an unknown use, or for a nonresidential building or structure with multiple units, the zoning of the parcel will determine the development impact fee by establishment type (see attachment A to Ord. No. 2001-03). The following types of development are not subject to the imposition of a development impact fee: 
(1)  Rebuilding of a residential dwelling unit on the same parcel. 
(2)  Rebuilding of a nonresidential building or structure so long as the number of nonresidential buildings or structures is not increased. 
(3)  The construction of an accessory structure which is allowed pursuant to chapter 110, zoning. 
(4)  The expansion of a residential dwelling which does not increase the number of dwelling units. 
(5)  The expansion of a nonresidential building or structure. 
(e)  Individual assessments of development impact fees are permitted at the option of applicants for development approval under guidelines established in this article. (See section 104-493.) 
(f)  A developer may receive certification of the development impact fee schedule or individual assessment for a particular project which shall establish the development impact fee for a period of 180 days from the date of certification. 
(g)  The developer shall have the right to elect to pay a project's proportionate share of system improvement costs by payment of development impact fees according to the fee schedule as full and complete payment of the development project's proportionate share of system improvement costs. 
(h)  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs. 
(Code 1992, § 8-357; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. VII, §§ 1—8, 5-4-2001) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4. 
Sec. 104-493. - Individual assessment determination. 
Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
(1)  In the event that a developer elects an individual assessment, the developer shall submit an individual assessment study. Any such study is to be presented to the county administrator. If the county administrator finds that the data, information, and assumptions used in such an individual assessment study satisfy the requirements of this article, then that study shall be used to calculate the individual assessment for that project. 
(2)  Each individual assessment study must: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source, or engineering or planning data; or be based on actual, relevant and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in the Atlanta Metropolitan Statistical Area carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and 
b.  Be based on any other specifications required in this article. 
(3)  Any fee calculated in accordance with this provision shall have standing for 180 days following the date of a formal response from the county administrator to the applicant. Following such a period, a new application must be made. 
(4)  A determination by the county administrator that any individual assessment study does not satisfy the requirements of this article may be appealed by the applicant to the board of commissioners subject to the procedures, rules, and regulations set forth in section 104-497. 
(Code 1992, § 8-358; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. VIII, §§ 1—4, 5-4-2001) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4. 
Sec. 104-494. - Credits. 
(a)  In the calculation of development impact fees for a particular project, credits shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, or contribution, or dedication of land, or money required or accepted by the county from a developer, or his predecessor in title or interest, for system improvements of the category for which the development impact fee is being collected. Credits shall not be given for project improvements. 
(b)  Credits under subsection (a) of this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
(1)  For the present value of the construction of any system improvements required or accepted, in conjunction with the project for which approval is being sought, by the county from the developer or predecessor in title or interest for the category of system improvements in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, the developer must present evidence of the cost and age of the improvement from which present value may be calculated using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent) as estimates of inflation and depreciation. 
(2)  For the present value of any contribution or dedication of land required or accepted for system improvements, in conjunction with the project for which approval is being sought by the county from the developer or predecessor in title or interest for the category of system improvements in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, the value for contributed land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the current validated the county tax appraisal at the time of dedication; present value shall be calculated from the time of dedication using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent). 
(3)  For the present value of any contribution or dedication of money required or accepted, in conjunction with the project for which approval is being sought, by the county from the developer or predecessor in title or interest for the system improvements in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, the value of contributed money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution or dedication; present value shall be calculated from time of contribution or dedication using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent). 
(c)  Upon submission of adequate evidence that a development impact fee was previously paid and that the building permit has expired, credit for the present value of the development impact fee shall be in the amount of the development impact fee paid, inflated from the date of payments using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent) and shall be applied against that parcel of land. Should the development impact fee be less than the amount credited, under the circumstances previously mentioned herein, the excess credit shall remain with the county. Should the development impact fee be greater than the amount credited, under the circumstances previously mentioned herein, the developer shall pay the difference to the county. 
(d)  In the event that a developer enters into an agreement with the county to construct, fund, or contribute system improvements such that the amount of credit created by such construction, funding, or contribution exceeds the development impact fee calculated for the project, the developer shall be compensated for such excess contribution by the county or, at the county's option, from development impact fees paid by other developments located in the service area benefitted by such improvements. The present value of any such construction or contribution shall be established by: 
(1)  Use of documented prices actually paid by the developer for the system improvements with such prices inflated by use of the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent); or 
(2)  Use of documented prices which would have been paid by the county for such system improvements with such prices inflated by use of the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent), whichever is less. 
The county is under no obligation to make immediate compensation, but will make compensation if funds are available. 
(e)  Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, no credits shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this article, nor shall credit be given for system improvements or funds for system improvements constructed, contributed, or dedicated after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived if an agreement to do so was entered into before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived for projects which have already received a building permit. 
(f)  In the event that a feepayor has, under previously established conditions of zoning, constructed, contributed, or dedicated system improvements or funds when receiving permits to proceed with only a portion or phase of a project as defined by a particular zoning case, where the construction, contribution, or dedication is in excess of that required by the portion or phase permitted, the excess construction, contribution, or dedication shall be credited against future development impact fees which shall be required as additional portions or phases of the zoned projects seek building permits. 
(g)  The developer must present adequate evidence of the cost and age of the improvement from which present value may be calculated using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent), estimates of inflation and depreciation. 
(h)  Credits required under subsection (b) of this section, shall be automatically given at the time of fee imposition. Any other credits shall be given only upon request by the developer to the county administrator. To receive consideration for such other credits, a developer must present adequate evidence or proposals for creditable activities and adequate evidence of value to the county administrator at or before the time of application for a building permit. 
(i)  The county administrator shall review all claims for allowance and valuation of credits and make determinations regarding: 
(1)  Allowance of any claimed credit. 
(2)  Value of any allowed credit. 
(j)  Any credits shall be acknowledged in writing and calculated at the time of imposition of the development impact fee. A developer may appeal any such determination by following the guidelines established in section 104-497. 
(Code 1992, § 8-359; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. IX, §§ 1—10, 5-4-2001) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-7. 
Sec. 104-495. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
(a)  All development impact fee funds shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts. Restrictions on the investment of such funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all county funds generally. 
(b)  Accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements in the service area in which the fees are collected. 
(c)  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this article. 
(d)  Expenditures of development impact fees shall be made only for the category of system improvements and in the service area for which the development impact fee was imposed as shown by the capital improvements element and as authorized by this article. 
(e)  Development impact fees shall not be used to pay for any purpose that does not involve system improvements that create additional service available to serve new growth and development. 
(f)  The county administrator shall prepare an annual report describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding year by category of public facility and service area. 
(Code 1992, § 8-360; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. X, §§ 1—6, 5-4-2001) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-6. 
Sec. 104-496. - Refunds. 
(a)  Upon the request for a refund by a feepayor, development impact fees are eligible to be refunded under the following circumstances: 
(1)  If capacity is available and service is denied; or 
(2)  The county has failed to timely encumber the development impact fee or has failed to commence construction within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
(b)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first in, first out (FIFO) basis. 
(c)  When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber development impact fees, the county shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in the legal organ of the county within 30 days after the expiration of the six year period after the date that the development impact fees were collected and shall contain the heading: "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." 
(d)  All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the county administrator within one year of the time such refund becomes payable under subsections (a) through (c) of this section, or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. 
(e)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess development impact fee collected. 
(f)  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined that a sufficient proof of claim for a refund has been made. 
(g)  The feepayor shall have standing to sue for a refund if there has been a timely and complete application (including, but not necessarily limited to, proof that a development impact fee has been paid, proof that the applicant for the refund is the feepayor entitled to the refund, and that the conditions specified in subsection (a) of this section have been met) for a refund and the refund has been denied or has not been made within one year of submission of the application for refund to the county. 
(Code 1992, § 8-361; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. XI, §§ 1—7, 5-4-2001) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-9. 
Sec. 104-497. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any administrative determination made under this article, or by the application of any provision of this article, may appeal such determination or provision under this section. 
(b)  A notice of appeal must be filed with the board of commissioners within 30 days following the receipt of a written determination of the amount of the development impact fee to be paid or entitlement to a refund, credit, or exemption. 
(c)  All appeals shall be made to the board of commissioners following the county administrator's decision on the applicability or amount of the development impact fee, or eligibility for or amount of a refund, credit, or exemption. Upon filing of an appeal, the county administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board of commissioners all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is taken. The board of commissioners shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for the hearing on the appeal, give notice thereof to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time following the hearing. Any party taking an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the board of commissioners may take an appeal to the superior court of the county within 30 days after the decision by the board of commissioners is rendered. 
(d)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest in order to obtain a development approval or building permit, as the case may be. A developer making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising his right of appeal, nor shall such developer be estopped from receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. 
(e)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to issuance of development approval or a building permit. 
(Code 1992, § 8-362; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. XII, §§ 1—5, 5-4-2001) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-10. 
Sec. 104-498. - Intergovernmental agreements. 
For the provision of fire services, the county has entered into intergovernmental agreements with the Town of Brooks, the Town of Tyrone and the Town of Woolsey (see attachment B to Ord. No. 2001-03). 
(Code 1992, § 8-363; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. XIII, 5-4-2001) 
Sec. 104-499. - Private agreements. 
(a)  The county may require a developer to construct reasonable project improvements in conjunction with a development project. 
(b)  Private agreements may exist between property owners or developers and the county with regard to the construction or installation of system improvements in providing for credits or reimbursements for system improvement costs incurred by a developer including inter-project transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project. 
(c)  A private agreement may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
(1)  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of development impact fees, provided that any such agreement allows the county to assess additional development impact fees after completion of construction according to the schedule set forth in this article. 
(2)  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which a development impact fee would be imposed in lieu of, or with a credit against, applicable development impact fees. 
(3)  Permit a schedule and method of payment of development impact fees in a manner appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this article, provided that security acceptable to the county is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security which may be acceptable to the county include a cash bond, a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, negotiable certificate of deposit or escrow account, or lien or mortgage on land to be covered by the building permit. 
(d)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this subsection shall be submitted to the county administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the board of commissioners. Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the board of commissioners prior to the issuance of a building permit. Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the land owner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of the superior court of the county for recording. The board of commissioners shall approve such agreement only if it finds that the agreement will apportion the burden of expenditure for new facilities proportionately, consistent with the principles set forth in title 36, chapter 71, Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 71), and this article. 
(Code 1992, § 8-364; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. XIV, §§ 1—4, 5-4-2001) 
Sec. 104-500. - Exemptions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4(l), the public policies expressed in the comprehensive plan, and in accordance with the policies of the board of commissioners, exemptions from development impact fees may be available if: 
(1)  Such projects are determined to create extraordinary economic development and employment growth or affordable housing; 
(2)  The public policy which supports the exemption is contained in the comprehensive plan; and 
(3)  The exempt development's proportionate share of the system improvement is funded through a revenue source other than development impact fees. 
(Code 1992, § 8-365; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. XV, 5-4-2001) 
State Law reference— Mandatory provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-7. 
Sec. 104-501. - Review. 
(a)  As part of its annual capital improvement program process, or as part of any other planning process which causes the county to evaluate development potential in any area, the county may review the development potential of any area within the county, whether it be a previously designated service area or not, or the county as a whole. Based on such review of development potential, the county may adjust boundaries of service areas or create new service areas. 
(b)  As part of its annual review process, or as part of any other planning process which causes the county to evaluate development potential in any area, the county may review capital facilities plans in service areas and modify such plans as a result of development occurring in the previous year and/or requests for permission to develop, e.g., applications for rezoning, applications for land disturbance permits, and applications for building permits. Plans may also be modified as a result of: 
(1)  Capital facilities actually constructed. 
(2)  Changes in capital facility needs and/or standards. 
(3)  Revised cost estimates for capital facilities. 
(4)  Changes in availability of other funds applicable to public facility projects. 
(5)  Other relevant factors. 
(c)  As a result of modifications to service area boundaries and/or capital facilities plans, the county may modify development impact fee schedules as appropriate and adopt such revised schedules through official action of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  As part of its annual comprehensive plan review process, the county may revise the provisions specified in section 104-500. 
(e)  Failure by the county to undertake such a review shall result in the continued use and application of the existing fee schedule and other data. The failure to review such structure shall not invalidate this article. 
(Code 1992, § 8-366; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. XVI, §§ 1—5, 5-4-2001) 
Sec. 104-502. - Penalty provision. 
(a)  A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of, any criminal prosecution, the county shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this article. Recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary are available to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, including injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of the article and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(b)  Knowingly furnishing false information to the county on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute a violation thereof. 
(c)  The county administrator may withhold the issuance of any building permit or other development permits if the provisions of this article have been violated by the feepayor or his assigns, on any property within the unincorporated county until the provisions of this article, including the conditions on any permit issued thereunder, have been fully met. 
(d)  The county administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this article and shall have the right to issue cease and desist orders and citations for violations. Refusal of written notice of violation under this article shall constitute legal notice of service. 
(e)  For any violation, the county administrator shall have the authority to issue a citation. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 working days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the county administrator. If the required corrective action is not taken within the time allowed, the county administrator may use any available civil or criminal remedies to secure compliance, including revoking a permit. 
(Code 1992, § 8-367; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. XVII, §§ 1—5, 5-4-2001) 
Sec. 104-503. - Enforcement provision. 
The enforcement of this article will be the responsibility of the county administrator and such county personnel as the county administrator may designate from time to time. 
(Code 1992, § 8-368; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. XVIII, 5-4-2001) 
Sec. 104-504. - Effect on other regulations. 
This article shall not affect in any manner the permissible use of property, density of development, design, improvements, or any other requirements or aspect of the development of land, or provision of capital improvements subject to zoning and subdivision regulations, or other regulations of the county. All such regulations and requirements shall be operative and shall remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all development. Application and imposition of development impact fees is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the county on the development of land or the issuance of building permits. 
(Code 1992, § 8-369; Ord. No. 2001-03, art. XIX, 5-4-2001) 
Secs. 104-505—104-531. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 

Sec. 104-532. - Introduction. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that discharges to the county's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. 
(b)  These non-stormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and illegal connections to the county's MS4 from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
(c)  These non-stormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume non-stormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
(d)  These impacts of non-stormwater discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters. 
(e)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the county's MS4. 
(f)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits that require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper non-stormwater discharges to the county's MS4. 
(g)  Therefore, the county adopts this article to prohibit such non-stormwater discharges to the county's MS4. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the county's MS4 is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Code 1992, § 8-401; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 104-533. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article that occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illegal connection means the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4 including but not limited to any conveyances that allows any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the MS4, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any stormwater system including pipe, open channel, or drain connected to the county's MS4 not documented in county-approved plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the county's MS4, except as exempted in section 104-535. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means all infrastructure, natural or otherwise, used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater that is: 
(1)  Owned and maintained by the county; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the state EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the county's MS4 not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Owner and/or operator means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means any liquid, gas, solid, radioactive, hazardous, or other substance, that, when not used and/or disposed of in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Paints, varnishes, and solvents; 
(2)  Petroleum hydrocarbons; 
(3)  Automotive fluids; 
(4)  Cooking grease; 
(5)  Detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); 
(6)  Degreasers; 
(7)  Cleaning chemicals; 
(8)  Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; 
(9)  Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations (that may cause or contribute to pollution); 
(10)  Floatables; 
(11)  Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; 
(12)  Liquid and solid wastes, sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; 
(13)  Dissolved and particulate metals; 
(14)  Animal wastes; 
(15)  Wastes and residues that result from building construction waste; 
(16)  Concrete and cement; and 
(17)  Noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to: a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other pollutant into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Stormwater drainage system means all infrastructure, natural or otherwise, used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, e.g. inlets, street and roadway gutters, ditches, small channels, swales and underground piping systems. 
(Code 1992, § 8-401; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 104-534. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the county's MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the NPDES permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants into the county's MS4; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections into the county's MS4; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills and inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the county's MS4; and 
(4)  Establish legal authority to carry out all inspections, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability . The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the unincorporated area of the county. 
(c)  Designation of article administrator . The county environmental management director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article except for issues pertaining to human or animal waste (i.e., sewage) that shall be administered, implemented, and enforced by the county environmental health department. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations . This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Code 1992, § 8-402; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 104-535. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person, owner or operator shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under their control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the county's MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants. 
(b)  Exempted discharges. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  Non-stormwater discharges permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or orders and other applicable laws and regulations; written approval has been granted for any discharge to the county's MS4; and 
(4)  Agricultural operations as defined in section 104-266(5) of the county's soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control ordinance. 
(c)  Prohibition of illegal connections. All stormwater systems shall be sufficient to collect, convey, detain and discharge stormwater runoff in a safe manner consistent with all applicable county development regulations, ordinances, and state and federal laws. Stormwater systems that are connected to the county's MS4 shall be properly operated and maintained by the respective property owner. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the county's MS4 is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
a.  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying pollutants, including sewage, to the county MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
b.  Illegal connections conveying sewage shall be disconnected and/or redirected, if necessary, to an approved sanitary sewer system upon county environmental health department approval. 
(2)  Any stormwater system that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent and is connected to the county's MS4, shall be permitted or relocated by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the county environmental management department requiring that such permitting or relocating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable period for relocation and/or permitting of the stormwater drain or conveyance system. 
(Code 1992, § 8-403; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 104-536. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person, owner, or operator of a facility subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. A copy of the notice of intent submitted to the state environmental protection department shall be submitted to the county environmental management department. 
(Code 1992, § 8-404; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 104-537. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The county environmental management and/or environmental health departments shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force that requires proper identification and clearance before entry onto premises, the owner and/or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments. 
(2)  The owner and/or operator shall allow the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The county environmental management and/or environmental health departments shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the county environmental management and and/or environmental health departments to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The county environmental management and and/or environmental health departments may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(7)  If the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1992, § 8-405; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 104-538. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any owner, operator, and/or person responsible for a facility, activity or owner, operation and/or person responsible, has information of any known or suspected release of any non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation that may result in an illicit discharge into the county's MS4, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release to minimize the effects of the discharge. Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner and/or operator of such facility, activity, or operation shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. The owner and/or operator shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(b)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 8-406; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Sec. 104-539. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations . It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The county environmental management and/or environmental health departments are authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the county environmental management department and/or environmental health departments find that a violation of this article has occurred, the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building structure or land upon which the violation is occurring or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; and 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges; 
c.  The elimination and/or permitting of illegal connections; 
d.  That violating discharges, or operations shall cease and desist; 
e.  The abatement of remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
f.  Payment of costs to cover administrative, abatement, and remediation costs; and 
g.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Abatement measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, then representatives of the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The county environmental management and/or environmental health departments may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 15 days of such notice. Written appeals shall be made to the board of commissioners or a party appointed thereby. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(e)  Citations . For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, and/or in the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments shall deem appropriate, the county environmental management and/or environmental health department may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the state court for the county to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public, health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by the injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(g)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the county environmental management and/or environmental health departments may seek cumulative remedies. 
(Code 1992, § 8-407; Ord. No. 2012-05, § 1, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 3-22-2018) 
Secs. 104-540—104-556. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 104-557. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land-use conversions, and their associated changes to land-cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land-use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving water; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of land and water; 
(4)  These adverse impacts from new development and redevelopment can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures; and 
(5)  Localities in the state must comply with state and federal laws, regulations and permits that require impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution be addressed. 
Therefore, the county has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance regulating post-development stormwater runoff to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Code 1992, § 8-450; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 4, 8-26-2010) 
Sec. 104-558. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person submitting a stormwater management application for approval. 
Basin means an area of land that drains to a single outlet and is separated from other basins by a divide (i.e., a watershed). 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically. 
Common plan of development means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or scale. 
Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the county, other government agency or land trust that legally protects a designated natural conservation area for purposes of better stormwater management site design on the owner's land in perpetuity by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme-flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual means a stormwater technical guidance manual, also known as "the Blue Book" published by the Atlanta Regional Commission. The "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface (excludes porous pavements). 
Infiltration means the process of stormwater runoff percolating into the subsoil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement approved by the county board of commissioners providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetlands determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended. 
Land development ("development") means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities means those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project ("project") means a discrete land development undertaking. 
Natural conservation area means a legally protected area of the site that is perpetually preserved in a natural state thereby retaining the predevelopment hydrologic and water quality characteristics. This area shall be a minimum contiguous area of 10,000 square feet. 
New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site 
Nonpoint-source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint-source pollution is a byproduct of land-use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Off-site system means a stormwater management system located outside the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank and extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain) and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the county stormwater management department to the applicant, which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development means the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Predevelopment means the time period, or the conditions that existed, on a site prior to the commencement of any land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan stormwater management department. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc., the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish predevelopment conditions. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint-source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility/regional facility means any stormwater management system designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater drainage system means a system designed to provide adequate surface drainage that includes inlets, street and roadway gutters, ditches, small channels, swales and underground piping systems. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public's health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater nonstructural practice means a nonstructural component of the stormwater management system that provides enhanced stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other benefits, including, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, natural conservation areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Stormwater structural control means an engineered stormwater management device that controls and mitigates the effects of increased stormwater runoff. 
Subbasin means the hydrologic divisions of a watershed that are relatively homogeneous 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract of land into a minimum of two or more lots. 
(Code 1992, § 8-451; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 4, 8-26-2010) 
Sec. 104-559. - General provisions 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint-source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution, increases in stream temperatures, and preserve stream channel integrity and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design criteria for the construction and use of stormwater structural control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as establishing natural conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility and maintenance of stormwater management systems to ensure that they continue to function as designed, and are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, and approval of stormwater management applications, and inspection procedures of approved applications, for both construction and post-construction phases. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to any new or redevelopment project within the unincorporated county that meets one or more of the following criteria, unless specifically exempted below: 
(1)  The project creates 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover; 
(2)  The project disturbs one acre or more of land; or 
(3)  The project is part of a larger common plan of development, even though it individually may not meet the criteria set forth above and the multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times. The following activities are exempt from this article: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a larger common plan of development; 
b.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are part of a larger common plan of development (e.g., a subdivision or minor subdivision) but have no new roads (public or private) or other common structures associated with the subdivision or phased development. This exemption, however, may be waived by the stormwater management department if it is determined the project may have significant adverse impacts on downstream properties; 
c.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
d.  Agricultural or silvicultural land-management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
e.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the stormwater management department. 
(c)  Administration of article. The county stormwater management department shall administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Effective date. The effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, known as the county's "Post-Development Stormwater Management for New Development and Redevelopment Ordinance," is August 1, 2005, and shall apply to all developments that have preliminary plats or site development plans initially received by the county zoning department on or after this date. 
(f)  Stormwater design manual. The stormwater management department will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the state stormwater management manual and any relevant local addenda. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. The stormwater management department may publish an addendum to the state stormwater management manual to: 
(1)  Clarify discrepancies between the manual and any section of the county's development regulations; 
(2)  Specify requirements where options/alternatives are provided; 
(3)  Establish minimum design standards; or 
(4)  Further describe submittal requirements. 
The criteria within the addendum shall be considered minimum design standards and, in the event of a conflict, supersede design standards set forth in the state stormwater management manual. Addendum shall be available from the stormwater management department. 
(Code 1992, § 8-452; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 4, 8-26-2010) 
Sec. 104-560. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Drainage system guidelines stormwater management system criteria. May include, catchbasins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided, when necessary, for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or right-of-ways. Stormwater management systems that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  Design and construction of stormwater management systems shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual; 
c.  If a project is developed in phases, the stormwater management system in an initial phase must be sized and constructed to handle the quantity and effects of stormwater that may flow into that system subsequent phases. 
(2)  New street construction design criteria. All new streets constructed within the county except those constructed to serve subdivisions in which all lots are five acres or larger, shall have curbs and gutters. Rolled-back curbs are not acceptable, only straight-back curbs are allowed. A curb shall be six inches high and a gutter shall be 24 inches from face of the gutter to back of the curb. 
a.  Curb inlets shall conform to the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) specifications. Spacing of inlets shall not exceed 500 feet on a continuous grade and shall be sized to intercept a minimum of 85 percent of the flow in the gutter section. Inlets shall be located to prevent stormwater from crossing an intersection, but may not be located in a radius for the intersections. Inlets located in a sag shall be sized to prevent gutter spread from covering more than half of the road's travel surface during the 25-year storm event. If grates are proposed for inlet devices, the bars must be perpendicular to the road and shall pose no hazard to bicycle traffic. In any case, throat height shall not exceed eight inches. All stormwater structures requiring inverts shall be paved. 
b.  Only reinforced concrete shall be used for storm drain structures under the roadway, publicly owned right-of-way and in applications to create buildable lots. The pipe must be designed and installed to meet the requirements in the latest edition of the concrete pipe design manual. A third-party pipe standardized installation inspection report is required for all pipes being placed in the ground prior to final plat. Additional information may be requested for the pipe installation report. 
c.  Other pipe materials may be used in applications approved by GDOT. 
d.  Cross drains, laterals and outfalls that are part of a street drainage system shall be sized for subcritical gravity flow. The design engineer must provide calculations to show that any pipes are not flowing under pressurized conditions and that the hydraulic grade lines are below finished grade at all points for the 25-year storm event. Calculations determining the headwater elevation (inlet or outlet controlled) for the 100-year storm event shall be provided by the design engineer. The backwater area inundated by the 100-year storm event shall be shown and designated on the final plat as an area of special flood hazard area. It shall be based on as-built road conditions and shall be subject to the same conditions and limitations as any other area of special flood hazard (article IV of this chapter). 
e.  Storm drains shall not exceed 500 feet of continuous length between an inlet, manhole or junction box access. All junctions boxes shall be installed with accesses at grade. 
f.  In residential subdivisions, outfall piping from catch basins shall, at a minimum, extend from the street to a point 30 feet behind the front building setback line or to the 100-year floodplain, whichever is less. 
g.  For bridges crossing streams with a regulatory floodway and or floodplain, the bridge must meet criteria set forth in the county development regulations, article IV of this chapter. 
h.  All culverts and storm drain system outfalls shall have headwalls or tailwalls. Flared and, vertical wall or vertical wall with wing-walled outfall types are acceptable. 
i.  All outlets must be designed with energy dissipaters if outlet velocities are greater than four feet per second during the 25-year storm event. 
j.  Drainage ditches shall have a minimum bottom width of two feet and shall have 3:1 side slopes. Ditches must be designed to handle the 100-year flow rate and lined with an appropriate erosion control matting capable of withstanding the 25-year flow velocity. 
k.  Upon completion of the construction activities, the applicant shall submit as-built plans for all stormwater management facilities and practices associated with the project. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer registered in the state. The as-built plan shall also include stage/storage data for all detention or retention structures. These data shall be provided and certified by a registered land surveyor. A final inspection by the stormwater department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(3)  Stormwater structural controls. All stormwater structural controls shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the stormwater design manual. All structural stormwater controls must be and designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other stormwater structural controls not included in the, stormwater design manual or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and of the pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the stormwater management department before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land-use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the stormwater management department may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint-source pollution loads created on the development. 
a.  The outlet control structure shall be designed so as not to be submerged due to downstream conditions. 
b.  Detention basins shall be located far enough from any property line to allow nonerosive dissipation of the discharge, unless the basin discharges directly into a receiving stream. In either case, erosion control considerations shall be addressed in the erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
c.  An emergency spillway shall be provided to bypass flows for the 100-year storm in the event that the principal outlet structure gets blocked. 
d.  Any stormwater detention basin that poses a threat to public safety or constitutes an "attractive nuisance" shall be fenced to prevent access to the basin. A gate shall be provided for maintenance access. The gate shall be large enough to accommodate trucks or excavation equipment. 
e.  A stormwater detention basin shall not be constructed on state waters, unless all federal, state and local environmental permits have been acquired. 
f.  If detention is to be provided by a lake or pond, adequate storage must be provided, or be available in the case of existing lakes or ponds, to manage the runoff from the 100-year storm. In addition to these requirements, ponds or lakes must meet the requirements articles IV and X of this chapter and all applicable federal and state and local regulations. 
g.  Water quality requirements cannot be satisfied by existing or proposed lakes or ponds. 
h.  In common residential developments (e.g., subdivisions), all stormwater management systems except those used exclusively for water conveyance (e.g., swales, ditches, and storm pipes) shall be on common property owned by a homeowners' association, or other entity if approved by the stormwater management department, and not counted as an area for an individual lot. 
i.  The stormwater management department shall require documentation and calculations beyond the original submittal if, in their opinion, the plan does not satisfy the purpose as stated in this article. The approval of the plan does not preclude the necessity for field changes once construction has begun. Any such amendments to the approved plan shall be submitted to the stormwater management department on revised drawings and shall be supported by such documentation as is appropriate 
j.  Applicants shall consult the stormwater design manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a stormwater structural control. 
(4)  Modifications for off-site facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site system. A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the stormwater management department that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the stormwater management department that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
c.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
e.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(5)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis that includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This analysis area shall evaluate all effected stormwater management systems extending downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. For example, if the project area is seven acres, the post-development downstream analysis should extend downstream to a point where the drainage area is 70 acres or greater. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned upstream land-use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(6)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the stormwater design manual; and 
b.  Appropriate stormwater structural controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Stream channel protection. Stream channels shall be protected from bank and bed erosion and degradation by providing all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer, as established in articles VII and IX of this chapter; 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour storm event. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the stormwater management department for sites that discharge directly into larger perennial streams, rivers, jurisdictional wetlands, or lakes, if the applicant can demonstrate that the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity; and 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipaters that control velocity. 
(8)  Overbank and extreme flood protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak-discharge rate to the predevelopment rate for the 25-, 50-, and 100-year, 24-hour storm events. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm events under subsection (7)b of this section is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event shall also be provided, (i.e., the two-, five-, ten- and 25-year storm events). Overbank and extreme flood protection shall be provided for all drainage basins within a development. The procedures for providing overbank and extreme flood protection shall follow the criteria specified in the stormwater design manual. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the stormwater management department, on a sub-watershed by sub-watershed basis, for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(9)  Site design credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (6) of this section. The applicant may, if approved by the stormwater management department, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements, which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the stormwater design manual. All applicable documentation requirements shall be submitted and approved by the stormwater management department prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval. 
(10)  Drainage easements. Drainage easements shall be provided for all stormwater management facilities designated for water conveyance. These easements shall generally be 20 feet in width, except where existing streams or creeks or constructed basins require greater width. Such easement shall be shown on plans and plats as required by other sections of the county's ordinances. Since these easements are part of an overall system for the development, neither the easement location not the system element located in it may be modified without the approval of the stormwater management department. 
(11)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management systems requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access casements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property and All maintenance access casements shall be inspected and maintained as part of the annual operations and maintenance program. 
(12)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site that proposing dam construction shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.) and Rules for Dam Safety, as applicable, and article X of this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 8-453; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 4, 8-26-2010) 
Sec. 104-561. - Stormwater management application submittals and procedures. 
(a)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land activity shall submit the following items to the stormwater management department: 
(1)  Stormwater management plan; 
(2)  Operations and maintenance plan; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement; 
(4)  Stormwater assessment area; 
(5)  Application review fees; 
(6)  Application procedure; and 
(7)  Other submittals. 
Each of the submittals in this subsection shall be in accordance with the criteria specified in the following subsections. 
(b)  Stormwater management plan. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 104-560. This plan shall be submitted under the stamp and signature of a professional engineer licensed in the state. In addition, the professional engineer shall provide written certification that the plan meets the design criteria established in this article and the stormwater design manual. Any revisions to the stormwater management plan, including, but not limited to, installation of new stormwater structures, additions to approved stormwater structures, or modifications of existing structures, shall be submitted with the stamp and seal of a professional engineer licensed in the state and receive written approval from the stormwater management department prior to implementation. The stormwater management plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information and be presented in the order set forth as follows: 
(1)  Common address and description of site. The description of the site shall include the metes and bounds of the property, via a survey or written legal description, and identification of all adjacent property owners. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities shall include: 
a.  A topographic map of existing site conditions with each drainage basin boundary indicated. Drainage divides and downstream receiving waters shall be clearly delineated on the topographic map; 
b.  Acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
c.  All perennial and intermittent streams, jurisdictional wetlands, and other surface water features; 
d.  All existing stormwater management systems; 
e.  Direction of flow and exits from the site; 
f.  Analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and 
g.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities shall be based on field conditions prior to any structural or impervious improvements. Predevelopment conditions for the portion of the site outside the land development activities shall be based on the conditions present when the stormwater management plan is submitted to the county. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities shall include: 
a.  A topographic map of developed site conditions (i.e., proposed contours) with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated. Drainage divides and downstream receiving waters shall be clearly delineated on the topographic map; 
b.  Total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; 
c.  Calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 104-560; 
d.  Location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; 
e.  Documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being used; and 
f.  Methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site, then the stormwater runoff performance criteria in section 104-560 must be met for the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, shall include the following: 
a.  A map and drawing of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed stormwater structural controls. Design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes for all structural controls shall be indicated; 
b.  Cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the stormwater structural controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the system is designed according to the applicable design criteria; 
c.  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable storms events (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); 
d.  Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 104-560; 
e.  Drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyances including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catchbasins, channels, swales, ditches and areas of overland flow; and 
f.  Where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans. 
(c)  Operations and maintenance plan. Property owners are responsible for performing operation and maintenance activities for stormwater management facilities and practices located on their property; see section 104-563, for additional information. The applicant shall provide a project-specific operations and maintenance plan that includes detailed descriptions of required operations and maintenance procedures for the project's stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed. The plan shall identify the parts or components of each stormwater management facility or practice that needs to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary for this work. The plan shall include a detailed inspection and maintenance schedule, a list of all maintenance tasks, and identify the responsible parties for all maintenance, funding access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall also be included in the plan. Checklists shall be provided, as appropriate. Any revisions to the operations and maintenance plan shall be submitted with the stamp and seal of a professional engineering licensed in the state and receive written approval from the county stormwater management department. 
(d)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. The applicant or owner of the land involved in a land development project requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the county requires ongoing maintenance must execute a stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement, as defined in this article (appendix A) and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site or any portion thereof. 
(1)  The stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement shall require approval by the stormwater management department prior to final plat approval or issuance of a certificate of occupancy. A covenant running with the land will describe said agreement and the obligation of all present and future holders of any interest in the development or any portion thereof. Said covenant shall be recorded on the deed of every parcel of property and/or lot that is derived in any way from the land development activity. Thereafter, each deed shall be recorded in the county deed records by the applicant. 
(2)  The stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name and official title, if applicable, the persons bound by said agreement to cause said inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice shall remain that of the party which executed the stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement unless and until such time as the duties hereunder are properly assumed by a homeowners' association which is created as specified in this article. Evidence of the assumption of such duties shall be in a writing executed by the party assigning said duties and the homeowners association and agreed to by the county. 
(3)  The duties created under the inspection and maintenance agreement shall transfer to each and every subsequent owner/applicant, or homeowners' association (where one is established and duties are assigned thereto, in accordance with this article), or similar holders of interest in the development or any portion thereof. Upon transfer, each owner/applicant, homeowners' association, or similar interest holder shall cause the deed of transfer to be marked upon its face with notice of obligations of the stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement through use of a restrictive covenant, as previously described. Each successor in title shall be bound by the stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement to all the duties of his predecessor there under. The stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement shall incorporate by reference the project's operation and maintenance plan and account for all the work requirements specified in the plan. 
(4)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the stormwater management department may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 104-563. 
(e)  Residential subdivisions. Prior to final plat approval, the developer of a subdivision, which is subject to the provisions of this article, shall create a homeowners' association for the residential subdivisions for which the developer is requesting approval. All property owners within the subdivision shall be members of the homeowners' association. The homeowners' association shall be the legal entity to which all correspondence and notice, required under or related to this article is given by the county and from which the county will accept the same. 
(f)  Stormwater assessment area. Prior to final plat approval, the developer of any common development subject to the provisions of this article shall establish a stormwater assessment area that shall thereafter encompass the development, each subdivision thereof, and any other property that is alleged to be covered/served by the stormwater management plan. The stormwater assessment area shall be established through covenants running with each parcel of land in the assessment area, as evidenced through a recording in county deed records. The recording shall cause notice of the existence of the stormwater assessment area to transfer front one interest holder to the next with each sale of any parcel in the stormwater assessment area, until the stormwater management plan is replaced with a new plan or said plan is found to be inapplicable by the stormwater management department. Property owners within a stormwater assessment area may be billed annually for the cost to the county to perform maintenance and repair activities on privately owned stormwater management systems. The rate for stormwater assessment areas shall be determined based on the total cost incurred by the county in repairing and maintaining these systems divided by the number of nonexempt parcels that exist in the applicable stormwater assessment area. 
(g)  Other submittals. 
(1)  Landscaping plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to any stormwater management system. This plan may be included with the land development landscaping plan required in article V of this chapter. The landscaping plan shall include: 
a.  The arrangement of planted areas around the stormwater management systems; 
b.  Information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; 
c.  Descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the landscaping; 
d.  Density of plantings; 
e.  Descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and 
f.  A description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility system and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(2)  Maintenance bonds. The applicant shall provide the appropriate maintenance bond as specified in this article. 
(3)  As-builts. Upon completion of the construction activities, the applicant shall submit as-built plans for all stormwater management systems. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management systems must be certified by a professional engineer registered in the state. The as-built plan shall also include stage/storage data for all detention or retention structures. These data shall be provided and certified by a registered land surveyor. A final inspection by the stormwater management department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(4)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and nonlocal permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the county stormwater management department that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(h)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the county board of commissioners and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(i)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Two copies of the stormwater management plan, the inspection and maintenance agreement, and all applicable documents (conservation easements, etc.) shall be submitted to the stormwater management department with the project's construction drawings or commercial site plan. 
(2)  The stormwater management department shall inform the applicant whether the submittals are approved or disapproved. 
(3)  If the deliverables required by this article are not approved, the stormwater management department shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event this subsection and subsection (i)(2) of this section shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(4)  A land-disturbance permit for a project shall not be issued by the stormwater management department until all applicable sections of this article are satisfied and approved by the stormwater management department. 
(5)  Developments requiring a final plat. All remaining submittal requirements (e.g., creation of a stormwater assessment area) shall be submitted to the stormwater management department with or prior to the project's final plat. The stormwater management department shall inform the applicant whether the submittals are approved or disapproved. If any deliverable submittal is not approved, the stormwater management department shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event this subsection shall apply to such resubmittal. The final plat shall not be approved by the stormwater management department until all submittal requirements are satisfied. 
(6)  Developments not requiring a final plat. All remaining submittal requirements shall be submitted to the stormwater management department prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the county permits and inspections department. The stormwater management department shall inform the applicant whether the submittals are approved or disapproved. If any deliverable is not approved, the stormwater management department shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. The county permits and inspections department shall not issue the certificate of occupancy until all submittal requirements are satisfied. 
(j)  Notwithstanding the issuance of a land-disturbance permit. In conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The stormwater management department shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the stormwater management department; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineers report and certification and as-built reports as required by this section. 
(Code 1992, § 8-454; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 4, 8-26-2010) 
Sec. 104-562. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction; storm sewer installation report. A third-party pipe installation inspection report shall be required for all pipes placed in the ground and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Description of subgrade and bedding used in installation; 
(2)  Pipe material certifications; 
(3)  Description of backfill methods used; 
(4)  A summary of all field inspections, including the name and affiliation of the inspector, date and time of visits, and summary of activities observed; and 
(5)  Certification from a registered professional engineer that the pipe was installed in accordance to the approved construction plans and any applicable Georgia DOT, AASHTO or American Concrete Pipe Association Standards. 
(b)  Periodic inspections. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted and certified by a professional engineer registered in the state. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. The minimum number and schedule of inspections shall be based on the proposed design and established by the stormwater management department during the project's preconstruction meeting. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the inspector, the date and location of the inspection, and a summary of the activities observed; 
(2)  A determination if the construction activities are in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(Code 1992, § 8-455; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 4, 8-26-2010) 
Sec. 104-563. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance and inspection of stormwater management systems. Stormwater management systems identified in a stormwater management plan that are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. The responsible person, as designated in the approved inspection and maintenance agreement, shall inspect the stormwater management system on a periodic basis. In the event that the stormwater management system has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the stormwater management department shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the stormwater management department may correct the violation as provided in section 104-564. Inspection programs by the stormwater management department may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the stormwater management department to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management system shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the stormwater management department on an annual basis. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the stormwater management department, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. Recovery of costs associated with the performance of said work shall be through the stormwater assessment area established in section 104-561(d). Alternatively, the stormwater management department may issue citations to help force compliance with the inspection and maintenance agreement. 
(Code 1992, § 8-456; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 4, 8-26-2010) 
Sec. 104-564. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management application may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction, which is continuous with respect to time, is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described as follows shall not prevent such equitable relief: 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the stormwater management department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the stormwater management department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the stormwater management department may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order. The stormwater management department may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The stormwater management department may recommend that the county permits and inspection department refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The stormwater management department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violations or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the stormwater management department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Citations. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, or in the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in previously issued notice of violations or otherwise fails to cure the violations within ten days, the stormwater management department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in state court of the county to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1992, § 8-457; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 4, 8-26-2010) 
Secs. 104-565—104-591. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 104-592. - Declaration of purpose. 
The regulations, specifications and procedures for the subdivision and subsequent development of land and for the platting thereof, prescribed and adopted by the ordinance from which this article is derived are hereby deemed by the board of commissioners to be desirable and necessary in order to help ensure the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare by means of harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of land. Further, the purposes of the regulations of the subdivision of land are, among others: 
(1)  To encourage and ensure the development of economically sound and stable neighborhoods; 
(2)  To ensure the adequate provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
(3)  To ensure the provisions of reasonably safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic access and circulation; 
(4)  To ensure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservations of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; 
(5)  To ensure land is developed with reasonable safeguards for environmental protection; 
(6)  To provide accurate, uniform records for identification and location of real estate boundaries; and 
(7)  To ensure, in general, the wise development of new areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 8-500; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 104-593. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms, phrases, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. Words and terms not explicitly defined in this article shall have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. The following specific definitions shall apply: 
Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive plan for the county, approved by the board of commissioners and maintained by the county planning and zoning department. 
Construction plans means any plans required for the review, permitting and construction of a subdivision, including, but not limited to: Site; grading; street profiles; stormwater management; floodplain management, utility; soil erosion, sediment, and pollution control; soil surveys; and construction details. 
County engineer means the official to whom the responsibilities normally associated with this title have been delegated. 
County thoroughfare plan means the thoroughfare plan for the County of Fayette, Georgia, approved by the board of commissioners, indicating the designation of street type and is maintained by the county planning and zoning department. 
Cul-de-sac means a street, or segment of a street, with only one way in or out and which terminates at a turnaround constructed in accordance with the county development regulations. 
Development means a manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to any activity, action, or alteration that fundamentally alters the current use and/or density on the property and/or construction of buildings or other structures. 
Easement means an interest in land granted by a land owner to another person, consisting of the right to use or control the land, or an area above or below it, for a specific limited purpose, such as to cross for access to a public road. 
Environmental health county manager means the official responsible for all matters within the subdivision regulations pertaining to health regulations and who is the director of the county environmental health department. 
Lot means a tract of land of varying sizes which is designated as a single unit of property. 
Lot width means the minimum distance between side property lines either measured in a straight line parallel to the street right-of-way or a tangent and perpendicular to the mid-point of the arc in the case of the turnaround portion of a cul-de-sac along the front minimum building line (see graphic below). 

Phase means a portion or section of a larger development delineated on an approved, recorded final plat. 
Plat, final, means all divisions of a tract of land into two or more lots where the lots are less than five acres in size and/or new streets are created. 
Plat, minor subdivision, means all divisions of a tract of land into two or more lots where the lots are five acres or greater in size and no new streets are created. 
Plat, preliminary, means a conceptual subdivision plan required prior to a final plat where new streets are created. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of the county. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land, often of uniform width, that is owned by the county and used, or may be used for transportation, utilities, or similar purposes. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare or road used for vehicular access to other streets and/or properties. Streets may be: 
(1)  Owned and operated/maintained by the county (i.e., those within a public right-of-way); 
(2)  Privately owned but open for public use and maintained by the county (i.e., those within a prescriptive easement); or 
(3)  Privately owned and maintained (i.e., a private road). 
Public streets are designated by type on the county thoroughfare plan. 
Subdivider means any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership or any agent thereof who undertakes or proposes to undertake the subdivision of land so as to create a subdivision as defined herein. 
Subdivisions means all divisions of a tract of land into a minimum of two or more lots. 
Technical review committee (TRC) means a committee of county staff, in regards to the subdivision regulations, that performs monthly review of preliminary and final plats, prior to approval by the planning commission. 
Tract means a specified parcel of land. 
Utility means any service available to the public by means of an overhead or underground distribution and/or collection systems such as electricity, telephone, water, wastewater, stormwater, cable, natural gas, etc. 
Zoning administrator means the official to whom the responsibilities normally associated with this title have been delegated. 
Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance enacted by the board of commissioners of the county, which is maintained and implemented by the county planning and zoning department. 
(Code 1992, § 8-501; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 104-594. - Generally. 
(a)  Zoning ordinance. No subdivision shall be approved which does not conform with the zoning ordinance applicable to the land for which it is proposed. 
(b)  Recordation of final or minor subdivision plats. No final plat or minor subdivision plat shall be recorded with the clerk of superior court of the county without said plat having first been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. The secretary to the planning commission shall endorse the plat upon approval by the planning commission. The planning commission approval is not required for a plat of subdivision where no new streets or roads are created or no new utility improvements are required or no new sanitary sewer or approval of a septic tank is required. Said plat shall contain a certification from the licensed surveyor that these provisions do not apply which shall entitle said plat to be recorded. 
(c)  Unless noted otherwise, the county engineer shall be responsible for the implementation of the subdivision regulations. 
(Code 1992, § 8-502; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 104-595. - Approval of subdivisions. 
Subdivisions shall be reviewed and approved in stages as follows: preliminary plats, construction plans (see applicable development regulations), and final plats. The requirements of this section are administered by the county zoning administrator, unless indicated otherwise. 
(1)  Preliminary plat. 
a.  Purpose. The preliminary plat safeguards the subdivider from unnecessary loss of time and expense in preparation of a subdivision plat that does not conform with specifications of the subdivision regulations ordinance. The preliminary plat requires accuracy of scale and dimension. Public agencies having jurisdiction review the preliminary plat regarding matters within their jurisdiction. During the review process, the subdivider or his agent may be called upon for clarification. The subdivider is ultimately responsible for compliance with all applicable statutes, ordinances, regulations, and rules. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute a variance or authorization to violate any statute, ordinance, regulation, and/or rule. 
b.  Preliminary plat/lot layout. The subdivider shall submit to the zoning administrator for the planning commission a preliminary plat, with a completed application, (see preliminary plat application under forms at www.fayettecountyga.gov) of the entire tract which will show the future street system and lot layout for the entire tract. The plat must also show future recreation areas and pedestrian circulation patterns. 
c.  Street names and subdivision name approval. Prior to submittal of the preliminary plat, street names (see article III of this chapter) and subdivision names shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department. The planning and zoning department shall forward said names to the postmaster and 911 for approval. Approval by both parties is required. The planning and zoning department shall reserve the names with the postmaster and 911. The approved names shall be indicated on the preliminary plat. 
d.  Filing the preliminary plat and other requirements. Preliminary plats shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department. Preliminary plats shall be reviewed and approved by the applicable county departments and the technical review committee (TRC) prior to consideration by the planning commission. The preliminary plat shall be prepared, signed, and sealed in accordance with these regulations and with applicable county specifications by a registered engineer, surveyor, and/or landscape architect who is licensed under the state. The zoning administrator shall have authority to reject the preliminary plat, if after study, he finds that it does not comply with these regulations. If rejected, the zoning administrator shall provide subdividers with a written statement specifying all the respects in which the plat fails to comply. Subdividers shall have the right to appeal to the planning commission from such rejections. 
e.  Approval by individual agencies. The preliminary plat shall be reviewed at the TRC meeting. The checklists/comments from the applicable department are due to the planning and zoning department within three calendar days after the TRC meeting. Should the plat contain deficiencies and require corrections, said corrections shall be made by the design professional to satisfy all requirements of the preliminary plat, the corrected copies of the plat shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department for distribution to the applicable departments. The applicable department shall have a maximum of 14 calendar days from each resubmittal date to review and submit the checklists/comments to the planning and zoning department. The applicable departments shall recommend approval with or without conditions or shall require modification of the preliminary plat to the extent that each has jurisdiction. No preliminary plat shall be placed on the planning commission agenda until it has been reviewed by the TRC and approved by the zoning administrator and the applicable departments. 
f.  Approval by planning commission. 
1.  The preliminary plat shall be placed on the planning commission agenda for consideration when the preliminary plat has been reviewed by TRC and approved by the zoning administrator and all of the applicable departments. The applicant shall be notified by mail of the date, time, and place of the public meeting. 
2.  The planning commission shall take action on preliminary plats in their regularly scheduled meetings. For revisions to a recorded plat that requires approval of a revised preliminary plat that substantially changes a street and/or utility layout shown on a recorded plat shall be afforded a public hearing on the new preliminary plat. The legal notice for which shall be advertised in at least one of the newspaper in which is carried the legal advertisements of the county in such a manner as to give at least seven calendar days' notice of the public hearing from the date of issue. 
3.  The planning commission shall have 60 calendar days to act on a preliminary plat. The 60 calendar days begins upon approval by all of the appropriate departments. The planning commission may consider a preliminary plat at a public hearing or a workshop/public meeting (a schedule of the planning commission's monthly meetings is available through the planning and zoning department). If approval of the preliminary plat is not recommended, the reasons therefor shall be supplied to the subdivider. The approval of a preliminary plat by the planning commission shall not be deemed to constitute an acceptance by the county of any street or other real property shown upon the plat. 
g.  Approval of construction plans. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission, construction plans shall be submitted to the stormwater management department for distribution to the appropriate departments for approval. The plans must be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the development regulations. Permits for grading, road construction, and/or any minimal improvements shall not be given until the county engineer, stormwater management director, and the fire marshal have approved the construction plans as indicated by their signature and/or stamp. Construction plans and applicable permits shall expire upon expiration of the preliminary plat. Resubmitted construction plans, required as a result of an expired preliminary plat, shall be updated to comply with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. Any plans requiring approval by a state and/or federal agency shall be submitted directly to said agency by the subdivider. 
h.  Expiration. Preliminary plats shall include the following statement: "Approval of this preliminary plat shall expire 24 months from the date of approval by the planning commission unless: 
1.  A final plat for at least one phase has been approved; or 
2.  Street base construction for at least 50 percent of the total linear footage of all streets approved on the preliminary plat has been completed and inspected." 
Upon expiration of the preliminary plat, a new preliminary plat shall be submitted in accordance with all current regulations and requirements. 
(2)  Final plat or minor subdivision plat. 
a.  Conformance. The final plat shall conform with the layout indicated on the preliminary plat. If desired by the subdivider, the final plat may be developed and recorded in phases; provided that each phase conforms with all requirements of these regulations and the development regulations. 
b.  Filing the final plat or minor subdivision plat. A final plat shall not be submitted for review until the minimum improvements are completed subject to the provisions herein. The final plat shall be submitted in accordance with the schedule of application deadlines and meeting dates, a copy of which is available in the planning and zoning department. A minor subdivision plat may be submitted at any time. The number of copies required of the final plat or minor subdivision plat is available in the planning and zoning department. The zoning administrator shall distribute copies of the final plat or minor subdivision plat to the appropriate departments. The final plat or minor subdivision plat shall be deemed filed when it has been submitted to the planning and zoning department with a completed application (see final plat/minor subdivision plat application under forms at www.fayettecountyga.gov). 
c.  Approval by appropriate departments. A final plat shall be reviewed by technical review committee (TRC). A checklist of required information from the applicable department is due to the planning and zoning department within three calendar days after the TRC meeting. Should the final plat require corrections, the corrected copies of the plat shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department for distribution to the applicable departments. The applicable departments shall have a maximum of 14 calendar days from each resubmittal date to review and submit the checklists/comments to the planning and zoning department. 
d.  Minor subdivision plat. A minor subdivision plat shall be reviewed by the applicable departments which shall have a maximum of 14 calendar days from the submittal date for the review. Should the minor subdivision plat require corrections, the corrected copies of the plat shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department for distribution to the applicable departments. The applicable departments shall have a maximum of 14 calendar days from each resubmittal date to review and submit the checklists/comments to the planning and zoning department. 
e.  Resubmittal. When a corrected final plat or minor subdivision plat is resubmitted, the applicable departments shall review the resubmitted final plat or minor subdivision plat for compliance with all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances, and rules. The review of a resubmitted final plat or minor subdivision plat shall not be limited to only those reasons identified from a previous review. 
f.  Final approval. Once the corrected copies have been approved by all applicable departments, one paper vellum or Mylar shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department. Each applicable department shall be notified that the paper vellum or Mylar is available for review in the planning and zoning department. The paper vellum or Mylar shall be available in the planning and zoning department for a total of 14 calendar days to be reviewed and/or signed by the applicable departments. 
g.  Approval by the planning commission. 
1.  The final plat or minor subdivision plat shall be placed on the planning commission agenda for consideration when the final plat or minor subdivision plat is approved by all of the appropriate departments. The applicant shall be notified by mail of the date, time, and place of the public meeting. No final plat or minor subdivision plat shall be recorded with the clerk of superior court of the county without said plat having first been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. 
2.  The planning commission shall have 60 calendar days to approve or deny a final plat or minor subdivision plat. The 60 calendar days begins upon approval by all of the appropriate departments. The planning commission may consider a final plat or minor subdivision plat at a public hearing or a workshop/public meeting. If approval of the final plat or minor subdivision plat is not recommended, the reasons therefore shall be supplied to the subdivider. 
3.  The secretary to the planning commission shall endorse the final plat or minor subdivision plat upon approval by the planning commission. 
h.  Additional requirements for final plat or minor subdivision plat (if applicable) for approval prior to recordations. In addition to the above requirements, all documents, including, but not limited to: reports, environmental permits and/or variances (required for subdivision construction), bonds, irrevocable letters of credit, as-built drawings, and stormwater operation and maintenance plans and agreements, referenced in the development regulations shall be submitted to the applicable departments. One digital copy of the approved final plat or minor subdivision plat in a format that is compatible with the county's geographic information system must be submitted to the planning and zoning department for distribution to the appropriate departments. Submittal will not be accepted via an email. 
i.  Final plat or minor subdivision plat expiration. A final plat or minor subdivision plat shall expire 90 calendar days after the date of approval by the planning commission if the final plat or minor subdivision plat has not been recorded by the subdivider into the county clerk of superior court records. Once a final plat or minor subdivision plat has expired, it and any maintenance bond and/or irrevocable letter-of-credit (see section 104-600) are void and a new final plat or minor subdivision plat and maintenance bond and/or irrevocable letter of credit shall be submitted. The fee for the review and approval process shall be 50 percent of the original final plat or minor subdivision plat fee. 
j.  Revision to a recorded final plat. A revision to a recorded final plat shall show the name, phase (if any), date of the recorded subdivision plat being revised, and the exact citation with regard to the clerk of superior court records and the book and page number wherein said plat is recorded. See section 104-596 for requirements to be indicated on the revised final plat, as applicable. In addition, proposed revisions to a recorded final plat that substantially changes the street and/or utility layout, unless initiated by the county, shall require a revised preliminary plat in accordance with this section. Proposed revisions to a recorded final plat of any existing residential or agricultural-residential subdivisions which add property to, increases the number of platted lots, or changes the principal use on a lot will be considered in public hearings before the planning commission and the board of commissioners. The legal notice shall be advertised at least seven calendar days prior to the public hearing before the planning commission, but not more than 45 calendar days, nor less than 15 calendar days prior to the public hearing before the board of commissioners. In the event that the timeframes above cannot be met with one advertisement, the notice shall be published twice. As applicable, a revised final plat shall comply with the revised preliminary plat and shall be approved by the planning commission. 
k.  Revisions to a recorded minor subdivision plat. A revision to a recorded minor subdivision plat shall show the name, phase (if any), date of the recorded subdivision plat being revised, and the exact citation with regard to the clerk of superior court records and the book and page number wherein said plat is recorded. See section 104-596, for requirements to be indicated on the revised minor subdivision plat, as applicable. Proposed revisions to a recorded minor subdivision plat of any existing residential or agricultural-residential subdivisions which add property to, increases the number of platted lots, or changes the principal use on lots will be considered in public hearings before the planning commission and the board of commissioners. The legal notice shall be advertised at least seven calendar days prior to the public hearing before the planning commission, but not more than 45 calendar days, nor less than 15 calendar days prior to the public bearing before the board of commissioners. In the event that the timeframes above cannot be met with one advertisement, the notice shall be published twice. 
l.  Minor revisions to a recorded final plat or minor subdivision plat. A minor revision to a recorded final plat or minor subdivision plat such as the combination of lots, minor shifts to lot lines, corrections of errors and/or establishment or modification of an easement that does not increase the number of lots, change the use, alter the road or utility layout, or change the outer boundary of the final plat or minor subdivision plat will be reviewed by the zoning administrator. Based on the nature of the minor revision, the zoning administrator shall contact the applicable departments for their input. The signature of the zoning administrator and environmental health specialist shall be required for approval of the minor revision prior to recording. See section 104-596 for requirements to be indicated on the minor revision of a final plat or the minor revision of a minor subdivision plat, as applicable. 
m.  Requirements after the recordation of an approved final plat or minor subdivision plat. After the final plat or minor subdivision plat has been recorded, no building permits shall be issued until the subdivider has furnished the required number of recorded copies of the final plat or minor subdivision plat and a recorded warranty deed for any right-of-way being donated to the county to the planning and zoning department. The planning and zoning department will be responsible for distributing the materials to the appropriate departments. 
n.  Building permit. No permit lot the construction of any building on any lot of a proposed subdivision or phase thereof shall be issued unless the final plat or minor subdivision plat of the proposed subdivision has been recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county, and unless the minimum site improvements, as prescribed in this article, have been made and such improvements have been inspected and approved by the applicable departments. Upon recordation of the final plat or minor subdivision plat, the required number of recorded copies, a recorded copy of a warranty deed for any right-of-way dedicated to the county, and the digital media copy of the approved final plat or minor subdivision plat shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department prior to the issuance of any building permits. Lots within a nonresidential subdivision shall also require an approved site plan, as applicable, for the issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1992, § 8-503; Ord. No. 2000-03, 1-27-2000; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 104-596. - The subdivision plat. 
(a)  The preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain all the following requirements and certification statements, and any additional information required to address any state and/or federal requirements (see preliminary plat checklist under forms at www.fayettecountyga.gov). The following shall be indicated on the preliminary plat: 
(1)  The title block shall state: "preliminary plat of ____________ Subdivision," county, state, land lots, and districts. 
(2)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number of the engineer, surveyor, and/or landscape architect including seal, signature, and the state registration number. 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number of the owner and/or developer. 
(4)  Indicate date of plat preparation; provide scale of drawing (not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet, stated and shown graphically. 
(5)  Provide legend of all abbreviations. 
(6)  Provide an index of sheets if more than one sheet is provided. 
(7)  Provide a north arrow (to state plane grid north) and vicinity map of such a scale that the subdivision may be readily located and identified within the county. 
(8)  Show all land lot lines; land district lines; city and/or county boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the subject property. 
(9)  Show exterior property lines with bearings and distances of subject property. Provide a matching warranty deed and legal description of property (if applicable). 
(10)  Provide zoning district and property owner's name and/or subdivision name of all adjacent properties. 
(11)  Show location, purpose, and width of any easement of record. Provide a note if there are no existing easements associated with the property. 
(12)  Within the general notes, indicate the zoning district; minimum lot size; front, side, and rear setbacks; minimum floor area; minimum lot width at the building line; total acreage of subject property; and total number of lots. 
(13)  Provide rezoning information, including petition number, date of approval, and exact wording of any rezoning conditions (if applicable); and any approved variances including petition number and date of approval (if applicable). 
(14)  All applicable zoning regulations shall be indicated on the preliminary plat, Show front, side, and rear setback lines as dashed lines. Indicate minimum lot width at the front building line on each individual lot or in a legend. 
(15)  Provide the area of each lot and contiguous area (if applicable, see section 104-597) to the 1/100 th acre; label the lot numbers; and show the dimensions of all lot lines. 
(16)  Indicate how lots will be served by water and sewage disposal. Indicate the proposed layout of waterlines, fire hydrants, and sewer lines (if applicable). If county water is not available, indicate how subdivision will be served (i.e., individual well/septic tank). 
(17)  Indicate all existing structures and buildings and label as "to remain" or "to be removed." Structures and buildings that will remain must be shown on individual lots and meet all applicable zoning requirements. Also indicate any improvements such as existing railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains, water wells, parks, public open spaces, etc. Provide a note if there are no existing structures, buildings, or improvements on the subject property. 
(18)  Indicate the location of a cemetery (if applicable, see chapter 106, cemeteries, burial grounds, human remains, and burial objects). 
(19)  The plat shall show all parcels of land to be dedicated to the county for public use. 
(20)  Indicate the boundaries and enhancement areas for any proposed common areas including signage. Label as "Common Area—Not a Building Lot" and/or "Signage." 
(21)  Indicate the boundaries and area to 1/100 th acre for any proposed developed residential recreational/amenity areas. Label recreation areas "Not a Residential Building Lot, For Recreational Purposes Only." 
(22)  Show all existing and/or proposed streets on and/or adjacent to property. Label right-of-way widths. Label proposed street names. Provide right-of-way dedication, as needed. 
(23)  Corner lots. Fillet (20-foot radius) or chamfer corner property lines at street intersections. 
(24)  Street length. Indicate the length of each street in the subdivision. 
(25)  Entrances. Subdivision entrances shall meet sight distance requirements and minimum distance between intersection requirements (both sides of street). Provide appropriate data on the plat (article III of this chapter). 
(26)  Indicate any proposed golf cart, bicycle, or pedestrian circulation systems, including sidewalks, crosswalks, multi-use paths, etc. 
(27)  Show existing (dashed) and proposed (solid) contour at ten two foot intervals of elevation and be based upon North American Datum NAD 1983 State Plane Georgia West. 
(28)  Delineate and label all state waters requiring watershed protection buffers and setbacks within the subdivision. Delineate and label all state waters adjacent to the subdivision where any watershed buffers and/or setbacks extend into the subdivision property. Provide a note if there are no state waters requiring a buffer. Label as "Watershed Protection Buffer," and "Watershed Protection Setback." 
(29)  Show location of all specimen trees within 100 feet of the centerline of all right-of-ways, stormwater management structures, and utility and drainage casements. 
(30)  Identify any specimen trees designated for removal. Include the tree size (DBH), species (common name) and justification for removal. 
(31)  Delineate and label each drainage basin within the project boundaries. Provide drainage areas and existing and proposed CN values. Show offsite area and peak flow (Q 16 and Q 100 ) for drainage areas passing through site. 
(32)  Delineate and label areas to be used for stormwater management consistent with the hydrologic data provided above. For each drainage basin, provide a narrative description of how water quality, stream channel protection, and flood protection criteria will be satisfied or why any exemptions may apply. 
(33)  Delineate any base flood elevations as required in the floodplain management ordinance. For any streams with 100 acres or greater drainage area provide the future-conditions flood elevations. Provide a note if there is no floodplain on the property. Reference the FIRM panel number and date. 
(34)  Delineate any groundwater recharge areas as required in the groundwater area protection ordinance. Provide a note if there is no groundwater recharge areas on the property. 
(35)  Delineate all jurisdictional wetlands. The wetland delineation shall be made following the procedures established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(36)  Soils. The plat shall delineate the soil classifications in the areas of the property proposed for the placement of on-site sewage management systems. The soil classification work shall be done following the procedures for Level III soil surveys established in the state department of human resources' current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. The requirements for a soil classifier are located in said manual. 
(37)  Statements and/or certifications. Provide the following statements and/or certifications, if applicable: 
a.  "Approval of this preliminary plat shall expire 24 months from the date of approval by the planning commission unless a final plat for at least one phase has been approved; or street base construction for at least 50 percent of the total linear footage of all streets approved on the preliminary plat." 
b.  "This preliminary plat has been reviewed and approved by the planning commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ." 
c.  "Each residential building lot has a minimum contiguous area that is free and clear of zoning setbacks, watershed protection buffers and setbacks, jurisdictional wetlands, and easements of any kind." Indicate the contiguous area (in acres) on each individual lot or in a legend." 
d.  Wetland delineation. 
I,  (name)  of  (organization)  do hereby certify that I have field inspected the property known as  (subdivision name)  on  (date)  and determined that the property □ contains □ does not contain jurisdictional wetlands as defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 

 
e.  Soil classification delineation. 
I,  (name)  do hereby certify that the Level III soil survey information provided on this plat was performed by  (company name)  in accordance with the procedures specified in the Georgia Department of Human Resources' current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 

 
(38)  Completeness. If any of the above facts are omitted or misrepresented on the plat, the zoning administrator may refuse to review the plat and shall return the plat to the subdivider to be completed or revised. 
(b)  The final plat. The final plat shall contain all of the following requirements and certification statements and any additional information required to address any state and/or federal requirements (see final plat checklist under forms at www.fayettecountyga.gov). Sheet design: The final plat and/or a revision to a recorded final plat shall conform in general with the preliminary plat and shall be drawn in permanent ink on one or more sheets of reproducible plastic measuring 17 inches by 22 inches. When two or more sheets are used, a key map shall be shown with each sheet. The following shall be indicated on the final plat: 
(1)  The title block shall state: "final plat of ____________ ." A revision to a final plat must state "revised final plat of ____________ "; purpose and date of revision; and date, plat book, and page number of the previously recorded final plat. 
(2)  The title block shall show the name of the proposed subdivision. county, state, land lots, and districts. 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number of the engineer, surveyor, and/or landscape architect including seal, signature, and the state registration number. 
(4)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number of the owner and/or developer. 
(5)  Indicate date of plat preparation; provide scale of drawing (not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet), stated and shown graphically. The zoning administrator may approve a different scale. 
(6)  Provide legend of all abbreviations. 
(7)  Provide an index of sheets if more than one sheet is provided. 
(8)  Provide a north arrow (to state plane grid north) and vicinity map of such a scale that the subdivision may be readily located and identified within the county. 
(9)  Show all land lot lines; land district lines; and city and/or county boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the subject property. 
(10)  Show property lines with bearings and distances of the subject property. Provide a matching warranty deed and legal description of property (if applicable). 
(11)  Provide zoning district and property owners name and/or subdivision name of all adjacent properties. 
(12)  Show location, purpose, width and/or dimensions of any easement of record and/or easements within the subdivision. Provide a note if there are no recorded easements found associated with the property. 
(13)  Within the general notes, indicate the zoning district; minimum lot size; front, side, and rear setbacks; minimum floor area; minimum lot width at the building line; total acreage of subject property; and total number of lots. 
(14)  Provide rezoning information, including petition number, date of approval, and exact wording of any rezoning conditions (if applicable); and any approved variances including petition number and date of approval (if applicable). 
(15)  Provide information regarding the preliminary plat, including date of approval by the planning commission and exact wording of any related conditions of approval. 
(16)  All applicable zoning regulations shall be indicated on the final plat. Show front, side, and rear setback lines as dashed lines. Indicate minimum lot width at the front building line. 
(17)  Provide the area of each lot and the contiguous area (if applicable, see section 104-597) to the 1/100 th acre; label the lot numbers; label street addresses; show the bearings and distances of all lot lines; and identify the parent tract, if applicable. 
(18)  Indicate how lots will be served by water and sewage disposal. Indicate the location of fire hydrants (if applicable). If county water is not available, indicate how subdivision will be served (i.e., individual well/septic tank). 
(19)  Indicate all existing structures and buildings and label as "to remain" or "to be removed." Structures and buildings that will remain must be shown on individual lots and meet all applicable zoning requirements. Also indicate any improvements such as existing railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains, water wells, parks, public open spaces, etc. Provide a note if there are no existing structures, buildings, or improvements on the subject property. 
(20)  Indicate the location of a cemetery (if applicable, see chapter 106. cemeteries, burial grounds, human remains, and burial objects). 
(21)  The plat shall show all parcels of land to be dedicated to any Local, State, or Federal governmental agency for public purpose (i.e., public parks, fire stations, public schools, etc.). 
(22)  Indicate the boundaries and area to 1/100 th acre for any common areas including signage. Label as "Common Area—Not a Building Lot" or "Signage." 
(23)  Indicate the boundaries and area for any Developed Residential Recreational/Amenity Areas. Label recreation areas "Not a Residential Building Lot, For Recreational Purposes Only." 
(24)  Show all existing streets on and/or adjacent to property. Label right-of-way widths. Label street names. Provide right-of-way dedication, as needed. 
(25)  Georgia Plat Act. Show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the survey. The point of reference shall be an established, monumented position that can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, and other documents on public record. 
(26)  Georgia Plat Act. State the type of equipment used to obtain the linear and angular measurements used in preparation of the plat. 
(27)  Surveying. Provide line and curve data for all right-of-way, parcel/lot boundaries, and easements. Line data shall include bearing and length. Curve data shall include the area length, radius, chord length, and chord bearing. 
(28)  Surveying. Street centerline curve data shall include the deflection angle (delta), radius, length, and tangent. 
(29)  Surveying. The final plat shall contain the location, bearing, and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, and easement line, whether curved or straight. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals to the nearest 1/100 th of a foot, and all angles shall be shown to the nearest second. The error of closure shall require accuracy of at least one in 10,000. 
(30)  Corner lot. Fillet (20-foot radius) or chamfer corner property lines at street intersections. 
(31)  Street length. Indicate the length of each street in the subdivision. 
(32)  Indicate any proposed golf cart, bicycle, or pedestrian circulation systems, including sidewalks, crosswalks, multi-use paths, etc. 
(33)  Delineate and label all stormwater easements as required in article XIV of this chapter. 
(34)  Delineate and label all state waters requiring watershed protection buffers and setbacks within the subdivision. Delineate and label all state waters adjacent to the subdivision where any watershed buffers and/or setbacks extend into the subdivision property. Provide a note if there are no state waters requiring a buffer. Label as "Watershed Protection Buffer," and "Watershed Protection Setback." 
(35)  Delineate and label all base flood elevations, both natural and manmade. Reference the sources of any flood hazard data shown on the final plat. 
(36)  Establish a minimum finished floor elevation (MFFE) as required in the floodplain management ordinance. 
(37)  Delineate all jurisdictional wetlands. Identify the source of the wetland delineation. 
(38)  Identify and label all stormwater management control structures (inlets, pipes, headwalls, BMPs, etc.) within the project. The nomenclature should match that used for the project's inspection and maintenance agreement for stormwater management controls. Stormwater controls shall be on common property. 
(39)  Delineate any groundwater recharge areas as required in the groundwater area protection ordinance. Provide a note if there is no groundwater recharge areas on the property. 
(40)  The final plat shall show the accurate location, material, and description of all monuments. A permanent master bench mark shall be established within the site. The monuments shall be an iron rod or pipe of not less than one-half inch in diameter and not less than 18 inches long and driven to a minimum depth of 12 inches. 
(41)  Statements and/or certificates. Provide the following statements and/or certificates, if applicable: 
a.  "Each residential building lot has a minimum contiguous area that is free and clear of zoning setbacks, watershed protection buffers and setbacks, jurisdictional wetlands, and easements of any kind." Indicate the contiguous area on each individual lot or in a legend. 
b.  Georgia Plat Act. Show the closure precision of the field survey. "The field data upon which this map or plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in ____________ feet, and an angular error of ____________ per angle point, and was adjusted using ____________ rule." 
c.  Georgia Plat Act. Show the closure precision of the data shown on the plat. "This map or plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in ____________ feet." 
d.  "Fayette County does not accept the ownership, maintenance or responsibility for any drainage easement or overall drainage plan, or the lack of one, indicated by this plat." 
e.  "As per Flood Insurance Rate Map Number ____________ dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , this site (does or does not) lie within a flood hazard zone." 
f.  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance. 
The property conveyed herein is subject to the restrictive covenants of the Homeowners Association and an Inspection and Maintenance Agreement for stormwater management Controls recorded in Deed Book ____________ , Page ____________ . Failure to satisfy the inspection and maintenance requirements of the above-referenced agreement may result in enforcement action by the county, including but not limited to, judgment liens against the property owners and/or Homeowners Association. The inspection and maintenance agreement is recorded with the Clerk of Courts. A copy of the agreement is available at the Fayette County stormwater management department. 
g.  Wetlands. 
Wetlands shown on this plat are under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of engineers. Property owners may be subject to penalty by law for disturbance to these wetland areas without proper authorization. 
h.  Owner's certificate. 
We, the undersigned owners of the ____________ Subdivision, hereby dedicate the rights-of-way for public use, and/or reserve for public use the easements and other ground shown on this plat. 
We, the undersigned owners, understand this Final Plat and any Maintenance Bond and/or Irrevocable Letter-of-Credit shall expire and thus become void if the Final Plat is not recorded into the Fayette county Clerk of Superior Court records within 90 calendar days ( ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ) of the date of approval by the Planning Commission. 

 
i.  Surveyor's certificate. 
I hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments and infrastructure shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future"; and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown. 

 
j.  Engineer's certificate. 
I hereby certify that accepted engineering practices and design methods were used to establish the layout of this development; that the streets, drainage structures and other design features have been constructed according to the development's approved Construction Plans; and that all applicable requirements of Fayette County's Development Regulations and Subdivision Regulations have been fully complied with. 

 
k.  Wetland delineator's certificate. 
I,  (name)  of  (organization)  do hereby certify that I have field inspected the property known as  (subdivision name)  on  (date)  and determined that the property □ contains □ does not contain jurisdictional wetlands as defined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
_____ Signature of Wetland Delineator 
_____ Company Address & Telephone 
l.  Level III soil survey. 
I,  (name)  do hereby certify that the Level III Soil Survey information provided on the Soil Map was performed by  (company name)  in accordance with the procedures specified in the Georgia Department of Human Resources' current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 

 
m.  Preliminary plat certificate. 
I hereby certify that all the applicable requirements of the Fayette County Subdivision Regulations relative to the preparation and submission of a preliminary plat have been fully complied with. 

 
n.  Approvals. The following spaces shall be provided on the Final Plat in the form listed below for approval by all agencies having jurisdiction: 

 
o.  Dedication of right-of-way. Each approved final plat shall include thereon the following statements, as applicable: 
1.  All that property contained within the right-of-way of (insert name of new street[s] within the subdivision), said roads having at least a minimum of (fill in) foot right-of-way as indicated hereon, are hereby deeded to the county, a political subdivision of the state, at no cost to the county, upon recordation of said final plat into the county clerk of superior court records. 
2.  All that property contained within the required right-of-way of (insert name of existing street) having a minimum required (fill in) foot right-of-way, (fill in) feet shall be dedicated to create a minimum (fill in) foot right-of-way as measured from the centerline. Said right-of-way shall be indicated hereon and are hereby deeded to the county, a political subdivision of the state, at no cost to the county, upon recordation of said final plat into the county clerk of superior court records. 
p.  Submittals. The following submittals and checks shall be satisfied prior to final plat approval, as applicable. 
1.  Core sample report (development regulations, article III of this chapter). 
2.  Soil density tests (development regulations, article III of this chapter). 
3.  Utilities-power, gas, and water installed (development regulations, article III of this chapter). 
4.  Stormwater management plan (development regulations, article XIII of this chapter). 
5.  Stormwater operations and management plan (development regulations, article XIV of this chapter). 
6.  Storm sewer installation report (development regulations, article III of this chapter). 
7.  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreement (development regulations, article XIII of this chapter). 
8.  Stormwater as-built plan (development regulations, article XIV of this chapter). 
9.  Performance bond/irrevocable letter-of-credit (Subdivision regulations, section 104-600). Amount ____________ . 
10.  Maintenance bond/irrevocable letter-of-credit (Subdivision regulations, section 104-600). Amount ____________ . 
11.  Engineering department final inspection. (Call department to schedule.) 
12.  Submit a soil map indicating the classification of soils in the areas of the property proposed for the placement of on-site sewage management systems. The soil classification work shall be done following the procedures for level III soil surveys established in the state department of human resources' current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. The requirements for a soil classifier are located in said manual. 
q.  Other considerations. 
1.  An application may be submitted to the planning and zoning department for the board of commissioners authorization of motorized cart use in the subdivision after recordation of the final plat (see chapter 26, motor vehicles and traffic and the home page www.fayettecountyga.gov for application). 
2.  A petition may be submitted to the stormwater management department for the board of commissioners authorization for the subdivision to become a street light district after recordation of the final plat (chapter 20, article II, pertaining to street lights). 
(c)  The minor subdivision plat. The minor subdivision plat shall contain all of the following requirements and certification statements and any additional information required to address any state and/or federal requirements (see minor subdivision plat checklist under forms at www.fayettecountyga.gov). Sheet design: The minor subdivision plat and/or a revision to a recorded minor subdivision plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on one or more sheets of paper vellum or Mylar measuring 17 inches by 22 inches. When two or more sheets are used, a key map shall be shown with each sheet. The following shall be indicated on the minor subdivision plat; 
(1)  The title block shall state: "minor subdivision plat of ____________ ." A revision to a minor subdivision plat must state "Revised minor subdivision plat of ____________ "; purpose and date of revision; and date, plat book, and page number of the previously recorded minor subdivision plat. 
(2)  The title block shall show the name of the proposed subdivision, county, state, land lots, and districts. 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number of the engineer, surveyor, and/or landscape architect including seal, signature, and the state registration number. 
(4)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number of the owner and/or developer. 
(5)  Indicate date of plat preparation; provide scale of drawing (not to exceed one inch equals 200 feet), stated and shown graphically. The zoning administrator may approve a different scale. 
(6)  Provide legend of all abbreviations. 
(7)  Provide an index of sheets if more than one sheet is provided. 
(8)  Provide a north arrow (to state plane grid north) and vicinity map of such a scale that the subdivision may be readily located and identified within the county. 
(9)  Show all land lot lines; land district lines; and city and/or county boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the subject property. 
(10)  Show property lines with bearings and distances of the subject property. Provide a matching warranty deed and legal description of property (if applicable). 
(11)  Provide zoning district and property owners name and/or subdivision name of all adjacent properties. 
(12)  Show location, purpose, width and/or dimensions of any easement of record and/or easements within the subdivision. Provide a note if there are no recorded easements found associated with the property. 
(13)  Within the general notes, indicate the zoning district; minimum lot size; front, side, and rear setbacks; minimum floor area; minimum lot width at the building line; total acreage of subject property; and total number of lots. 
(14)  Provide rezoning information, including petition number, date of approval, and exact wording of any rezoning conditions (if applicable); and any approved variances including petition number and date of approval (if applicable). 
(15)  All applicable zoning regulations shall be indicated on the minor subdivision plat. Show front, side, and rear setback lines as dashed lines. Indicate minimum lot width at the front building line on each individual lot or in a legend. 
(16)  Provide the area of each lot and the contiguous area (if applicable, see section 104-597) to the 1/100 th acre; label the lot numbers; label street addresses; show the bearings and distances of all lot lines; and identify the parent tract, if applicable. 
(17)  Indicate how lots will be served by water and sewage disposal. If county water is not available, indicate how subdivision will be served (i.e., individual well/septic tank). 
(18)  Indicate all existing structures and buildings and label as "to remain" or "to be removed." Structures and buildings that will remain must be shown on individual lots and meet all applicable zoning requirements in terms of any new property lines. Also indicate any improvements such as existing railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains, water wells, parks, public open spaces, etc. Provide a note if there are no existing structures, buildings, or improvements on the subject property. 
(19)  Indicate the location of a cemetery (if applicable, see chapter 106, cemeteries, burial grounds, human remains, and burial objects). 
(20)  The plat shall show all parcels of land purposed to be dedicated to any local, state, or federal governmental agency for public purpose (i.e., public parks, fire stations, public schools, etc.). 
(21)  Indicate the boundaries and area to 1/100 th acre for any proposed common areas including signage. Label as "Common Area—Not a Building Lot" or "Signage." 
(22)  Show all existing streets adjacent to subject property. Label street names and right-of-way widths. Provide right-of-way dedication, as needed. 
(23)  Georgia Plat Act. Show the direction and distance from a point of reference to a point on the boundary of the survey. The point of reference shall be an established, monumented position which can be identified or relocated from maps, plats, and other documents on public record. 
(24)  Georgia Plat Act. State the type of equipment used to obtain the linear and angular measurements used in preparation of the plat. 
(25)  Surveying. Provide line and curve data for all right-of-way, parcel/lot boundaries, and easements. Line data shall include bearing and length. Curve data shall include the area length, radius, chord length, and chord bearing. 
(26)  Corner lots. Fillet (20-foot radius) or chamfer corner property lines at street intersections. 
(27)  Delineate and label all state waters requiring watershed protection buffers and setbacks within the subdivision. Delineate and label all state waters adjacent to the subdivision where any watershed buffers and/or setbacks extend into the subdivision property. Provide a note if there are no state waters requiring a buffer. Label as "Watershed Protection Buffer," and "Watershed Protection Setback." 
(28)  Delineate and label all base flood elevations both natural and manmade. Reference the sources of any flood hazard data shown on the minor subdivision plat. 
(29)  Establish a minimum finish floor elevation (MFFE) as required in the floodplain management ordinance. 
(30)  Delineate all jurisdictional wetlands per the national wetlands inventory. A more detailed study may be required by the stormwater management director dependent on field conditions. Provide a note if the inventory indicates there are no wetlands present. 
(31)  Delineate any groundwater recharge areas as required in the groundwater area protection ordinance. Provide a note if there is no groundwater recharge areas on the property. 
(32)  Indicate the classification of soils in the areas of the property proposed for the placement of on-site sewage management systems. The soil classification work shall be done following the procedures for Level III soil surveys established in the state department of human resources' current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. The requirements for a soil classifier are located in said manual. 
(33)  The minor subdivision plat shall show the accurate location, material, and description of all monuments. The subdivider shall provide and set iron monuments at all property corners. The monuments shall be an iron rod or pipe of not less than one-half inch in diameter and not less than 18 inches long and driven to a minimum depth of 12 inches. 
(34)  Statements and/or certificates. Provide the following statements and/or certificates, if applicable: 
a.  "Each residential building lot has a minimum contiguous area that is free and clear of zoning setbacks, watershed protection buffers and setbacks, jurisdictional wetlands, and easements of any kind." Indicate the contiguous area (in acres) on each individual lot or in a legend. 
b.  Georgia Plat Act. Show the closure precision of the field survey. "The field data upon which this map or plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in ______ foot and an angular error of ______ per angle point, and was adjusted using ______ rule." 
c.  Georgia Plat Act. Show the closure precision of the data shown on the plat. "This map or plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in ______ foot." 
d.  "Fayette County does not accept the ownership, maintenance or responsibility for any drainage easement or overall drainage plan, or the lack of one, indicated by this plat." 
e.  "As per Flood Insurance Rate Map Number ______ dated (___/___/___), this site (does or does not) lie within a flood hazard zone." 
f.  Wetlands. Wetlands shown on this plat are under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Property owners may be subject to penalty by law for disturbance to these wetland areas without proper authorization. 
g.  Owner's certificate. 
We, the undersigned owners of the ____________ Subdivision, hereby dedicate the rights-of-way for public use, and/or reserve for public use the easements and other ground shown on this plat. 
We the undersigned owners understand this Minor Subdivision Plat and any Maintenance Bond and/or Irrevocable Letter-of-Credit shall expire and thus become void if the Minor Subdivision Plat is not recorded into the Fayette County Clerk of Superior Court records within 90 calendar days ( ____________ / ____________ / ____________ ) of the date of approval by the Planning Commission. 

 
h.  Surveyor's certificate. 
I hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments and infrastructure shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future"; and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown. 

 
i.  Engineer's certificate. 
I hereby certify that accepted engineering practices and design methods were used to establish the layout of this development; that the streets, drainage structures and other design features have been constructed according to the development's approved Construction Plans; and that all applicable requirements of Fayette County's Development Regulations and Subdivision Regulations have been fully complied with. 

 
j.  Level III soil survey. 
I,  (name)  do hereby certify that the Level III soil survey information provided on this plat was performed by  (company name)  in accordance with the procedures specified in the Georgia Department of Human Resources' current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 

 
k.  Approvals. The following spaces shall be provided on the minor subdivision plat in the form listed below for approval by all agencies having jurisdiction: 

 
l.  Dedication of right-of-way. Each approved minor subdivision plat shall include thereon the following statements, as applicable: 
All that property contained within the required right-of-way of (insert name of existing street) having a minimum required (fill in) foot right-of-way (fill in) feet shall be dedicated to create a minimum (fill in) foot right-of-way as measured from the centerline. Said right-of-way shall be indicated hereon and is hereby deeded to the county, a political subdivision of the state, at no costs to the county, upon recordation of said minor subdivision plat into the county clerk of superior court records. 
(Code 1992, § 8-504; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 104-597. - Minimum standards. 
The following design standards are in addition to applicable federal, state, and local ordinances, including, but not limited to: the county zoning ordinance, the county development regulations, and the county sign ordinance. 
(1)  Subdivision access. Where the subdivision does not immediately access an existing public street (county or state owned and/or maintained), the subdivider shall provide access via a new public street or private street which complies with the minimum county standards to an existing public street. Any upgrades to existing public streets to provide adequate access to the subdivision shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. The county engineer or public works director shall determine if any necessary upgrades to the existing public streets are required prior to approving construction of the subdivision. 
(2)  Easements. All easements shall be shown on the final plat or minor subdivision plat and meet the following standards where applicable. 
a.  Where possible, water lines shall be located outside the curb line on the west and south sides of streets; sewer and gas lines shall be on the east and north sides; 
b.  Water and sewer lines outside of street rights-of-way shall follow side and rear property lines where possible and shall have a minimum easement width of 20 feet. The water system may require a greater width if determined necessary for maintenance or construction; 
c.  Wherever public utility easements are planned adjacent to the subdivision tract boundary or phase, they shall be platted within said subdivision or phase thereof; and 
d.  Drainage easements shall be provided as required in article VIII of this chapter. 
(3)  Contiguous areas for residential development. Each residential building lot shall have a minimum contiguous area that is free and clear of zoning setbacks, watershed protection buffers and setbacks, jurisdictional wetlands, and easements of any kind. The required minimum contiguous areas, set forth below, are a function of zoning requirements and minimum lot sizes. 

 
1 Where public water is not available (lots have individual wells) 
2 Where public water is available 
(4)  Corporate limits. Any lot divided by corporate limits (city or county) shall meet fully the requirements of Fayette County on the portion of the lot that is within unincorporated Fayette County for the purposes of a building permit. All corporate limits dividing a lot will be viewed in the same manner as a property line. 
(5)  Street layout and design. 
a.  Subdivision entrances and street length. No street or portion of a street may provide access to more than 75 lots unless 1) a second means of access to the lots is provided by another street; or 2) a two-way divided road is used at the entrance and extended to all points within the subdivision until the number of lots being served is 75 or less. Amenity and common areas (e.g., green space) are excluded from the 75-lot limit. Of the two options, use of a second means of access is preferred and shall be provided unless it is determined not feasible by the county engineer due to the lack of adequate road frontage, limited sight distance, or significant environmental constraints. 
b.  Right-of-way. Any two-way divided entrance/road shall have a minimum 80-foot right-of-way, two 16-foot travel lanes, curb and gutter, and an 18-foot wide landscape island. Additional specifications for the divided entrance may be found in the development regulations. 
c.  Corner lots. Corner property lines at street intersections shall have chamfer corners with minimum chamfer distances of 20 feet in each direction (chamfering means to connect two, non-parallel property lines with a third beveled line). The purpose of the chamfer is to allow sufficient room within the right-of-way for utility placement and maintenance. 
d.  Curb radius. The curb radius at street intersections within subdivisions shall be no less than 25 feet. Curb radius requirements for intersections with collectors or arterial streets are dictated by the county development regulations and/or the state department of transportation. 
e.  Dead-end streets, half-street and alleys. Dead-end streets, half-streets and alleys are prohibited. Temporary dead-end streets resulting from phased developments shall be constructed with a temporary turn-around. 
f.  Elbows. Elbows (i.e., a circular bump-out of the paved road) may be used in lieu of a horizontal curve for road alignment when the centerline tangents have an intersection angle between 90 and 120 degrees. The "elbow" portion of the intersection shall be designed with a paved radius of 42 feet (to back-of-curb) and a 60-foot right-of-way radius. Elbows are not considered cul-de-sacs with respect to required road frontage for subdivision lots. 
g.  Intersections. The center lines of no more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no intersection shall have an angle of less than 80 degrees. A tangent section no less than 50-feet long shall be placed between a centerline curve and the nearest right-of-way line of the street with which it intersects. 
h.  Stub street. Where it is necessary to provide a street for future connection to an adjacent property, such street shall be constructed in conjunction with the subdivision up to the property line creating a stub street. Said stub street shall be indicated on the preliminary plat and final plat and labeled "Temporary Stub Street." Connecting stub streets shall maintain the same name and be terminated with a temporary turnaround as necessary. 
(6)  Subdivision names. A proposed subdivision name shall not duplicate the name of another subdivision unless such property is contiguous to the subdivision bearing the proposed name and with the same or more restrictive zoning, and covenants and restrictions as the subdivision previously bearing such name. In addition to meeting the above criteria, the sharing of a subdivision name must be approved by the planning commission. Whenever a new subdivision is permitted by the planning commission to share the name of a previously approved subdivision, such name shall be followed by the appropriate Roman Numerals (e.g., II). Any subsequent subdivisions approved by the planning commission under these provisions shall be numbered in sequence with Roman Numerals. 
(7)  Additional right-of-way. If the subdivision boundary lies adjacent to the right-of-way line of an existing public street of less than minimum needed right-of-way width, as determined by the county thoroughfare plan, a minimum of one-half the required extra width shall be dedicated, at no cost, to the county by the subdivider. 
(8)  Provisions for public use. In subdividing land, due consideration shall be given to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other common areas for public use. Such land shall be located in accordance with the comprehensive plan. The acquisition of such land shall rest with the proper authority. 
(Code 1992, § 8-505; Ord. of 3-23-2006; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 104-598. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  General. The subdivider shall provide public improvements as required by all applicable county regulations, specifications, and requirements. 
(b)  Curbs and gutter. The subdivider shall install curb and gutter and proper drainage as required by county specifications. 
(c)  Monuments. The subdivider shall provide and set iron monuments at all property corners. The monuments shall be an iron rod or pipe of not less than one-half inch in diameter and not less than 18-inches long and driven to a minimum depth of 12 inches. 
(d)  Water supply and sanitary sewerage. Every lot within a proposed subdivision shall have an approved supply of adequate water and an approved sewage disposal system, as determined by the county water system and the environmental health county manager. 
(e)  Public water facilities. Where public water facilities are available within the distance specified below, the subdivider shall assure that every lot of the subdivision shall be provided with public water. 

 
For each additional lot after six, an additional 150 feet shall be added per lot to the minimum distance from a water line requiring connection thereto. 
*Measured along public right-of-way to closest point on property. 
Cost differentials based on line sizes and fire hydrants needed to serve a subdivision versus that needed as part of the overall system will be determined by the water system. (Ordinance No. 2000-14) 
(f)  Fire hydrants. Standard fire hydrants will be provided at the spacing specified by chapter 12, Fire Prevention and Protection. Design standards shall be as specified by the American Water Works Association. 
(g)  Sanitary sewer. When a public sewage disposal system is not available, the county environmental health department shall review the preliminary and final plat of a subdivision to determine the feasibility for individual on-site sewage disposal systems. After approval of the final plat or minor subdivision plat of the subdivision, on-site sewage disposal system permit applications must be submitted to the county environmental health department for each individual lot for review and approval. If the lots of a subdivision are to be served by individual subsurface wells, the on-site sewage disposal permit application must indicate the location of the well and on-site sewage disposal system. The subsurface well must be setback at least 100 feet from any on-site sewage disposal system and drainfields. 
(h)  Stormwater drainage. The subdivider shall provide adequate stormwater drainage in accordance with all applicable county regulations and specifications. 
(i)  Grassing and erosion control. Proper erosion control measures must be in place throughout the entire phase of construction and must also be in place prior to final plat approval. Permanent grass must also be established on all disturbed areas prior to final plat approval. However, proper temporary erosion control measures and performance bonds can be substituted for a permanent stand of grass during the final plat inspection. 
(j)  Approval of permits. Building permits may be issued for a phase of a subdivision prior to the completion of the improvements in the entire subdivision, provided that the applicable departments approves the improvements in said phase and it is determined that the lots to be built upon are completely served by the improvements in the completed phase as if it were a separate subdivision. 
(k)  Utilities. The subdivider shall provide all applicable utilities to the subdivision in accordance with all applicable county requirements. The utilities shall be located as specified by the development regulations. Power and water utilities must be installed, if available in the area, prior to final plat approval. All of the minimum improvements listed in this section of the article must be completed and inspected prior to final plat approval with the exceptions of the installation of utilities in nonresidential subdivisions. 
(Code 1992, § 8-506; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 104-599. - Provisions for recording of final plats prior to completion of minimum improvements. 
(a)  Performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit. The following improvements shall be made after the recordation of a final plat if a performance bond or irrevocable letter-of-credit is provided that meets the standards set hereafter. 
(1)  Paving the top layer (top course) of asphalt on one or more roads within the subdivision; and/or 
(2)  Meeting permanent stabilization requirements within the proposed right-of-way. 
Other than those items listed above, all minimum improvements within the subdivision shall be completed and accepted in accordance with the approved construction plans, the county development regulations, and the subdivision regulations prior to the recordation of a final plat, acceptance shall be determined by the county engineer, the director of utilities, and the stormwater management director based on a field inspection of the project and/or review of required submittals. Work to be completed after the recordation of a final plat shall be guaranteed by either a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit and the documents shall be filed with the county engineer prior to his signature on the final plat. 
(b)  Criteria for performance bonds or irrevocable letter of credit for paving. The amount of the bond or irrevocable letter-of-credit needed for paving shall be the sum of material, labor, equipment, and repair estimates, as determined by the county engineer, using the following guidelines: 
(1)  Material costs equal 150 percent of current cost estimate for tack and asphalt; 
(2)  Labor and equipment equals 20 percent of material costs; and 
(3)  Repairs to binder and base equals 20 percent of material cost. 
Additional costs shall be included for unusual circumstances. Performance bonds/irrevocable letters of credit for paving shall be considered only if coring of the asphalt binder and base, as required by the development regulations, demonstrate the work was completed per the approved construction plans and county standards. Paving work shall be completed within two years of recording the final plat unless an extension is provided by the county engineer. The bonds/irrevocable letters of credit shall not be released until all repairs and paving work are done in accordance with the approved construction plans and the work is accepted by the county engineer. 
(c)  Criteria for performance bonds for permanent stabilization. The amount of the performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit needed for permanent stabilization shall be the sum of material, labor, equipment, and repair estimates, as determined by the stormwater management department. At a minimum, the cost estimate shall include all best management practices required to bring the project into compliance with the approved soil erosion and sediment control plan. Additional costs may be included for unusual circumstances. Performance bonds/irrevocable letters of credit for stabilization will be considered only if the stormwater management director determines that current weather patterns and the season make permanent stabilization infeasible at this time. Stabilization work shall be completed within one year of recording the final plat. The performance bonds/irrevocable letters of credit shall not be released until all areas of concern are stabilized in accordance with the approved construction plans and the work is accepted by the stormwater management director. 
(d)  Conditions thereof. 
(1)  Performance bonds or irrevocable letters of credit delivered for the purpose of guaranteeing construction of minimum improvements pursuant to this section, shall be accepted by the county engineer provided that the subdivider, his heirs, successors and assigns, and their agents and servants will comply with all applicable terms, conditions, provisions, and requirements of these regulations, will faithfully perform and complete the work of constructing and installing said facilities or improvements in accordance with these regulations. The subdivider will save the county from any unnecessary expense incurred through the failure of the subdivider, his heirs, successors or assigns, or their agents or servants, to complete the work of said construction and installation as required by these regulations, and from any damage growing out of negligence in performing or failing to perform said construction and installation. Before acceptance of any performance bond or irrevocable letter-of-credit for paving, the county engineer may, at his direction, have the county attorney review said instrument. A bond shall be executed by a surety or guaranty company qualified to transact business in the state. If an irrevocable letter of credit is offered, it shall be written by a financial institution licensed to do business in the state. 
(2)  Duration and release. Performance bonds and/or irrevocable letters of credit posted pursuant to the regulations shall be released or returned, as the case may be, at such time as the facilities guaranteed thereby have been installed and accepted. 
(3)  Default. If the construction or installation of any improvements or facilities for which a bond or irrevocable letter of credit is posted is not completed within three months after substantial completion of any building or structures which said improvements of facilities are designed to serve, or if said construction or installations not in accordance with the applicable specifications and requirements, the county may proceed to construct, install, or modify said improvements of facilities in accordance with the applicable specifications and requirements. In either the case of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit, the county shall make whatever claims and/or drafts are necessary in order to obtain the funds necessary to so construct or install said improvements of facilities. The default provisions of this section, shall not apply when the governing body acts to permit the subdivider to remove his subdivision from the land records of the county in accordance with the provisions of these regulations. 
(Code 1992, § 8-507; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 104-600. - Acceptance and guarantee of completed minimum improvements; completion. 
The following requirements shall be satisfied prior to approval of the final plat by the applicable departments: 
(1)  Submittals. The subdivider shall provide to the county all applicable submittals as required in the county's development regulations. A detailed list of the specific submittals and contact information for the applicable departments responsible for review and approval of each submittal is available from the county stormwater management department. 
(2)  Final inspections. Upon completion of all minimum improvements, the subdivider shall notify the departments listed on the final plat checklist and request a field inspection. The subdivider is responsible for correcting all deficiencies identified during the final inspections. Improvements shall not be accepted unless they conform to the approved construction plans and all applicable federal, state and local requirements (see forms for final plat checklist at www.fayettecountyga.gov). 
(3)  Maintenance bond/irrevocable letter of credit. The subdivider shall provide to the county engineer, a maintenance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit for the purpose of guaranteeing the materials and workmanship of the minimum improvements for a period of two years. For purposes of bond/irrevocable letter of credit determination, "minimum improvements" includes all materials and work within the proposed right-of-way plus any part of the storm sewer infrastructure serving the subdivision. This includes, but is not limited to: storm pipe, open ditches, headwalls, stormwater management ponds, etc. The subdivider shall be responsible for making any needed repairs to the road or other "minimum improvements" as defined above within the two-year bonding period. Notification of needed repairs may be provided by the county to the subdivider at any time during the bonding period. If the subdivider does not make the necessary repairs within 90 calendar days of said notification, the county engineer shall claim funds from the bond or irrevocable letter of credit to adequately reimburse the county for its cost associated with having the repairs made by a contractor or the appropriate county department. Regardless of project size, the minimum maintenance bond/irrevocable letter of credit is $5,000.00. If a final plat becomes void, as may happen if not recorded into the county clerk of superior court records within 90 calendar days of approval by the planning commission, the existing maintenance bond/irrevocable letter of credit is also void and a new maintenance bond/irrevocable letter of credit will be required prior to approval of the new final plat. 
(4)  Ownership. Upon recordation of the final plat or minor subdivision plat, subsequent to approval by the planning commission, the county shall accept ownership of any street or other real property shown upon the final plat or minor subdivision plat. 
(5)  Attorney review. Before acceptance of any maintenance bond or irrevocable letter of credit, the county engineer may, at his direction, have the county attorney review said instrument. If a bond is offered, it shall be executed by a surety or guaranty company qualified to transact business in the state. If an irrevocable letter of credit is offered, it shall be written by a financial institution licensed to do business in the state. 
(Code 1992, § 8-508; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 104-601. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to convey or improve property by the construction of buildings on lots of any land subdivision which has not been approved and recorded as provided in these regulations, except those parcels recorded prior to the effective date of these regulations. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to record a subdivision plat, or once recorded, to make any changes, with the exception of minor revisions to a recorded plat or minor subdivision plat, thereon whatsoever which have not been approved by the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of all applicable regulations. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person or persons, firm or corporation of association of persons who shall knowingly divide and offer for sale any real estate in violation of the terms or provisions of this article shall, upon conviction therefore in state court, be punished as provided by this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 8-509; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 104-602. - Legal status. 
(a)  Amendment. The board of commissioners shall have the authority to amend these regulations after a public hearing thereon. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least 15 calendar days prior to such meeting. 
(b)  Variance or appeal. In cases of undue hardship under this chapter, the property owner may petition the planning commission for a variance or an appeal from the decision of any of the aforementioned appropriate departments with regard to interpretation, administration, and enforcement. If the planning commission does not grant the variance or appeal, the property owner may then appeal to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 8-510; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 1, 6-24-2010) 
Chapter 106 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 106-1—106-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CEMETERY, BURIAL GROUND, HUMAN REMAINS, OR BURIAL OBJECT 

Sec. 106-19. - Development of cemetery or burial ground; documentation. 
(a)  No cemetery, burial ground, human remains, or burial object shall be knowingly disturbed (see O.C.G.A. § 6-72-4). When property containing a cemetery or burial ground, is developed, the following is required: 
(1)  Evidence of ownership of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located in the form of a legal opinion based upon a title search; 
(2)  A report prepared by an archeologist stating the number of graves believed to be present and their locations, as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques that do not require a state permit, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes; 
(3)  A survey prepared by a registered surveyor showing the location and boundary in bearings and distances of the cemetery or burial ground based on the aforementioned archeologist's report. The boundary of the cemetery or burial ground shall be staked and offset a minimum of five feet from the location of any grave and the acreage of the cemetery or burial ground shall be provided; 
(4)  A plan prepared by a genealogist for identifying and notifying the descendants of those buried or believed to be buried in such cemetery. The plan shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department for review and upon approval thereof, the applicant shall implement the plan for notification. The notification shall include a summary of rights under O.C.G.A. § 36-72 and the contact information for the planning and zoning department. 
(b)  If those buried or believed to be buried are of aboriginal or American Indian descent, the genealogist, in preparing the notification plan, shall consult with the Council of American Indian Concerns and shall include in the notification plan not only any known descendants of those presumed buried but also any American Indian tribes as defined in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-260 that are culturally affiliated; and a proposal for mitigation or avoidance of the effects of the planned activity on the cemetery or burial ground. If the proposal includes relocation of any human remains or burial objects, the proposal shall specify the method of disinterment, the location and method of disposition of the remains, the approximate cost of the process and the approximate number of graves affected. 
(Code 1992, § 12-314; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 106-20. - Public hearing. 
Within 15 days after it is satisfied that all reasonable efforts have been made to notify descendants, a planning commission public hearing shall be scheduled. The public hearing shall be advertised once a week for two consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week in which the public hearing. The applicant shall reimburse the county for the cost of the advertisements prior to the public hearing. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the county shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision, issues considered by the planning commission shall include: 
(1)  The presumption in favor of leaving the cemetery or burial ground undisturbed; 
(2)  The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties; 
(3)  The economic or other costs of mitigation; 
(4)  The adequacy of the applicant's plans for disinterment and proper disposition of any remains or burial objects; 
(5)  The balancing of the applicant's interest in disinterment with the public's and any descendants interest in the value of the undisturbed cultural; and 
(6)  Any other compelling factors which the governing authority deems relevant. 
(Code 1992, § 12-315; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 106-21. - Appeal. 
Should any applicant or descendant be dissatisfied with a decision of the planning commission, they may within 30 days of such decision; file an appeal in the county superior court, the applicant shall not resume or begin any development activities until the expiration of the time for appeal. 
(Code 1992, § 12-316; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 106-22. - Protective fencing. 
During the development phase, orange protective fencing shall be installed around the cemetery or burial ground along the boundary established by the surveyor. If an unknown cemetery or burial ground is discovered during the development process of property, work shall stop immediately and notice shall be given to the planning and zoning department. 
(Code 1992, § 12-317; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 106-23. - Plats. 
The cemetery or burial ground shall be indicated on a preliminary plat. Final plat, and/or site plan, as applicable. A minimum 20-foot access shall be maintained to the cemetery or burial ground either through fee simple ownership or an easement. Any disinterment and disposition of human remains or burial objects shall be supervised, monitored, or carried out by the applicant's archeologist. 
(Code 1992, § 12-318; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2, 6-24-2010) 
Sec. 106-24. - Penalty. 
Any person who knowingly fails to comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-72 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine of not more than $5,000,00 for each grave site disturbed; provided, however, that any person who knowingly violates the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-72-4 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature and, upon conviction, shall be incarcerated for not more than six months and shall pay a fine not less than $5,000.00 for each grave site disturbed. 
(Code 1992, § 12-319; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2, 6-24-2010) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-16. 
Chapter 108 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Outdoor advertising, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 108-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Fayette County Sign Ordinance." 
(Code 1992, § 21-1-1; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of the county understands that signs are an integral part of the ability of every person to exercise their right to freedom of speech. It is, however, important to understand that there is a fundamental need to protect the county as a whole from the unchecked proliferation of unregulated signage. It is with this understanding in mind that the board of commissioners of the county provides the following purposes for the regulation of signage: 
(1)  To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the unincorporated county; 
(2)  To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the county's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
(3)  To improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
(4)  To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and 
(5)  To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions. 
(b)  This sign chapter is adopted under the zoning authority of the county in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in chapter 110, zoning. 
(Code 1992, § 21-1-2; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-3. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Terms and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in the zoning chapter of the county shall be given the meanings set forth in such chapter. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in article IV of this chapter. 
Animated sign means any sign, or part of a sign, that uses any movement or change of lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene (prohibited). 
Awning/canopy sign means any sign that is a part of, or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy (prohibited). 
Banner means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. 
Beacon means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move (prohibited). 
Billboard means any sign which exceeds 60 square feet in area. 
Building official means the person, officer or official whom the board of commissioners has so designated or his designee. 
Canopy/awning sign . See Awning/canopy sign . 
Changeable copy signs means a sign or portion thereof with letters, numerals, or graphics that can be changed either manually or electronically. The electronic change of letters, numerals, graphics must be a static change and cannot dissolve, fade, travel, or scroll and must not change more than once every 30 seconds. A sign on which the letters, numerals, or graphics change more than once every 30 seconds shall be considered an animated sign (prohibited) and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter. 
Decorative wall means a freestanding wall sometimes used in association with landscaping. 
Dissolve means a mode of message transition accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the second message. 
Double-face sign means a sign where the message is displayed back to back. If the sign is constructed in the form of a "V," at no point can the backs of the sign faces be separated by a distance greater than two feet. Only one side of the sign face shall be measured in computing the sign area. 
Drive-through/drive-in facility means any location where products and/or services are distributed to, or business is transacted with, a person seated in a motor vehicle. 
Fade means a mode of message transition accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
Flag means any fabric or bunting containing colors, patterns, or symbols. 
Flashing sign means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects (prohibited). 
Freestanding sign means any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
Illuminated sign, external, means a sign illuminated by an external light source. Such source cannot be a device that changes color, flashes, or alternates. 
Illuminated sign, internal, means a sign illuminated by an internal light source. 
Kiosk means a small, freestanding structure requiring a building permit which has more than two surfaces (prohibited). 
Lot means a parcel of land that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for lot area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by chapter 110, zoning. 
Marquee or marquee sign means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather (prohibited). 
Moving sign means a sign which revolves, rotates, swings, undulates, or otherwise attracts attention through the structural movement of parts (prohibited). 
Mural. See Wall sign. 
Nonresidential zoning district. The following are considered nonresidential zoning districts within this chapter: O-I, C-C, C-H, M-1, M-2, and L-C. 
Out-of-store marketing device means any facility which is located outside of a primary building on a site zoned for nonresidential uses. Examples of out-of-store marketing devices include fuel pumps, bank ATM units, newspaper racks, drink machines, ice boxes, and phone booths. 
Pennant or streamer means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind (prohibited). 
Permanent sign means any sign which, when installed, is intended for permanent use. A permanent freestanding sign shall be of a type and construction as to not be easily or readily removed from the lot on which it has been erected. 
Permit means a sign permit reviewed, approved, and issued by the county planning and zoning department. 
Portable sign means any sign which is capable of being transported, either by trailer or on its own wheels. 
Principal building means the building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. Nonresidential lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
Public sign means any sign erected by a governmental entity. 
Residential zoning district. The following are considered residential zoning districts within this chapter: A-R, EST, R-80, R-72, R-70, R-60, R-55, R-50, R-45, R-40, R-20, DR-15, RMF, MHP, PUD-PRD, and C-S. 
Roof sign means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure (prohibited). 
Scroll means a mode of message transition where the message appears to move vertically across the display surface. 
Sign means any device, fixture, placard, or structure affixed to, supported by, or suspended by a stationary object, building, or the ground that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing, to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
Sign face means the area or display surface of a sign which is used for the message. 
Sign structure means the aboveground poles, beams, columns, posts, foundations, or framing providing structural support for the sign face. 
Suspended sign means any sign which is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building. 
Temporary sign means any sign that is not permanently mounted. 
Travel means a mode of message transition where the message appears to move horizontally across the display surface. 
Wall means the side of a building connecting floor to ceiling or foundation to roof. 
Wall sign means any sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. No wall sign shall extend more than six inches from any wall, building, or structure. 
Window sign means any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass either inside or outside the building, and is visible from the exterior of the structure. 
Zoning administrator means the person, officer or official whom the board of commissioners has so designated, or his designee. 
(Code 1992, § 21-1-3; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-4. - Powers and duties of personnel. 
The zoning administrator is hereby authorized and directed to administer this chapter. Unless otherwise specifically provided by resolution of the county board of commissioners, the enforcement of this chapter shall be within the jurisdiction of the county marshal. 
(Code 1992, § 21-1-4; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Secs. 108-5—108-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITTING 

Sec. 108-27. - Permits required. 
All signage listed herein requiring a permit must meet the requirements of subsection (1) of this section when applying for a permit. 
(1)  Applications for signage . Applications for sign permits required by this article shall be filed with the county planning and zoning office during normal business hours and shall include the following to be considered by the zoning administrator: 
a.  The name, street address, and phone number of the owner of the property where the sign is to be installed along with a site plan showing the proposed location of the sign on the property. 
b.  If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a signed and notarized authorization by the property owner shall be included with the application. 
c.  A description of the type of sign to be erected which shall include a schematic drawing of the sign indicating overall dimensions (height, width, square footage, shape, and number of faces). 
All applications for signage shall be on a form provided by the county planning and zoning. 
(2)  Review and notification . Review of an application deemed to be complete by the county planning and zoning department and notification to the applicant of either approval or denial shall in no case extend for a period of time exceeding 30 days from the date of the county planning and zoning department's receipt of the completed application. Notification to the applicant can be made either by certified mail return receipt requested, by fax to the number provided on the application, or by hand delivery by the county marshal's office on or before the 30th day after the county planning and zoning department's receipt of the application. Should the process exceed 45 days, it shall be deemed that the application is approved and the zoning administrator shall issue a permit to the applicant. Issuance of a permit shall in no way prevent the county from later declaring the sign to be illegal if the structure fails to substantially comply with the specifications submitted in the application or some new information of illegality is discovered. 
(Code 1992, § 21-2-1; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-28. - Denial, revocation, and suspension. 
(a)  Compliance to chapter. The zoning administrator shall deny all applications for signs that do not comply with this article. Written notification to the applicant listing the reasons for denial shall be provided as set forth in section 108-27(2). 
(b)  Revocation of permits and certificates. The zoning administrator may revoke a sign permit or certificate of compliance in those cases where an administrative determination has been duly made that false statements or misrepresentations existed as to material facts in the application or plans upon which the permit of approval was based. 
(c)  Suspension of permits and certificates. The zoning administrator may suspend a sign permit or certificate of compliance where an administrative determination has been duly made that an error or omission on the part of either the permit applicant or a government agency existed in the issuance of the permit or certificate. A new permit or certificate shall be issued in place of the incorrect permit or certificate after correction of the error or omission. 
(d)  Appeals. Any individual whose application has been denied or revoked may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator to the county zoning board of appeals within 30 days of notification of denial or revocation. Once an applicant has notified the county of their intent to appeal, a hearing will take place within 90 days of the appeal being filed with the zoning administrator. If a hearing cannot take place within the 90-day limit then the appeal is determined in favor of the applicant. 
(Code 1992, § 21-2-2; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-29. - Signs which require no permit. 
The following types of signs shall not count toward the total amount of signage allowed in sections 108-135, 108-161 and 108-162: 
(1)  Numeral displayed for the purpose of identifying property location not to exceed eight inches in height; 
(2)  Flags; see sections 108-138 and 108-167; 
(3)  Window signs; see sections 108-136 and 108-163; 
(4)  Doors signs not to exceed one square foot in size and not more than one sign per door; and 
(5)  Temporary signs in all districts. 
(Code 1992, § 21-2-4; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-30. - Prohibited signs and devices. 
(a)  The following signs shall be prohibited under this article. Such signs include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Animated or flashing signs; 
(2)  Rotating signs, or any sign which requires either natural or artificial wind current for motion or gives the appearance of movement; 
(3)  Portable signs when not attached to a motor vehicle including signs attached to or painted on vehicles which prevent the vehicle from being used for its intended purpose and that are legible from the public right-of-way are also considered portable signs; 
(4)  Searchlights, beacons, or similar devices; 
(5)  Roof signs; 
(6)  Pennants, streamers; 
(7)  Attention-getting devices, including but not limited to balloons (including all inflatable air signs and lights), shall not be used to attract attention to any sign or business. This includes neon tubing or bare bulb lights encircling a window or outlining the structure; 
(8)  Signs or other advertising structures that contain obscene or indecent material; 
(9)  No lettering, logos or other graphics are allowed on any awning, canopy (including a gasoline canopy), marquee, or other similar devices; 
(10)  Kiosks; 
(11)  All signs attached to light poles, power poles or trees (when in the right-of-way); 
(12)  Any privately owned sign located within or partially within any public right-of-way; 
(13)  Billboards; and 
(14)  Wall signs in residential districts. 
(b)  Material is obscene if all of the following apply: 
(1)  To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion; and 
(2)  The material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined in subsections (b)(2)a. through e. of this section: 
a.  Acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; 
b.  Acts of masturbation; 
c.  Acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; 
d.  Acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or 
e.  Sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
(c)  Material is indecent if the sign depicts the following portions of human anatomy: 
(1)  Any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; 
(2)  Any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(Code 1992, § 21-2-5; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
State Law reference— Obscenity, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
Secs. 108-31—108-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 108-51. - Violations, penalties. 
(a)  No person shall erect on any premises owned or controlled by him any sign which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises, or as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(c)  Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions herein. 
(d)  Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(e)  In case any sign or other device covered by this chapter is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this article, the county marshal shall issue a citation. Additionally, the county may seek an injunction for a continuing violation or take other appropriate action to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or use to correct or abate such violation. Any violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor and the violator will be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 or imprisonment for up to 60 days. 
(Code 1992, § 21-3-1; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-52. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming existing signs. A freestanding or wall sign for which a sign permit was issued which was in existence on November 10, 2005, or which was constructed in accordance with the ordinances and other applicable laws in effect on the date of its construction, but which by reason of its size, height, location, design or construction is not in conformance with the requirements of this article, shall be considered a nonconforming sign. Such a sign shall be allowed to remain in place and be maintained (provided that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent of the nonconformity) until there is a change of business name (single business), a change of complex name (multi-business), or the sign and/or supporting structure is totally destroyed as a result of natural causes, acts of God, vandalism or any other cause. In the case of a change of ownership where the business name and existing signage (face and structure) remain the same, said sign shall be allowed to remain in place. 
(b)  Lapse of nonconforming sign permit. A nonconforming sign permit shall lapse and become void under the same circumstances as those under which any other sign permit may lapse and become void. 
(Code 1992, § 21-3-2; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-53. - Removal of unlawful or dangerous signs. 
(a)  Removal. The county may order the removal of any sign in violation of this chapter by written notice to the property owner. If a permit has been issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. 
(b)  Procedure following removal order. If the sign is not removed within 14 days after the order of removal (or 14 days after the date any appeal becomes final), the county shall remove or cause to be removed the sign and to collect the costs thereof as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Removal without notice. The county shall remove any sign in violation of this chapter, without giving notice to any party, if: 
(1)  Said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
(2)  Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
(d)  Reclamation/fees. Following such removal or repair, the county may collect the costs as set by the county board of commissioners for any reclaimed signs. Signs not claimed will be destroyed after 14 days. 
(Code 1992, § 21-3-3; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Secs. 108-54—108-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MEASUREMENT; CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 108-80. - Sign location. 
(a)  Obstructions to doors, windows, or fire escapes. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. 
(b)  Signs not to constitute traffic hazard. No sign or part thereof, except authorized traffic signs, shall be located in any state or county right-of-way. No sign may be located any closer than 20 feet from an intersection as measured from the intersection of the two rights-of-way. 
(Code 1992, § 21-4-1; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-81. - Measurement of sign face area; freestanding sign. 
The area of a sign face shall be computed as the entire area within the continuous perimeter, enclosing the limits of all writing, representation, emblem, or any figure or similar character. This shall also include any open spaces or colors, forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such. 
(Code 1992, § 21-4-2; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-82. - Measurement of sign height. 
(a)  The height of a sign shall be computed as to the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: 
(1)  Existing grade prior to construction; or 
(2)  The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. 
(b)  In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is greater. Where the normal grade is below the normal grade of a public street, the sign base can be raised to the elevation of the normal grade of the street before the height limitations are applied (surveyor's certificate required). 
(Code 1992, § 21-4-3; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-83. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All signs permitted under this Code shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable county building codes. The county may remove after due notice per section 108-53 any sign which shows neglect or becomes dilapidated. 
(b)  Face of sign shall be smooth. No sign or other advertising structure shall be constructed so as to have nails, tacks, or wires protruding therefrom. 
(c)  Illumination of signs. Signs, when illumination is permitted, may be illuminated internally or externally. Neon tubing may be used to spell the business name on a wall sign only, and shall be entirely encased within a sign cabinet. 
(d)  Landscaping, weeds, and grass shall be kept cut in front of, behind, underneath, and around the base of ground signs. 
(Code 1992, § 21-4-4; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Secs. 108-84—108-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESTRICTIONS BASED ON LOCATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 108-110. - Zoning districts. 
(a)  Sign standards by district apply to all zoning districts in the county. The districts are defined herein as being either residential or nonresidential. 
(b)  Residential zoning districts allow for both residential and nonresidential uses and as such will be governed by the respective articles of this chapter based on the approved use. For all unimproved residential property the residential sign regulations shall apply. For all nonresidential uses permitted in residential zoning districts, the signage allowances for those uses shall be determined to be under division 3 of this article. 
(c)  Nonresidential zoning districts allow for both nonresidential and residential uses and as such will be governed by the respective articles of this chapter based on the approved use. For all unimproved nonresidential property the single business sign regulations shall apply (see section 108-161). For all residential uses permitted in the nonresidential zoning district, the signage allowances for those uses shall be determined to be under division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-1; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Secs. 108-111—108-133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 108-134. - Signs allowed within residential zoning districts. 
The following signs shall be allowed in all residential zoning districts: 
(1)  Freestanding signs; see section 108-135; 
(2)  Window signs; see section 108-136; 
(3)  Signage during construction; see section 108-137; and 
(4)  Flags; see section 108-138. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-21; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-135. - Residential freestanding signs. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for herein, lots located in a residential zoning district shall be allowed no more than three freestanding signs and not more than one such sign can be permanent. The sign face shall not exceed six square feet in area or four feet in height. Sign structures shall not exceed five feet in height. Banners shall be exempt from this section. All permanent signs shall require a permit. If the sign or sign structure is attached to a decorative wall or fence, it shall be considered to be permanent and said decorative wall or fence must meet the requirements of section 110-72. Permanent signs shall not be internally illuminated. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided for herein, no more than two freestanding signs shall be allowed to be placed at each entrance of a residential subdivision. These signs must be placed on common property under the ownership of the homeowners' association (HOA) and shall not be allowed to be on private property. The sign face shall not exceed 35 square feet in area or five feet in height. Sign structures shall not exceed six feet in height. If the sign or sign structure is attached to a decorative wall or fence, the decorative wall or fence shall not exceed four feet in height. The post and/or columns of the decorative wall or fence shall not exceed six feet in height. Such signs shall not be internally illuminated. A permit shall be required. Said permit shall not be issued until after the final plat has been recorded. 
(c)  Banners shall not be more than 24 square feet in size to be displayed not more than 30 days in a calendar year. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet and shall not extend more than four feet above grade when mounted on the ground. A permit shall be required. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided for herein, for any multifamily residential property, the number of allowable temporary freestanding signs shall not exceed six signs. The sign face shall not exceed six square feet in area or four feet in height. Sign structures shall not exceed five feet in height. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated. Multifamily developments shall also be entitled to two permanent signs at the entrance to the development as regulated per the dimensional requirements in subsection (b) of this section and these signs shall require a permit. The property owner shall be responsible for all signage posted on the property. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-22; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-136. - Window signs. 
Not more than three window signs shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall not be larger than six square feet or cover more than 25 percent of the area of each window in which a sign is placed, whichever is less. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-23; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-137. - Signage during construction. 
(a)  One additional sign shall be allowed during construction. Said sign shall not be internally illuminated. A permit shall be required. 
(1)  Duration. Said sign shall be allowed beginning with the issuance of a land disturbance permit and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Size. Said sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area nor five feet in height. 
(b)  This sign is in addition to the number of signs allowed in section 108-135. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-24; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-138. - Flags. 
Every parcel may display no more than one flag and/or flagpole. The flagpole shall not exceed 35 feet in height. Flag dimensions shall be proportional to the pole such that the hoist side of the flag is not more than 50 of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-25; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Secs. 108-139—108-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 108-160. - Signs allowed within nonresidential zoning districts. 
The following signs shall be allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts: 
(1)  Freestanding signs; see section 108-161; 
(2)  Wall signs; see section 108-162; 
(3)  Window signs; see section 108-163; 
(4)  Banners; see section 108-164; 
(5)  Signage during construction; see section 108-165; 
(6)  Out-of-store marketing device; see section 108-166; and 
(7)  Flags; see section 108-167. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-31; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-161. - Freestanding signs. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided herein, lots located in a nonresidential zoning district containing a single business shall be allowed no more than one freestanding permanent sign. The sign face shall not exceed 50 square feet in area or six feet in height. Sign structures shall not exceed seven feet in height. A permit shall be required. Such sign may be internally or externally illuminated. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided herein, lots located in a nonresidential zoning district containing multi-businesses shall be allowed no more than one permanent freestanding sign. The sign face shall not exceed 60 square feet in area or seven feet in height. Sign structure shall not exceed eight feet in height. Individual business names are included in the total square footage. A permit shall be required. Such signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
(c)  Signs as part of a drive-through or drive-in facility, not legible by the traveling public, shall not exceed six feet in height. Such signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
(d)  Temporary signage. Unless otherwise provided herein, each parcel containing a single business shall be allowed not more than two temporary signs. Unless otherwise provided herein, each parcel containing multiple businesses shall be allowed not more than four temporary signs. Signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area. Signs shall not exceed four feet in height. Sign structures shall not exceed five feet in height. For all lots containing multiple businesses, the property owner shall be responsible for all signage placed on the property, regardless of who erects the sign. Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided herein, no more than two signs shall be allowed to be placed at each entrance of a nonresidential subdivision. These signs must be placed on common property under the ownership of the property owners' association (POA) and shall not be allowed to be on private property. The sign face shall not exceed 35 square feet in area or five feet in height. Sign structures shall not exceed six feet in height. If the sign or sign structure is attached to a decorative wall or fence, the decorative wall or fence shall not exceed four feet in height. The post and/or columns of the decorative wall or fence shall not exceed six feet in height. A permit shall be required. Said permit shall not be issued until after the final plat has been recorded. Such signs may be internally or externally illuminated. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-32; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-162. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Wall signs shall be placed on the principal structure only, and may be internally and externally illuminated. A permit shall be required. 
(1)  Number. Each parcel containing a single business shall be allowed not more than one wall sign. On parcels containing multiple businesses, each business shall be allowed a wall sign. 
(2)  Location. No wall sign shall be placed on any roof or on top of any structure. In addition, no part of a wall sign shall be at an elevation higher than 25 feet above the average ground level elevation along the side of the building on which the wall sign is installed. If a building has two or more stories, no signs shall be installed at a level above the bottom of the second floor windows, unless the building is a multitenant office or multitenant commercial structure wherein tenants have primary, direct access from their space to the outside. This access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designed for public use. 
(3)  Erection. All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall, subject to the approval of the building official. 
(4)  Size/calculation. The allowable front wall sign area for each building shall not exceed two square feet per linear foot of the front length of the building or portion thereof occupied. If the sign is a panel or box, the total area including background is included. If a sign consists of individual letters, each attached directly to a building or structure, the area of the sign shall be measured by the area of the smallest rectangle or series of contiguous rectangles which enclose all the letters. 
(b)  Mural graphics shall be permitted. Such signs may not be internally illuminated. Murals are allowed in lieu of wall signage but cannot cover more area than would be allowed in subsection (a)(4) of this section. A permit shall be required. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-33; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-163. - Window signs. 
Any visible sign inside a building within ten feet of a window is considered a window sign. No more than 50 percent or 35 square feet, whichever is less, of the total available advertising space (glass area) shall be used to display window signs. Such signs may not be illuminated. No window signs are allowed above the first floor unless the building is a multitenant office or commercial structure wherein tenants have primary direct access from their space to the outside. This access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designed for public use. In no case shall any window signs be installed above the level of the second floor windows. No permit shall be required. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-34; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-164. - Banners. 
Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 14 days with not more than three such 14-day periods being permitted per calendar year per lot. In the case of lots which contain multiple businesses, each business will get a banner. 
(1)  Banners shall not be more than 32 square feet. A permit shall be required. 
(2)  No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-35; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-165. - Signage during construction. 
(a)  One additional sign shall be allowed during construction. Said sign shall not be internally illuminated. A permit shall be required. 
(1)  Duration. Said sign shall be allowed beginning with the issuance of a land disturbance permit and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Size. Said sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area nor five feet in height. 
(b)  This sign is in addition to the number of signs allowed in section 108-161. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-36; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-166. - Out-of-store marketing device. 
One sign shall be allowed on an out-of-store marketing device. Said sign shall not exceed two square feet. The height of the sign shall not be more than two feet above the device. Said sign shall not be illuminated except for illumination intrinsic to the device. No permit shall be required. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-37; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-167. - Flags. 
Every parcel may display no more than three flags and/or flagpoles. Flagpoles shall not exceed 70 feet in height. Flag dimensions shall be proportional to the pole such that the hoist side of the flag is not more than 50 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-38; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Sec. 108-168. - Suspended signs. 
In a multitenant commercial or office building, in addition to all other permitted signs, one projecting nonilluminated sign per entrance used shall be allowed to identify the location of each tenant's premises. A permit shall be required. Suspended signs shall adhere to the following: 
(1)  Does not exceed three square feet in area; 
(2)  Is uniform in size, material, color and shape and is placed in an equivalent location to other such signs located on the same building; 
(3)  Is suspended from the eave or soffit of the building; and 
(4)  Maintains a minimum of seven feet clearance between the bottom of the sign and the walkway below. 
(Code 1992, § 21-5-39; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 1-13-2011) 
Chapter 110 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Preamble and enactment clause. 
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the county, the board of commissioners of the county hereby ordains and enacts into law the articles and sections set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1992, ch. 20, art. I; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-9-2010) 
Sec. 110-2. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of Fayette County, Georgia." 
(Code 1992, ch. 20, art. II; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-9-2010) 
Sec. 110-3. - Definitions. 
Words and terms not explicitly defined in this chapter shall have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. The term "shall" is always mandatory while the term "may" is merely discretionary. The following specific definitions shall apply: 
Accessory means a use or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure and located on the same lot as such principal use or structure. 
Acquisition of property for a public purpose means the acquisition of property by an entity with the power of eminent domain. 
Acre, gross, means a measure of land equal to 43,560 square feet. 
Acre, net, means a gross acre less: street rights-of-way, both public and private; all land located within the 100-year floodplain; all water/stormwater impoundments; and all lands proposed to be dedicated to a governing authority. 
Adult day care facility means adult day care facilities shall include any building, or portion thereof, used to house four or more adults requiring care, maintenance, and supervision for part of a day. 
Agriculture means the raising of soil crops, including forestry and landscape planting materials, and/or livestock in a customary manner on lots of land at least five acres in size, including all associated activities. 
Aircraft means any machine, whether heavier or lighter than air, used or designated for navigation of, or flight in the air. 
Aircraft hangar means a fully enclosed structure with operational doors designed to store aircraft and the associated equipment or supplies needed for the operation and maintenance of the aircraft. 
Aircraft landing area means areas designed for safe landing and departures, including runways and heliports. 
Airplane means a fixed-winged aircraft that is supported in flight by dynamic reaction of the air against its wings. 
Alteration means any construction or renovation to an existing structure, other than repair. 
Amphitheater means an open-air facility primarily used for entertainment purposes, commonly with tiers of seats facing a performance stage. 
Animal means either a domestic dog ( Canis familiaris ) or domestic cat ( Felis catus ) This term shall not include livestock or household pets (see Household pet, see Livestock ). 
Animal, wild, includes any species or family or breed (including hybrids) of wild animals listed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) as being wild per O.C.G.A. title 27, ch. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 27-5-1 et seq.). 
Antenna means a device used to transmit and/or receive radio-frequency signals, microwave signals, or other signals transmitted to or from other antennas. 
Apiary means a place where honeybees and beehives are kept. (Adopted 7-28-2011) 
Aquaculture means the hatching, raising, and breeding of fish and/or aquatic plants for food or fiber. 
Art and/or crafts studio means an establishment where an artist's works are created and sold, where pieces by various artists are displayed for sale in a gallery, where customers purchase then create their own works (canvas, pottery, glass pieces, sculpture, etc.), a studio with classes and/or an art supply store. 
Artist studio means a structure accommodating the practice of the full spectrum of the arts including, but not limited to: fine arts, visual arts, and performing arts. 
Athletic facility means an area designated for athletic activity. 
Automobile service station means a land use where gasoline, oils, greases, batteries, tires, and general automobile accessories may be provided, but where no part of the premises is used for the storage or dismantling of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
Auxiliary structure means a structure which is allowed incidental and secondary to a residence. 
Bakery means an establishment engaged in the preparation and production of baked goods for sale and consumption both on and off the premises. 
Banquet hall means a facility which is rented by individuals or groups to accommodate private functions including, but not limited to: banquets, weddings and/or wedding receptions, anniversaries, and other similar celebrations. 
Basement means that portion of a building that is partially or completely below grade as defined and regulated in the International Residential Code. 
Bed and breakfast inn, A-R, means a bed and breakfast inn allowed as a conditional use in the A-R zoning district. 
Beehive means a structure intended for the housing of bees. 
Boat house means a structure built in or over a waterway to house a boat. 
Breezeway means a roofed, open-sided or screened passageway connecting two structures, such as a house and a garage. 
Buffer means a portion of a lot which is set aside to provide a separation of uses from abutting lots. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure for any person, animal, livestock, process, equipment, goods or property of any kind. 
Building height means the vertical distance of a building measured from the median height of the basement level or crawl space to the midpoint of the highest roof. The midpoint shall be measured from the ceiling joist of the highest floor level or from where the truss rests on the highest wall for open roof structures. For structures constructed without a basement or crawl space, the measurement will be taken beginning at the ground floor level. (See also section 110-75, Structures Permitted above the Height Limit.) 
Building line, front, means a line running parallel to the street which touches the nearest point of the principal structure to the street. 
Building, principal, means a building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. 
Cabana/pool house means an open, partially, or totally enclosed structure used in conjunction with a pool or lake/pond, commonly containing a changing area, and/or seating area, and/or a restroom. 
Campground facilities means any lot where two or more recreational vehicles and/or tents (which are normally associated with outdoor camping) are parked and/or erected for short-term occupancy. 
Card, gift, and/or stationery shop means an establishment which sells products such as greeting cards, wrapping paper, photo albums, picture frames, items that are suitable as gifts or souvenirs, desktop office products, paper, calendars, pencils, pens, briefcases, and art/graphic supplies. 
Care home means a convalescent center, nursing home, rest home, home for the aged, assisted living facility, or similar use established and operated on a profit or nonprofit basis to provide lodging and/or meals and/or domiciliary care for aged, infirm, chronically ill, or convalescent persons. 
Carport, attached, means a roofed, open-sided motor vehicle shelter, formed by extension of a roof from a building in a residential zoning district. 
Carport, detached, means a roofed, open-sided motor vehicle shelter. 
Cemetery means a burial ground. 
Cemetery or burial ground, legal nonconforming, means an existing cemetery or burial ground established before the effective date of November 13, 1980, or subsequent amendments which fail to comply with the provisions herein. These cemeteries or burial grounds could be active, inactive, or abandoned. 
Check cashing means an establishment that for compensation engages, in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. 
Child care facility means an agency, organization, or individual providing care for four or more children not related by blood or marriage or not the legal wards of the attendant adult and would include those providers that offer pre-primary, pre-K, and/or kindergarten instruction. 
Child care, in-home, means a custodial care business, conducted as a home occupation in a residential dwelling, where not more than three children, not related to the operator, are received for temporary care during the day only, whether for compensation, reward, or otherwise, and in full compliance with all applicable state requirements and/or certifications. The children of the owner are not included in the count. 
Church or other place of worship means a building used for public worship, including, but not limited to: temple, synagogue, pagoda, shrine, cathedral, tabernacle, and mosque/masjid. 
Clapboard siding means a siding with horizontal boards or the appearance of horizontal boards. 
Clinic means an establishment where medical or dental patients are admitted for examination and treatment, but where there is no overnight lodging. 
Club or lodge, private, means all incorporated or unincorporated associations for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities, operated for the benefit of the members and not open to the general public. 
Common area means any part of a development that is not part of a building lot and is designated for the common usage of the development. (See Open space. ) 
Convenience commercial establishment means an establishment that primarily stocks a range of groceries, snack foods, freshly-prepared foods for on and off-site consumption, and beverages, and may also provide household items, toiletries, tobacco products, newspapers, and the sale of fuel. 
Convenience store means a small retail establishment that offers convenience goods for sale, such as prepackaged food items, beverages, tobacco, personal care items, and other household goods. 
County engineer means the official to whom the responsibilities normally associated with this title has been delegated. 
Copy and/or print shop means an establishment engaged in duplicating and printing services to individuals and businesses. 
Cornice means a projecting feature surrounding the upper portion of a structure, dividing it horizontally for compositional purposes. 
Covered patio or covered deck, detached, means an open or partially enclosed structure consisting of a roof with supporting posts/columns commonly containing a seating/dining area, and/or outdoor kitchen, and/or spa/hot tub. 
Cultural facility means a facility for social, intellectual, artistic and/or scientific exposition such as museums, performing arts theaters, botanical gardens, and zoological parks. 
Curb cut means the point at which vehicular access is provided to a lot from an adjoining street. 
Day spa means an establishment offering massage therapy performed by a licensed massage therapist pursuant to Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.) that in addition may also offer beauty care, body treatments, and the retail sales of related products. 
Daylight hours means that period of time beginning 30 minutes before sunrise and ending 30 minutes after sunset. 
Deer processing facility means a facility where deer is processed into various cuts of venison. 
Density means the number of dwelling units per net acre. 
Density, high, means high density is defined as more than four dwelling units per net acre. 
Density, low, means low density is one dwelling unit or fewer per two net acres. 
Density, medium, means medium density is one to three dwelling units per net acre. 
Dog pen/run means, for the purposes of section 110-79, accessory structures and uses, an outside open air enclosure, consisting of 400 square feet or less of space per animal, used for the purpose of containing animals. 
Drive-in means a retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to customers who remain in their vehicles. 
Drive-through means an opening in the wall of a building or structure designed and intended to be used to provide service to customers who remain in their vehicles. 
Drive-up facility means a structure or device designed and intended to provide service to customers who remain in their vehicles. 
Dwelling means a building or portion of a building, designed for, or occupied for residential purposes constituting a residence. 
Dwelling, multifamily, means a dwelling designed for three or more families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a detached dwelling designed for a single family. 
Dwelling, townhouse, means one of a series of three or more attached dwelling units on separate lots which are separated from each other by party wall partitions extending at least from the lowest floor level to the roof. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a building containing two single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof. 
Dwelling unit means any building which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, and sanitation for not more than one family. 
Educational/instructional facility means a specialized training establishment. 
FAA means the federal aviation administration. 
Facility means the area established to serve a particular use or purpose. 
Family means one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that all persons are related by blood or marriage, or are lawful wards, and shall also include a group of persons, not exceeding four, living and cooking together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. The members of said group need not be related by blood or marriage or be lawful wards, where said group is occupying a single dwelling unit. 
Farm means a lot devoted to the raising of agricultural products and/or livestock. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Fence means structures made of posts, columns, boards, wire, pickets, wrought iron, or rails. 
Financial institution means any trust company, savings bank, industrial bank, savings and loan association, building and loan association, commercial bank, credit union, federal association, investment company or other business association, which is chartered under federal or state law, solicits, receives or accepts money or its equivalent on deposit and loans money as a regular business. 
Floor area, accessory structure, means the sum of the horizontal areas of several floors of the structure under roof, excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet. 
Floor area, principal structure, means the area of a dwelling exclusive of unheated space shall be measured from the face of the exterior walls. Unheated space shall include, but not be limited to: attic, basement, garage, carport, patios, and open porches. 
Footprint means the area of the foundation upon which a structure or building sits and would include the area beneath a supported or cantilevered lean-to attached to the structure or building. 
Foundation means an in-ground masonry or poured concrete support for a structure. 
Front door means the main entrance to a residence or building which is normally oriented to a street. 
Gazebo means a freestanding, circular roofed structure open on all sides, but enclosed by a railing, and used for outdoor seating in residential zoning districts. 
Governing authority means the county board of commissioners. 
Greenhouse, temporary means a structure constructed with a metal, plastic or wood framing (bent in a half round or hoop shape in the case of a hoop house), with a plastic sheet or cloth covering that is not mounted on a foundation and used for the purpose of growing or storing plants. 
Greenhouse, permanent means a structure typically constructed with wood or metal framing and covered by glass or Plexiglas that is mounted on a foundation used for the purpose of growing or storing plants. 
Grocery store means a retail establishment which primarily sells food and household goods, but is substantially larger and carries a broader range of merchandise than a convenience store. 
Guestroom means a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants and used for that purpose and where overnight occupancy is allowed. 
Helicopter means a rotary winged aircraft that depends principally upon the lift generated by one or more engine-driven rotors rotating on a substantially vertical axis for its primary means of propulsion. 
Heliport means an area of land, water, or structure used for the sole purpose of landing and takeoff of helicopters. 
Hobby breeder means a breeder of animals who sells less than 30 animals per year. 
Home occupation means an occupation operated within a dwelling by residents of the dwelling. 
Horse quarters means a structure used to house horses in the residential zoning districts. 
Horse stable means a structure used to house and/or board horses in an A-R zoning district. 
Hospital means any institution receiving in-patients, providing a staffed 24-hour emergency care facility, and authorized under the state law to render medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" includes a sanitarium, with an approved certificate of need (CON) from the state health planning agency, for the treatment and care of various forms of mental illness, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine, dentistry or psychiatry. 
Hotel means a building in which overnight accommodations are provided to the public and the innkeeper. The term " hotel" includes the term "motel". 
Household pet means a household pet shall include rodent pets, such as gerbils, hamsters, mice, rats, and guinea pigs; small mammal pets such as rabbits, hares, and ferrets; avian pets, such as canaries, parakeets, and parrots; reptile pets, such as turtles, lizards and snakes; and aquatic pets, such as tropical fish and frogs that is customarily kept for personal use or enjoyment primarily within a principal residence. 
Industrialized building means any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a nonresidential building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. 
Junk/auto grave yard means property used for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk, including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
Junked automobile. (See Vehicle, abandoned. ) 
Kennel means an establishment for the boarding, breeding and/or sale of animals for commercial gain that may in addition provide grooming and/or training services, and a pet rescue operation where the animals are primarily housed or kept outside of the principal residence in accessory structures, pens, or enclosures. A hobby breeder, as defined herein, shall not be considered a kennel. 
Kindergarten. (See School, private. ) 
Landscape areas means a maintained area of grass and/or ornamental planting materials. 
Livestock means animals including, but not limited to: horses, cattle, goats, sheep, pigs, potbellied pigs, chickens, ducks, geese, mules, rabbits, emu/ostrich, buffalo, chinchilla, fox, mink or other fur-bearing animal, and llamas. This term shall be deemed to specifically exclude animals (See Animal and Household pet. ) 
Loading space means space logically and conveniently located for pickup and delivery service, scaled to the vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles at all times. 
Lot means a tract of land of varying size which is designated as a single unit of property. 
Lot, corner, means a lot located at the intersection of two streets. 
Lot depth, means the distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, interior, means a lot which has frontage on only one street. 
Lot, landlocked, means a lot of record having no frontage on a street. 
Lot, through, means a lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on more than one street. 
Lot width, minimum, means the minimum distance between side lot lines either measured in a straight line parallel to the street right-of-way or tangent and perpendicular to the mid-point of the right-of-way in the case of the turn around portion of a cul-de-sac along the front minimum building line (see graphic). 

Lot of record means an area designated as a separate and distinct lot of land on a recorded subdivision plat approved in accordance with chapter 104, article XV subdivision regulations, or in a legally recorded deed. 
Mail services store means an establishment that provides packaging and mail services (both U.S. Postal and private service), provides mailboxes for lease and retail sale of office and stationery products. 
Manufactured home park means any lot where two or more manufactured homes are installed for living purposes, including any land or structure used by occupants of manufactured homes on such premises. 
Manufactured home space means a plot of ground within a manufactured home park designed to accommodate a single manufactured home. 
Manufactured housing means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "mobile home" means "manufactured housing" or "manufactured home." 
Massage therapy means massage therapy performed by a licensed massage therapist pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.). 
Mini-storage facility means storage facilities which are leased to the public. 
Motel. (See Hotel. ) 
Mullion means a heavy vertical or horizontal divider between windows and/or doors. 
Muntin means a narrow strip that divides or gives the appearance of individual panes of glass in a traditional sash. 
Museum means a permanent institution in the service of society and of its development, open to the public, which acquires, conserves, researches, communicates, and exhibits the tangible and intangible heritage of humanity and its environment, for the purpose of education, study, and enjoyment. 
Nonconformance, illegal, means a lot, use, building, or structure established after the effective date of November 13, 1980, or subsequent amendments which fail to comply with the provisions herein. 
Nonconformance, legal, means a legally existing lot, use, building or structure which fails to comply with the provisions herein, as of the effective date of November 13, 1980, or as the result of subsequent amendments, or due to the acquisition of property for a public purpose, a rezoning, or a variance. 
Nonemergency medical transport service means a service licensed by the state under O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 11, arts. 1—4 (O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq.) as applicable and as administered by the department of human resources providing prearranged non-emergency medical transport. 
Open space means land within and related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, that is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents and their guests of the development and may include such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate. (See Common area. ) 
Overlay zone means a zone that imposes a set of requirements in addition to those set out by the underlying zoning district. 
Parapet wall means a wall at the edge of a roof. 
Parking garage/lot means a structure, lot or any portion thereof which is open to the public in which one or more vehicles are housed or kept, not intending exhibition or showroom or storage or cars for sale. 
Parking space means an area for off-street motor vehicle parking. 
Pavilion means a freestanding roofed structure generally supported by poles and open on the sides with a permanent foundation that is used for picnic/social gatherings. 
Pay-day loan agency means an establishment providing loans to individuals in exchange for personal checks as collateral. 
Pawn establishment means any business that loans money on deposit of personal property and/or a title of ownership. 
Pet rescue means a nonprofit organization or individual providing temporary welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals while searching for permanent adoptive homes. 
Pet store means a retail establishment engaged in the sale of household pets and/or associated accessories and supplies, and may in addition provide grooming and/or training services. 
Planning commission means the commission to which the responsibilities associated with the planning commission has been delegated. 
Playhouse means a small house-like structure designed for children to play in. 
Pole barn means a large structure consisting of a roof supported by poles for the storage of farm products, feed, or the housing of farm animals or farm equipment, in agricultural zoning districts. 
Pool house. (See Cabana/pool house. ) 
Porte cochere means an extension of the roof projecting over a driveway at an entrance of a building and sheltering those getting in or out of vehicles; also called a carriage porch. 
Public utility facility means a location of or for public utilities, such as an electric substation or a location where a business organization (as an electric company) performing a public service and subject to special governmental regulation and the public service commission. 
Public water facilities means mains and service lines owned and operated by the county water system, or, when approved by the county commissioners, a private water system operating under the direct supervision of the department of natural resources. 
Recycling facility means a facility engaged in the collection, separation, storage and processing (baling, compacting, grinding, or shredding) of household and office type recyclable materials only (aluminum and tin cans, cardboard, glass containers, magazines, newspaper, paper, plastic containers and telephone books) to facilitate the shipment of such materials to an industrial end-user. 
Runway safety area means a cleared, drained, graded, and stable area symmetrically located about the runway, the dimensions of which include the runway width, and which is suitable for an airplane to overrun should it accidentally veer off the pavement. 
Sales, garage/yard, includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale," "moving sale," or "estate sale." 
School, private, means an elementary (kindergarten thru sixth grade that may, in conjunction, provide pre-primary and pre-K instruction), middle or high school, supported with private funds, providing a curriculum that meets state board of education requirements, including schools serving school age children with special needs. 
School, trade/vocational. (See Educational/institutional facility. ) 
Service area means a designated space, generally out-of-doors, utilized for utility areas, storage and pickup, and for the delivery of goods and services to any building or land use. 
Setback means the area as designated by this chapter in which a structure may not be erected, as measured from the property boundaries of the lot or from the buffer line if a buffer is required. 
Sewer system, central sanitary, means collection of sanitary sewage via a pipe network, transportation to a common collection point and treatment to required department of natural resources criteria prior to release. 
Shooting range, indoor, means an indoor facility for the safe shooting of firearms, including both facilities which are open to the general public or open only to private membership. 
Shooting range, outdoor, means an outdoor facility for the safe shooting of firearms, including both facilities which are open to the general public or open only to private membership. 
Smoking lounge means an establishment dedicated, in whole or in part, to the sale and/or smoking of legal substances, including but not limited to, establishments known commonly as cigar stores/lounges, hookah lounges, tobacco clubs, etc. 
Solar farm means any lot where more than three ground-mounted solar panels exceeding 200 cumulative square feet, or where more than 900 cumulative square feet of ground-mounted solar panels are located. 
Solar panel means a device consisting of an array of connected solar cells or photovoltaic cells that convert solar energy (light from the sun) into heat or electricity. 
Soundstage means a room or building used for the shooting of film and video content. 
Special event means a temporary, short-term event commonly held by a religious, educational, or community organization or a promotional event to attract attention to a place of business. 
Split zoning means a lot divided by more than one zoning district. 
Stadium, athletic, means an open-air facility, primarily for the viewing of athletic events, usually with tiers of seats rising around a field or court. 
Story means the portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare or road, often paved, used for vehicular access to other streets and/or properties. Streets may be: 
(1)  Owned and operated/maintained by the county (i.e., those within a public right-of-way); 
(2)  Privately owned but open for public use and maintained by the county (i.e., those within a prescriptive easement); or 
(3)  Privately owned and maintained (i.e., a private road) public streets are designated by type on the county thoroughfare plan. 
Street, access, means a street that provides for access to lots. 
Street, private, means a street used for access that is not owned or maintained by a governmental agency such as the county, a municipality, the state or federal government. 
Street, public, means a street that is used for travel by the general public, that is owned or maintained by a governmental agency such as the county, a municipality, the state or federal government. 
Structure means a combination of materials assembled for use or occupancy, whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or water. For the purposes of this chapter, structures include, but not limited to: buildings, manufactured homes, towers, recreational courts, and swimming pools, but do not include driveways, signs, septic systems, walls, or fences. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a lot or land into a minimum of two or more lots. 
Swimming pool screened enclosure means a structure or part thereof, in whole or in part, self-supporting and having walls of insect screening and a roof of insect screening, commonly made of plastic, aluminum, or similar lightweight material. 
Taxi service means a service that offers transportation in passenger vehicles to persons in return for remuneration. This does not include charter motor coach service. 
Thoroughfare, major, means a street designated on the thoroughfare plan as a major arterial, minor arterial, proposed minor arterial, collector, and proposed collector. 
Thoroughfare, minor, means a street designated on the thoroughfare plan as a county local or internal local. 
Tot lot means an improved and equipped play area which may consist of swings, slides, sandboxes, climbing apparatus, and/or benches for small children, usually up to elementary school age. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and alternative tower structures. 
Tower facility means the area containing a tower, antennas, all accessory equipment cabinets or buildings, and required security fencing, excluding tower anchors. (Amended 5-26-2011) 
Tower height means when referring to a tower or tower facilities, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna (see building height. ) 
Tower, planned, means any tower that is in the public hearing procedure, site application review process, site plan revision process, or has been approved, but not yet constructed (see article V of this chapter). 
Tower structure, alternative, means tower structures designed to diminish, camouflage, or conceal the appearance of antennas or towers including: monopine (man-made pine trees), free standing clock towers, and bell towers, light poles, flag poles, internal antenna towers (a/k/a "slick stick") including cylindrical unicells and/or similar alternative design tower structures. 
Towers and antennas, pre-existing, means any tower or antenna permitted prior to December 10, 1998. 
Townhouse. (See Dwelling, townhouse. ) 
Trailer, temporary means a vehicle designed for towing, not intended for use as a dwelling, and restricted to such uses as a construction office/storage facility, real estate sales office, and operations office or classrooms pending construction of a permanent facility. 
Training center means a facility used for business or professional conferences, seminars, and training programs. 
Training facility, indoor, means a structure used for indoor training. 
Transom means a horizontal opening over a door or window. 
Tutoring means the provision of instruction. 
Uses, conditional, means those uses that are allowed in a particular zoning district, but only under certain specified conditions. 
Uses, permitted, means those uses that are allowed in a particular zoning district as a matter of right. 
Uses, principal, means the main purpose for which a lot is intended and for which it may be used. 
Variance means a modification of the terms of this chapter granted by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with criteria as set forth herein. 
Vehicle, abandoned, means a vehicle which does not bear a license plate with a current decal affixed thereto, if required, unless said vehicle is stored within a completely enclosed building, stored on a permitted auto sales lot and is in satisfactory operating condition, or stored at a junk yard and/or auto grave yard (see article V of this chapter). 
Vehicle/boat sales means a business establishment primarily involved in the sale of automobiles, trucks, farm equipment, heavy construction equipment, motorcycles, boats, recreational vehicles or trailers, or other vehicles, excluding manufactured homes. 
Vehicle, business, means any vehicle used for business purposes, whether or not the owner is a private or governmental entity, except that school buses shall be excluded. 
Vehicle, passenger, means a wheeled motor vehicle for transporting passengers which is designed to run primarily on roads, principally for the transport of people rather than goods, and shall exclude a charter motor coach. 
Vehicle, recreational, means a self-propelled or towed vehicle used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes. 
Walkway means a passage to provide walking access, such as walks, paths, and steps. 
Wall means structures made of masonry or concrete, commonly used as an enclosure for a lot. 
Warehouse means a building devoted to retention of goods, merchandise, supplies or other materials produced on site or received in shipment for ultimate sale or shipment elsewhere. 
Water distribution system, central, means mains and service lines owned and operated by the county water system, or when approved by the county commissioners, a private water system operating under the direct supervision of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Water impoundment means a body of water confined by a dam, dike, floodgate, or other barrier. 
Wedding/event facility means a facility where weddings and other events are held. 
Weight, curb, means the total weight of a vehicle with standard equipment, all necessary operating consumables (e.g., motor oil and coolant), a full tank of fuel, while not loaded with either passengers or cargo. 
Wind farm means any lot where more than one wind turbine for the purpose of generating electricity is located. 
Wind turbine means a freestanding alternate energy device which converts wind energy into electrical energy. A windmill shall also be deemed a wind turbine when used in association with an agricultural operation. 
Yard means a required open space on a lot that is left unoccupied with structures and facilities, except as otherwise permitted herein. 
Yard, front, means the area between a property line adjacent to a thoroughfare and the building line, extending the full width of the lot. 
Yard, rear, means the area between the rear property line and the rear building line, extending the full width of the lot. 
Yard, side, means the area between the side property line and the side building line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
Zoning administrator means the person who has been designated by the board of commissioners to administer the enforcement of this chapter. 
Zoning board of appeals means the board to which the responsibilities associated with the zoning board of appeals has been delegated. 
(Code 1992, § 20-3-1; Ord. of 5-26-2011; Ord. of 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 4-25-2013; Ord. No. 2013-05, §§ 1, 2, 7-25-2013; Ord. No. 2013-20, § 1, 11-14-2013; Ord. No. 2014-19, § 1, 12-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-12, § 1, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-15, § 1, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 1, 3-23-2017; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 1, 10-26-17) 
Secs. 110-4—110-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 110-25. - Zoning districts. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the unincorporated areas of the county are divided into zoning districts designated as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 2, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 1, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 2, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 110-26. - Maps. 
The location and boundaries of each zoning district are shown on a map entitled the "The Official Zoning Map of Fayette County, Georgia." The official zoning map and all explanatory materials accompanying it were adopted on November 13, 1980, became effective on November 13, 1980, and are hereby made a part of this chapter. The official zoning map shall be maintained in an accurate, up-to-date condition for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Code 1992, § 20-4-2; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 2, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-27. - Amendments. 
If, in accordance with the provisions herein, amendments are made to the aforementioned maps, the zoning administrator shall record such amendment on the appropriate map and indicate thereon the effective date of the amendment. 
(Code 1992, § 20-4-3; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 2, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-28. - Boundary rule. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any zoning district, the following rules shall apply unless otherwise specifically indicated: 
(1)  Where the zoning district boundaries are indicated on the official zoning map as approximately following the centerlines of a street, road, highway, railroad right-of-way line, stream bed, river bed, corporate city limits line, or land lot line, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
(2)  Where the zoning district boundaries are indicated on the official zoning maps as being set back from a street, road, highway, railroad, stream or river and parallel thereto, then such boundaries shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the centerline of same and parallel thereto. 
(3)  Where a zoning district boundary, enacted by the adoption of the county zoning ordinance from which this chapter is derived and official zoning map on November 13, 1980, divides a lot, the zoning administrator may, administratively change the zoning of the smaller portion of said lot to coincide with the zoning of the larger portion of said lot. Said administrative rezoning, by the zoning administrator, shall take place prior to submittal of a preliminary plat, final plat, minor subdivision plat, site plan, and/or building permit, as applicable. Any changes in boundaries which occur pursuant to this provision shall be reported to the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Any development that involves multiple lots to be utilized as one lot shall be required to be combined prior to submittal of a preliminary plat, final plat, minor subdivision plat, site plan, and/or building permit, as applicable. In addition, any development which results in or is located on a lot with multiple zonings shall be rezoned to one zoning district prior to submittal of a preliminary plat, final plat, minor subdivision plat, site plan, and/or building permit, as applicable. Any existing development/structure developed on multiple lots utilized as one lot or located on a lot with multiple zonings which was approved through a preliminary plat, final plat, minor subdivision plat, site plan, and/or building permit, as applicable, prior to the adoption of this regulation on December 9, 2010, shall be allowed to continue development within the boundary established by said approved preliminary plat, final plat, minor subdivision plat, site plan, and/or building permit. 
(5)  Corporate limits. Any lot divided by corporate limits (city or county) shall fully meet the requirements of the county, on the portion of the lot that is within unincorporated the county for the purposes of a building permit. All corporate limits dividing a lot will be viewed in the same manner as a property line. Setbacks arc measured from corporate city limit lines and/or county boundary lines. 
(Code 1992, § 20-4-4; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 2, 5-24-2012) 
Secs. 110-29—110-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 110-60. - Conflicting requirements. 
Should any requirements conflict within this chapter or with any other county requirements, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-1; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-61. - Use. 
No land, building, or structure shall be used in any manner or for any purpose that is inconsistent with this chapter, or amendment thereto, except as otherwise provided herein. In addition, no building or structure shall be erected, moved, altered, or enlarged in any manner that is inconsistent with this chapter, or amendment thereto, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-2; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-62. - Use prohibited. 
If either a use or class of uses is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a zoning district, either as a matter of right or as a conditional use, then such use, class of uses, or structures for such uses shall be prohibited in such zoning district, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-3; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-63. - Principal structure or use. 
In all residential or agricultural-residential zoning districts, no more than one principal structure or use shall be located on a lot, except as otherwise provided herein. In all nonresidential zoning districts, no more than one principal use shall be located on a lot. The principal use on a non-residentially-zoned lot shall either be either nonresidential or residential, but not both, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-4; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-64. - Use on a lot. 
Construction of buildings, structures, and establishment of uses shall occur only upon a lot as required herein. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-5; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-65. - Reduction of lot area. 
No lot shall be reduced in size so that the lot size, width or depth, size of yard, lot area per family, or any other requirement of this chapter is not maintained. This restriction shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-6; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-66. - Height and density. 
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to: 
(1)  Exceed the height limit; or 
(2)  Accommodate or house a greater number of families per lot than allowed. 
(Code 1992, § 20-7; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-67. - Street frontage for access. 
(a)  For access purposes, all residential or nonresidential lots shall have frontage on a street and/or a cul-de-sac that is either: 
(1)  A public street; or 
(2)  A private street built to county standards and deeded to the property owners' association or the homeowners' association through a recorded warranty deed which the owner of any lot within the subdivision is required to join. 
(b)  All residential lots shall have at least 100 feet of immediate frontage on a street. This 100 foot width shall be maintained from the lot's frontage on the street to the body of the lot where the minimum lot width is met. This requirement shall be met unless: 
(1)  The lot is "Landlocked Property" as provided in article V of this chapter; or 
(2)  The lot fronts only the turn-around portion of a cul-de-sac. Each lot which fully fronts the turn-around portion of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum of 50 feet of street frontage and this provision shall be limited to a maximum of four lots. 
(c)  All nonresidential lots shall have at least 125 feet of frontage on a street. This 125 foot width shall be maintained from the lot's frontage on the street to the body of the lot where the minimum lot width is met. This requirement shall be met unless: 
(1)  The lot is "Landlocked Property" as provided in article V of this chapter; or 
(2)  The lot fronts only the turn-around portion of a cul-de-sac. Each lot which fully fronts the turn-around portion of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum of 50 feet of street frontage and this provision is limited to a maximum of four lots. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-8; Ord. of 8-25-2011; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-68. - Encroachment on public rights-of-way. 
No building, structure (including prohibited mailbox supports as described in article V of this chapter), wall or fence, service area or required off-street parking and loading facilities, except driveways and associated headwalls, shall be permitted to encroach on public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-9; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-69. - Requirements for moving a building. 
No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be relocated in the county unless, when relocated, it meets all requirements herein and other applicable requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-10; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-70. - Buildings under construction. 
Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in the construction or intended use of a building which is legally under construction or for which a building permit has been issued as of the effective date of November 13, 1980, including amendments, and the construction of which shall be diligently pursued until completion. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-11; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-71. - Yard not to be encroached upon. 
No yard shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the setback, off-street parking spaces, and such other regulations required for the zoning district in which such building is located. Landscaping, driveways, vehicle parking areas, multi-use path connections, walkways and associated steps, boat docks and bridges, retaining walls, walls and fences, curbs, and planted buffer strips shall not be construed to be encroachments. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-12; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-72. - Permitted encroachments of yards and setbacks. 
Architectural features connected to a structure such as cornices, eaves, steps, landings, ramps, gutters, and fire escapes may project not more than three feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways. One flagpole per lot shall also be allowed to encroach into the front yard setback, provided it is not located within 15 feet of the right-of-way. Flagpoles which encroach the front yard setback shall be required to have a signed and sealed affidavit from an architect or engineer registered in the state with the actual location and setback of the flagpole and inspection approval of the footing to be submitted to the planning and zoning department prior to placement of the flagpole. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-13; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-73. - Yard service, required open space to one building. 
No part of any yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required, about or in connection with, any building, structure, or use shall be included as part of a required yard, open space, off-street parking, or loading space similarly required for any other building, structure, or use except as provided herein. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-14; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-74. - Side and rear yards and buffers not required next to railroad. 
Within any nonresidential zoning district, side yards, rear yards, and buffers shall not be required adjacent to railroad rights-of-way. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-15; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-75. - Structures permitted above the height limit. 
The height limit shall not apply to the following structures and architectural features: a cathedral or vaulted ceiling on a church or other place of worship, spire, steeple, belfry, cupola, dome, monument, water tower, observation tower, chimney, smoke stack, conveyer, mast or aerial, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment, elevator equipment, roof mounted solar panels, roof mounted satellite/telecommunications equipment, and a parapet wall not extending more than four feet above the roof line of the building. A freestanding flagpole is also permitted above the height limit, provided the total height does not exceed 70 feet. Total height shall be measured from the finished grade at the location of the flagpole to the highest point. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-16; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 7-25-2013) 
Sec. 110-76. - Front yard setback and common area. 
The front yard setback shall be measured from the street right-of-way (existing or required, whichever is greater). Street right-of-way is based on the classification of the street (see chapter 104, development regulations, and the county thoroughfare plan). When a common area, open space, or conservation area is located between a lot and the street, the setback on the lot shall be measured from the right-of-way as a front yard setback or from the common area as a side or rear setback and whichever is greater shall apply as enacted October 1, 2008. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-17; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-77. - Lot width, minimum. 
The lot width at the building line shall be met for a depth of 80 feet. The principal structure shall be constructed within this area provided the required setbacks are met. Accessory structures do not have to comply with the lot width at the building line; however, they shall comply with the required setbacks and location requirements. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-18; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-78. - Additions to a single family structure. 
(a)  Additions. All additions to a single-family dwelling shall be attached to the primary structure, via either a heated corridor that shall be attached to the primary residence at a location that is currently heated and that has minimum interior dimensions of six feet in width and eight feet in height, or by a direct access common wall. 
(b)  Porte cochere. A porte cochere shall be attached at an entrance of a single-family dwelling and shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Shall consist of a singular roof line that is consistent with the single-family dwelling roof design, and supported by posts/columns and shall remain open on the remaining three sides; 
(2)  Shall be consistent with the architectural character/facade of the single-family dwelling; and 
(3)  A porte cochere shall not be utilized as a carport, garage, storage building, open storage, or living area. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-19; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-79. - Accessory structures and uses. 
(a)  The following accessory structures and uses are permitted in A-R and all residential zoning districts. 
(1)  Well/pump house; 
(2)  Guesthouse; 
(3)  Greenhouse, permanent or temporary (see (n) temporary greenhouse); 
(4)  Swimming pool, hot tub, pool deck, pool equipment enclosure, and pool screen enclosure; 
(5)  Garage; 
(6)  Recreational court; 
(7)  Gazebo; 
(8)  Cabana/pool house, boat house, covered patio, and covered deck; 
(9)  Storage building; 
(10)  Carport; 
(11)  Solar panel (ground-mounted); 
(12)  Wind turbine/windmill (ground-mounted); 
(13)  Aircraft hangar, detached (see article V of this chapter); 
(14)  Dog house and dog pen/run; 
(15)  Playhouse; 
(16)  Outdoor kitchen and/or fireplace; 
(17)  Patio; and 
(18)  Underground storm shelter. 
Farm outbuildings, including horse stables, auxiliary structures, and commercial greenhouses are regulated as conditional uses under article VII of this chapter and shall be allowed in the A-R zoning district only. One semi-trailer may be utilized as a farm outbuilding provided the property is zoned A-R and the semi-trailer is being used to store agricultural items. These regulations shall not apply to those nonresidential uses allowed in A-R and residential zoning districts. 
(b)  Structure limitations. Construction of an accessory structure shall occur concurrently with or after the construction of the principal structure. Accessory structures shall not be used as dwelling units or for lodging purposes, except a guesthouse. 
(c)  Number and size. The number and size of accessory structures shall conform to the requirements described herein. 
(1)  Accessory structures shall be limited to one of the following options: 
a.  Two accessory structures, per individual lot, that shall not exceed a combined total footprint of 1,800 square feet or a combined total footprint of 3,600 square feet on a lot with a minimum of five acres and a minimum contiguous area of two acres clear of zoning setbacks, watershed protection buffers and setbacks, jurisdictional wetlands, 100-year floodplain area, and easements of any kind. One of these accessory structures may include up to 700 square feet of heated and finished floor area to be utilized as a guesthouse. An accessory structure combined with a guesthouse, under this option, shall be deemed as one accessory structure; 
b.  One accessory structure, per individual lot, footprint not to exceed 1,800 square feet. This accessory structure may include up to 700 square feet of heated and finished floor area to be utilized as a guesthouse. An accessory structure combined with a guesthouse, under this option, shall be deemed as one accessory structure; or 
c.  One accessory structure, per individual lot with a minimum of five acres and a minimum contiguous area of two acres clear of zoning setbacks, watershed protection buffers and setbacks, jurisdictional wetlands, 100-year floodplain area, and easements of any kind, footprint not to exceed 3,600 square feet. This accessory structure may include up to 700 square feet of heated and finished floor area to be utilized as a guesthouse. An accessory structure combined with a guesthouse, under this option, shall be deemed as one accessory structure. Under this option, an accessory structure shall be located only to the rear of the principal structure. 
(2)  At least 50 percent of the square footage of an accessory structure building shall be fully enclosed, except as otherwise provided herein. Said enclosed area shall be surrounded by connecting adjacent walls constructed of solid materials attached to the foundation and roof. 
(3)  A well/pump house, dog house, or playhouse consisting of 70 square feet or less; dog pen/run; swimming pool, hot tub, or recreational court; aircraft hangar, farm outbuilding, greenhouse, horse stable, or auxiliary structure (as regulated in A-R under article V of this chapter); ground/pole-mounted solar panel consisting of less than 200 square feet or ground-mounted wind turbine/windmill; uncovered outdoor kitchen, fireplace; patio; underground storm shelter; or beehive shall not be included in determining the number of accessory structures provided herein. 
(d)  Location on lot. Accessory structures shall conform to the dimensional requirements within each zoning district. No structure shall be located in the front yard except: a detached garage (see subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section for requirements); well/pump house consisting of 70 square feet or less; or farm outbuildings, including horse stables, auxiliary structures, and greenhouses located in an A-R zoning district, where the lot consists of five acres or more. A well/pump house of 70 square feet or less may be located within the setbacks. On a single frontage lot, the area between the street and the front building line shall be treated as a front yard with regard to the location of accessory structures. On a corner lot, the area between both of the streets and both of the front building lines shall be treated as a primary front yard and a secondary front yard with regard to the location of accessory structures. On a through lot, the area between the street from which the lot is accessed and the front building line shall be treated as a front yard with regard to the location of accessory structures. 
(1)  Detached garage located in the front yard of a single frontage lot and a through lot. A detached garage located in the front yard shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Footprint shall not exceed 900 square feet; and 
b.  Located no more than 35 feet from the principal structure. 
(2)  Detached garage located in the front yard of a corner lot. 
a.  Primary front yard. The location of the front door of the principal structure shall establish the primary front yard. If the front door is not oriented to a street, the driveway access shall be utilized to establish the primary front yard. The primary front yard is the area between the street and the front building line in which an accessory structure is prohibited, except in the case of a detached garage which shall comply with the requirements of a single frontage lot; and 
b.  Secondary front yard. Consequently, the other frontage shall be the secondary front yard. The secondary front yard is the area between the street and the front building line in which an accessory structure is prohibited, except in the case of a detached garage which shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Footprint shall not exceed 900 square feet; and 
2.  Located no more than 35 feet from the principal structure. 
(3)  Architectural standards for a detached garage located in all front yards. The garage shall maintain a residential character. Elevation drawings denoting compliance with the following requirements shall be submitted as part of the building permit application: 
a.  The design of the garage shall match with the general architectural style inherent in the existing principal structure, including, but not limited to: roof pitch, roof facade, facade, residential windows, and residential doors. 
b.  The garage shall have at least one opening for vehicular access. 
c.  A separate electrical meter is not permitted, unless otherwise required per the building permits and inspections department. 
d.  The garage shall be connected to the principal structure by at least one of the following: 
1.  An attached or detached breezeway. Said breezeway shall be a minimum of six feet in width and a minimum of eight feet in height (interior measurement). A detached breezeway shall be constructed within six inches of the principal structure and the garage; 
2.  An attached raised deck. Said attached raised deck shall be a minimum height of 15 inches. The deck shall have a minimum width of six feet. Said deck shall have guard rails measuring a minimum of three feet in height; or 
3.  An attached or detached pergola. Said pergola shall consist of parallel colonnades supporting an open roof of beams and crossing rafters, shall be a minimum of six feet in width and a minimum of eight feet in height (interior measurement). A detached pergola shall be constructed within six inches of the principal structure and the garage. 
(e)  Guesthouses. Only one guesthouse is allowed per individual lot. Any living area included in an accessory structure is a guesthouse. A guesthouse shall not be used as tenant space. A guesthouse shall not exceed 700 square feet of heated and finished floor area. 
(f)  Architectural standards. All accessory structures of 200 square feet or greater, except a detached garage located in the front yard, shall be constructed in a residential character consisting of a facade of fiber-cement siding, wood siding, wood textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, stucco, or synthetic stucco, or finished/baked enamel aluminum/metal siding which establishes a horizontal pattern. These standards shall not apply to an addition to an existing accessory structure that is nonconforming in terms of these standards. Any addition to an existing nonconforming accessory structure shall match the architectural design of the existing nonconforming accessory structure. Elevation drawing denoting compliance shall be submitted as part of the building permit application. 
(g)  Temporary accessory storage. Portable on-demand storage units are only allowed on a temporary basis and only in conjunction with an ongoing a renovation project for the purpose of storage of household items for a period not to exceed one year. Portable on-demand storage units are defined as any container, storage unit, or other portable structure, other than an accessory building or shed complying with all building codes used to store household items. Only two portable on-demand storage units are allowed per lot. 
(h)  Carport. The carport shall be used to house motor vehicles and trailers only. Carports shall be constructed of the same material or types of material as the principal structure on the property, or of metal. 
(i)  Cabana/pool house, boat house, covered patio, and covered deck. The cabana, covered patio, and covered deck may contain an outdoor kitchen, fireplace, spa/hot tub, bathroom/changing room, and/or pool pump/filter but shall not be utilized as a carport, garage, storage building, open storage, or living area. Said structures shall, at a minimum, consist of a roof with supporting posts/columns, not to exceed one story, and comply with the architectural standards for an accessory structure 200 square feet or greater. 
(j)  Swimming pool, pool deck, pool equipment enclosure, and pool screened enclosure. The pool deck, pool equipment enclosure, and pool screened enclosure shall comply with the required setbacks. A pool screen enclosure shall be constructed with insect screening commonly made of plastic, aluminum, or similar lightweight material and shall be exempt from the architectural requirements herein. 
(k)  Solar panels (ground-mounted). Ground-mounted solar panels shall be limited to three per lot, the total cumulative square footage of ground-mounted solar panels shall not exceed 900 square feet, shall not exceed ten feet in height, shall comply with the required setbacks, and shall comply with the location of an accessory structure/use. Ground-mounted solar panels consisting of less than 200 cumulative square feet shall not count toward the number of accessory structures/uses. Ground-mounted solar panels consisting of 200 cumulative square feet up to a maximum of 900 cumulative square feet shall be counted as one accessory structure/use. 
(l)  Wind turbines/windmill (ground-mounted). Wind turbines/windmills shall not exceed 70 feet in height. The setbacks shall be equal to the height of the wind turbine, including the blades, or the applicable zoning district setbacks, whichever are greater. Each lot is limited to one ground-mounted wind turbine/windmill. The ground-mounted wind turbine/windmill shall not count toward the number of accessory structures/uses. All anchors for guyed towers shall meet the setbacks for the applicable zoning districts. 
(m)  Nonconformance. All accessory structures or uses which had a building permit issued prior to January 24, 2008, are legally nonconforming and shall be allowed to be maintained and rebuilt to current size and in the existing location. All accessory structures or uses permitted after January 24, 2008, shall comply with the current requirements. 
(n)  Temporary greenhouse. Temporary greenhouses shall not exceed ten feet in height. Each lot is limited to one temporary greenhouse. The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 30 feet or the minimum side yard setback of the applicable zoning district, whichever is greater, and the rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet or the minimum rear yard setback of the applicable zoning district, whichever is greater. The maximum square footage for temporary greenhouses shall be as follows: 

 
Temporary greenhouses shall be maintained in good condition and the covering shall not be torn and tattered. Temporary greenhouses shall only be used for the purpose of growing or storing plants. Temporary greenhouses shall be exempt from subsections (c)(2) and subsection (f) of this section. One temporary greenhouse of 120 or less square feet on a lot shall not count toward the total square footage or number of accessory structures for that lot. Greenhouses built in the A-R zoning district as regulated under article V of this chapter shall be exempt from these requirements. 
A temporary greenhouse permit will be required for all temporary greenhouses prior to construction. Scaled drawings shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department which shall include, but not be limited to: temporary greenhouse elevations including height and total square footage and location on the lot including the distance from the property lines. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-20; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 7-25-2013; Ord. No. 2014-19, §§ 2—5, 12-11-2014; Ord. No. 2017-16, §§ 2—4, 10-26-2017) 
Sec. 110-80. - Pavilion. 
A pavilion is an accessory structure which is allowed in nonresidential zoning districts, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-22; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-81. - Walls, fences, and entrance structures located in a front yard in A-R and all residential zoning districts and residential and nonresidential subdivision entrance walls and fences. 
(a)  All walls and fences shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No wall or fence shall be constructed in a public right-of-way, and such wall or fence shall not be constructed any closer than three feet from any fire hydrant. Walls and fences in the right-of-way shall be removed. 
(2)  Any vehicular driveway shall have a minimum clearance of 14 feet in width and 14 feet in height to allow for the passage of emergency vehicles. 
(3)  All walls and fences shall be maintained and repaired as required in the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(4)  A zoning compliance certificate will be required for all walls and fences located in a front yard prior to construction. A scaled drawing shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department which shall include, but not be limited to: wall and/or fence elevations, location, height of wall/fence, posts/columns, and ornamental statues, figurines, and light fixtures, visibility, spacing over the entire linear footage of wall/fence, changes in grade, building materials, and other requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Walls and fences not exceeding four feet in height shall comply with the following: 
(1)  A wall or fence shall be constructed of brick/brick veneer, stucco, synthetic stucco, rock, stone, cast-stone, wood, wrought iron, chainlink or other similar wire materials, or other architecturally engineered facades which match these materials. Barbed wire and electric fences are prohibited, except as otherwise provided herein (see subsection (e) of this section). 
(2)  Posts or columns, light fixtures, ornamental statues, and figurines shall not be included in the measurement of the four foot wall height. 
(c)  Walls and fences exceeding four feet in height shall comply with the following: 
(1)  A wall and/or fence shall be constructed of brick/brick veneer, stucco, synthetic stucco, rock, stone, cast-stone, wood, wrought iron, or other architecturally engineered facades which match these materials. Barbed wire and electric fences are prohibited, except as otherwise provided herein (see subsection (e) of this section). 
(2)  A solid wall and/or fence shall not exceed four feet in height and any portion of a wall and/or fence higher than four feet shall have a minimum visibility of 50 percent which shall be uniformly spaced over the entire linear footage of the wall and/or fence. Columns and posts shall not be included in this calculation. 
(3)  A vehicular entry structure shall not be subject to the four foot wall and fence requirement or the minimum visibility of 50 percent within 35 feet of either side of the driveway. 
(d)  Walls and fences that cannot meet height requirements due to changes in grade shall make adjustments to each section (as created by the columns or posts) of the wall or fence to meet the requirements to the greatest degree possible. In some cases, this will result in a stair-step pattern as the wall or fence moves along the grade. 
(e)  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the above requirements: 
(1)  In any residential zoning district where horses are kept in accordance with article V of this chapter, a wall or fence made of chainlink or other wire materials is exempt from the four-foot maximum height requirement and shall not exceed a maximum of five feet in height in a front yard. 
(2)  Where the use of the property is for farming in an A-R zoning district, including the raising and selling of crops and/or livestock, the property is exempt from the four-foot maximum height requirement, and exempt from the construction requirements of brick/brick veneer, stucco, synthetic stucco, rock, stone, cast-stone, wood, wrought iron, or other architecturally engineered facades which match these materials. 
(3)  Walls and fences in any residential or A-R zoning district. 
a.  On a corner lot, in order to reduce road noise, a solid wall and/or fence along a street which is classified as an arterial or collector per the county thoroughfare plan shall be exempt from the four foot maximum height requirement and the 50 percent visibility requirement. However, this exemption shall not apply to the street which the front door of the residence is facing. 
b.  Where a temporary fence is used in conjunction with a construction site, said fence is exempt from the requirements of this section. 
c.  A fence required for a telecommunication tower site shall comply with the requirements of article V of this chapter and shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
d.  A wall or fence used in conjunction with a storm water facility shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
e.  A wall or fence used in conjunction with any nonresidential permitted use or conditional use, including but not limited to: an animal hospital, kennel, cemetery and mausoleum, church or other place of worship. Colleges and universities, day care facility, private school, telephone, and electric or gas sub-station or other public utility facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
f.  With regard to the location of a wall or fence, a through lot shall be exempt from the four foot maximum height requirement and the minimum 50 percent visibility requirement, except for the area between the street from which the lot is accessed and the front building line, which shall be treated as a front yard. 
(f)  Residential and nonresidential subdivision entrance walls and fences. Subdivision entrance walls and fences shall be placed on common property under the ownership of the homeowners' association (HOA) or the property owners' association (POA). Common property shall be shown on the preliminary plat and/or final plat and/or minor subdivision plat. Said walls and fences shall not be subject to the four-foot height or 50 percent visibility requirements, but shall be constructed of brick/brick veneer, stucco, synthetic stucco, rock, stone, cast-stone, wood, wrought iron, or other architecturally engineered facades which match these materials. (Note: Check with the building permits and inspections department for any permitting requirements for walls/fences/subdivision entrances.) 
(g)  Nonconformance. All walls and fences which were lawfully built and existing on October 1, 2008, and which do not conform with the provisions of this article, shall be allowed to remain in place and shall be considered to be a legally existing nonconforming wall or fence. Additionally, any walls or fences built prior to October 1, 2008, that were in compliance with all codes and ordinances when it was built except for the height of the wall or fence, and which do not conform with the provisions of this article, shall be considered a legally existing nonconforming wall or fence and shall be allowed to remain in place. All walls and fences built after October 1, 2008, shall comply with this article. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-23; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-82. - Sales, garage/yard. 
A maximum of three garage/yard sales consisting of a maximum of three days each within a 12-month period shall be allowed per residential lot. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-23; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-83. - Architectural yard features. 
Architectural yard features shall not be located within the right-of-way, shall not be required to comply with the setback requirements, and shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Landscaping features such as planters, arbors, and trellises; 
(2)  Water features shall include, but not be limited to: fountains, waterfalls, and decorative man-made ponds such as koi ponds; and/or 
(3)  Sculptures. All associated mechanical and electrical equipment shall be screened with vegetation or housed in an equipment cabinet not to exceed 70 square feet. Landscaping features, such as arbors or trellises, shall not exceed ten feet in height as measured at the highest point. Landscaping planters shall not exceed four feet in height at the highest point. Sculptures shall not exceed 20 feet in height or the highest point of the roof of the principle structure, whichever is less. (Note: Check with the building permits and inspections department for any permitting requirements.) 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-24; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-84. - Parking of business vehicles. 
(a)  In any residential district, except A-R on lots of ten acres or larger, no business vehicle exceeding 8,000 pounds (curb weight) shall be allowed to park either on lots so zoned or on streets abutting such lots except during daylight hours and only for the purpose of making deliveries, making pickups, and providing services. 
(b)  Business vehicles weighing less than 8,000 pounds shall not be parked on streets abutting such lots. This provision shall not be construed as restricting in any way the normal business vehicle activity associated with development and construction. School buses shall be exempt (see this article). This provision shall not be allowed in conjunction with a home occupation (see article V of this chapter). 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-25; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-85. - Access to thoroughfares. 
Lots containing nonresidential uses shall be provided with a convenient vehicle turn-around which shall be of adequate design to permit vehicles to enter streets in a forward manner. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-26; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-86. - Raising and keeping of horses in residential districts. 
The raising and keeping of no more than one horse on a lot consisting of a minimum of three acres and one additional horse for each additional acre shall be allowed on any lot for which single-family residential is a permitted use (EST, R-85, R-80, R-78, R-75, R-72, R-70, R-55, R-50, R-45, R-40, R-20, PUD-PRD, and C-S). An accessory structure related to the shelter of horses shall be allowed, as long as, such accessory structure complies with this article. The boarding of horses and commercial riding lessons shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-27; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-87. - Keeping of animals in residential and agricultural-residential districts. 
The number of animals allowed per principal dwelling unit is limited to three in the following zoning districts: EST, C-S, R-85, R-80, R-78, R-75, R-72, R-70, R-55, R-50, R-45, R-40, R-20, DR-15, RMF, MHP, PUD-PRD, PUD-PRL, PUD-PEF, O-I, C-C, C-H, L-C, M-1, M-2, and BTP. One litter of animals of not more than six months of age shall not count toward this limit. The number of animals allowed in the A-R zoning district kept for personal use or hobby breeding is unlimited. A dog house and dog pen/run as regulated in this article and similar open air animal enclosures are allowed in side and rear yards only and shall meet the setbacks of the applicable zoning district. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-28; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-88. - Beekeeping. 
Beekeeping shall be allowed on any lot for which single-family residence is a Permitted Use (C-S, EST, R-85, R-80, R-78, R-75, R-72, R-70, R-55, R-50, R-45, R-40, R-20, and PUD-PRD) under the following conditions: 
(1)  All beehives shall meet the setbacks for the applicable zoning district. 
(2)  The beekeeper shall have 30 days from the time of a complaint to bring the beehives into compliance. 
(3)  The on-premises sale of honey produced on the premises shall be allowed. Approval of a home occupation shall not be required. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-29; Ord. of 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-89. - Wild animals. 
All wild animals categorized as inherently dangerous that require a license or permit and liability insurance per O.C.G.A. title 27, ch. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 27-5-1 et seq.) shall be prohibited in all residential and A-R zoning districts. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-30; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-89.5 - Keeping of chickens in conjunction with residential use. 
The number of chickens allowed per principal dwelling unit is limited to six and, starting with a base lot size of one acre, three additional chickens for each additional acre to a maximum of 12 chickens shall be allowed in the following zoning districts: EST, C-S, R-85, R-80, R-78, R-75, R-72, R-70, R-55, R-50, R-45, R-40, R-20, DR-15, RMF, MHP, PUD-PRD, PUD-PRL, PUD-PEF, O-I, C-C, C-H, L-C, M-1, M-2, and BTP. No roosters are allowed. Chicken houses/coops are allowed in side and rear yards only and shall be set back from all property lines a minimum of 50 feet. Chickens shall be contained on the lot. The containment area shall be in side and rear yards only and shall be limited to no more than 40 percent of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 2016-14, § 1, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 110-90. - Mailbox supports. 
The use of massive supports that, when struck, could damage vehicles and cause serious injury to vehicle occupants, are prohibited. Concrete posts, brick bases, iron pipes and similar miscellaneous items, such as farm equipment or supports filled with concrete cannot be used for mailbox supports. This restriction shall not apply on streets with a classification of internal local (see the county thoroughfare plan). 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-31; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-91. - Recreational vehicles and boats. 
Camping trailers, travel trailers, camper pick-up coaches, motorized homes, boat trailers and boats shall not be parked on any residential or A-R lot that has not been improved with a dwelling nor any nonresidential lot that has not been improved with a dwelling nor any nonresidential lot that has not been improved with a principal building except in conjunction with the construction of a principal building for which a building permit has been issued. Application for a permit for the parking of such recreational vehicles shall be made to the zoning administrator. Such a permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed six months and shall not be renewable when associated with the construction of a dwelling. This provision shall not be interpreted as precluding the parking of such recreational vehicles for a period not to exceed 14 days. One recreational vehicle, when utilized for temporary occupancy, shall be allowed to be parked in any zoning district on a lot which contains a single-family dwelling or in A-R or any residential zoning district. The duration shall not exceed 14 days and said duration shall be allowed two times per year. Recreational vehicles shall include camping trailers and travel trailers in addition to self-propelled vehicles which do not exceed 8½ feet in width, when in travel mode, and 45 feet in length, not including the towing vehicle. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-32; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2016-12, § 2, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 110-92. - Site plan requirement. 
All proposed nonresidential development shall be depicted on a site plan consistent with the requirements listed in chapter 104, development regulations. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-33; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-93. - Septic tank and septic drain field line setbacks. 
Septic tanks shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the property line. Septic drain field lines shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the property line. In the case where a buffer is required, septic tanks and septic drain field lines shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the property line (see section 110-94). 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-34; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2016-22, § 1, 12-8-2016) 
Sec. 110-94. - Buffer. 
A buffer shall provide a separation of uses from abutting properties and a visual screen through the use of natural vegetation or other means, including, replanting or supplemental plantings (see chapter 104, development regulations, for planting requirements). Other visual screening elements or noise attenuation devices, such as walls or berms, may be utilized in addition to the vegetation in the buffer. Stormwater retention and detention facilities may be located in a buffer but shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the property line. Said 25 feet, as measured from the property line, shall be for the aforementioned required natural vegetation, landscape plantings, and other visual screening elements or noise attenuation devices only. Multi-use path connections and utilities (including underground stormwater piping) may be located anywhere within the buffer (see section 110-93). A buffer shall not be required along the common boundary where the side or rear yard abuts property owned by the board of commissioners, the board of education, a municipality, the state or federal government that is in a residential or A-R zoning district. This provision shall apply to all buffers required by the zoning. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-35; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-95. - Landscaping and buffer requirements. 
A nonresidential structure/use allowed in a residential zoning district shall comply with the planting requirements for the buffer and landscape areas of chapter 104, development regulations. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-36; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-96. - Roadside sales. 
Sales of goods or services from a temporary location along a public right-of-way where business is transacted outside of an approved permanent structure are prohibited. Mobile ice cream vendors, mobile food venders which serve building sites, and vendors located at special events shall be exempt. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-37; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-97. - Nonresidential screening required. 
Any outside service area, refuse/dumpster area, storage area, or outside equipment area shall be screened from view in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-39; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-98. - Refuse/dumpster area. 
The refuse/dumpster area used in conjunction with nonresidential uses shall only be located to the side or rear of the principal structure, comply with the setbacks and/or buffer requirements, and be screened per this article. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-39; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-99. - Screening standards. 
Walls and fences or combinations thereof shall achieve 100 percent screening prior to the issuance of any applicable planning and zoning department approval and/or certificate of occupancy. Walls and fences required for screening purposes shall be limited to wood, brick, stone, concrete or concrete block (with architectural treatment), or any such wall or fence combined with vegetative screening materials which shall be compatible with or enhance the appearance of adjoining properties. Chain-link fences with slat inserts may be utilized to establish a screen in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-40; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-100. - Outside storage. 
Outside storage of merchandise, equipment, and parts shall be allowed in the side and rear yards subject to such requirements to the extent indicated below, as long as, such storage is screened in accordance with this article. Storage contained in a structure which is not enclosed by walls shall be deemed outside storage. Outside storage is allowed only within the M-1, M-2, C-C, and C-H, G-B, BTP, PUD-PIP, and PUD-PSBC zoning districts. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-41; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 2, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-101. - Outside display exempt from screening. 
Outside display of vehicles, for lease or sale, including, but not limited to: motorcycles, boats, recreational vehicles, farm equipment, utility trailers, heavy equipment, manufactured homes, and landscape plants shall be exempt from the setback and screening requirements of this chapter, subject to the minimum landscape and buffer requirements. Merchandise which is moved inside on a daily basis shall be exempt from the setback and screening requirements; however, such display shall comply with all minimum landscape and buffer requirements. Outside sales display shall be exempt from screening; however, the outside sales display shall comply with the required setbacks, buffers, and landscape requirements. The outside installation and display of products shall be limited to those items generally utilized outside, including, but not limited to: swimming pools, spas/hot tubs, patios and patio accessories, and/or children's play equipment. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-42; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-102. - Office trailer. 
The temporary use of a trailer for an office during a development and/or construction period shall require a permit to be issued by the zoning administrator prior to locating the trailer on a site. Said permit shall require a fee as established by the board of commissioners of the county and shall specify the precise location of the trailer meeting all applicable setbacks. Said permit shall be issued for a six-month period. Renewals of additional six-month periods are available, so long as there is a current land disturbance permit, preliminary plat, final plat, minor subdivision plat, site plan, or building permit for the property. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-43; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-103. - Temporary classrooms. 
(a)  Permit required. The temporary use of a trailer for classrooms shall require a permit issued by the zoning administrator. Said permit shall require a fee established by the board of commissioners. It shall be demonstrated on a site plan that such a use will comply with all zoning requirements. Required on-site parking for temporary classrooms shall be provided prior to the issuance of any temporary classroom permit. Each trailer shall be approved for occupancy by the fire marshal. Site is defined, for the purpose of this section, to be the entire area indicated on an approved overall site plan. 
(b)  Initial placement of temporary classrooms. Upon the issuance of a building permit for the principal structure on site, a maximum of four temporary classroom permits may be issued for a period not to exceed two years, or 30 days after the issuance of any type of certificate of occupancy on-site should that occur prior to the two year deadline. 
(c)  Subsequent placement of temporary classrooms. Upon issuance of a building permit for an expansion on site, additional temporary classroom permits may be issued, the number of which shall be based on the following: one temporary classroom per 2,000 square feet of proposed addition devoted to classroom use, with a maximum of four temporary classrooms. Subsequent temporary classroom permits may be issued for the expansion period and shall expire in one year, and may be renewed for a six-month period due to documented construction delays, with no further extensions. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-44; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-104. - Manufactured home. 
The placement of a manufactured home in a zoning district which allows a single-family dwelling as a permitted or conditional use, other than MHP, shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The manufactured home shall comply with all applicable zoning requirements, including, but not limited to: minimum heated square footage. 
(2)  The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation. 
(3)  The tongue and axles shall be removed. 
(4)  All applicable requirements shall be met within 90 calendar days and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-44; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-105. - Standards for telecommunications antennas and towers. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum development standards for the regulation of commercial telecommunications transmission towers, including, but not limited to: cellular and personal communications systems (PCS) towers, broadcasting towers, two-way radio towers, fixed-point microwave dishes, commercial satellites and receiving dishes, and related equipment cabinets and/or buildings. The intent of this chapter is: 
(1)  To implement the provisions of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, on a local level; 
(2)  To control placement of towers and antennas in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact to nearby properties by locating towers and antennas in nonresidential areas or in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; and 
(3)  To advocate the shared use of existing and planned tower sites through co-location, thereby discouraging the proliferation of towers throughout the county. 
(b)  Authority. Only the board of commissioners has the authority to reduce or waive the requirements under this section through the public hearing procedure. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  District height limitations. Height limits specified for each zoning district shall not apply to towers and antennas. The requirements set forth herein shall govern the height of towers and antennas. 
(2)  Governmentally owned property. These requirements shall not apply to any governmentally owned property, including: properties owned by the board of commissioners, board of education, or a municipality, as well as, the state or federal government, that are used for the location of any tower facility. 
(3)  Amateur radio antennas. This chapter shall not govern any amateur radio tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is less than 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator. 
(4)  Pre-existing towers and antennas. 
a.  Any tower or antenna which existed prior to May 24, 2012, that does not comply with the requirements herein shall be deemed legally nonconforming. Any enlargement of a pre-existing tower or tower facility, shall meet the requirements herein. Co-location of an antenna which does not increase the height of the tower or placement of additional equipment cabinets or buildings within the existing tower facility shall be allowed under the provisions of site plan requirements. 
b.  Replacement of a pre-existing legally nonconforming tower structure is permitted provided that all of the following apply: 
1.  The replacement tower is constructed within 25 feet of the existing tower and is not greater in height than the existing tower; 
2.  The lower being replaced is removed from site within 90 calendar days from the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the replacement tower; 
3.  Additional co-location opportunities on the new tower are made available with the minimum users required based on tower height; and 
4.  A site plan indicating the location of the replacement tower shall be required. 
(d)  General requirements. 
(1)  Towers and tower facilities shall be on a lot which meets the minimum requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. Towers and tower facilities may be located on a lot containing another use. Towers and tower facilities may occupy a leased area being a portion of the lot. 
(2)  Internal setbacks for towers, tower facilities, and anchors shall be measured to the boundaries of the lot, not the boundaries of the leased area. Setbacks for towers shall be measured from the base of the tower. 
a.  All towers shall be set back from all adjoining properties zoned residential or A-R a distance equal to the height of the tower plus ten feet. 
b.  All towers shall be set back from all adjoining properties zoned nonresidential a distance of 100 feet. 
c.  All towers shall be set back from the street right-of-way (existing or required, whichever is greater) a distance equal to the height of the tower. Street right-of-way is based on the classification of the street (see chapter 104, development regulations). 
d.  All towers, excluding alternative tower structures, shall be set back from any off-site residence a distance equal to three times the tower height or a minimum of 500 feet, whichever is greater. 
e.  Any tower facility and anchors for guyed towers shall comply with the minimum required setbacks and/or buffers of the applicable zoning district. 
f.  All towers shall be set back from all adjacent municipalities and counties a minimum distance of 1,000 feet. 
(3)  Towers located on the same lot as a private school or day care center shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from all facilities, excluding parking areas. This provision shall not apply to an alternative tower structure which is allowed in conjunction with a private school conditional use. 
(4)  All towers, excluding alternative tower structures, shall be structurally designed to accommodate the following minimum numbers of carriers based on height of the tower: 
a.  Up to 70 feet: one carrier; 
b.  Greater than 70 up to 120 feet: two carriers; 
c.  Greater than 120 feet up to 150 feet; three carriers; 
d.  Greater than 150 feet up to 180 feet: four carriers; 
e.  Greater than 180 feet up to 250 feet: five carriers; and 
f.  Greater than 250 feet: six carriers. 
(5)  All tower facilities, excluding tower facilities associated with alternative tower structures, shall be enclosed by a steel chain-link fence not less than eight feet in height, with slat inserts for screening. Access to the telecommunication tower shall be through a locking gate. In addition, a minimum of three strands of barbed wire shall be used along the top of the fence to prevent unauthorized access to the tower. 
(6)  A landscaped strip ten feet in width surrounding the perimeter of the tower facility shall be required. Landscaping shall be staggered double rows of evergreen trees a minimum of six feet in height when planted and spaced every ten feet on center. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of the required security fence. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large wooded lots, the zoning administrator may determine that natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient in lieu of the required landscaping. If existing vegetation is to remain and requested to count toward the landscaping requirements, all such information, including location, size, and type of vegetation shall be indicated on the site/landscape plan. These requirements shall not apply to a tower facility associated with an alternative tower structure. 
(7)  Maximum height for all towers and antennas is 500 feet. Tower height shall be measured from the natural grade of the ground at the location of the tower to the highest point of the tower, including any antenna. If minimal grading (elevation of one to two feet above natural grade) is required to level the ground for the tower base, tower height shall be measured from the finished grade approved by the county engineer. 
(8)  No signage, other than required safety signage, shall be placed on a tower structure or antenna. 
(9)  Aesthetics and lighting requirements. The following compatibility standards shall govern the aesthetics and lighting of any tower facility, including the installation of antennas on towers: 
a.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and equipment cabinets shall be architecturally compatible with, the color and texture of the supporting structure. Roof-mounted equipment cabinets shall be screened so as to make the equipment visually unobtrusive. 
c.  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. 
(10)  Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Prior to the abandonment of any tower or antenna, a copy of the notice of intent to abandon required by the FCC shall also be submitted to the county planning and zoning department. Any antenna or tower, including pre-existing towers and antennas, that is not in use for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(11)  Performance bond required. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a new tower structure, every applicant shall be required to deposit a performance bond with the county. The amount of the bond shall be equal to ten percent of the total construction cost or a minimum of $5,000.00, whichever is greater. Such bond shall be required upon compliance with all aspects of this section and shall be applicable to any assignee and owner of any permit granted hereunder, or any employee, contractor, subcontractor, or other party performing services in connection with any certificate of zoning compliance issued by the planning and zoning department. The required performance bond shall be released only upon demolition of the tower and restoration of the site to the pre-development conditions. The approved format of the bond is available in the planning and zoning department. 
(e)  Supplemental requirements. In addition to the general requirements above, the following supplemental requirements shall apply as specified below: 
(1)  Highway corridor. Locating towers along the following highway corridors is permitted as an overlay zone provided all the following requirements are met: 
a.  The state and county highways included within the highway corridor are SR 54, SR 85, SR 92, SR 74, SR 314, SR 279, SR 138, and 85 Connector. 
b.  The highway corridor tower overlay zone permits towers in any zoning district when located within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way on either side of the aforementioned roads in unincorporated areas of the county. 
c.  Towers in excess of 250 feet in height in the highway corridor shall require public hearings before the planning commission and board of commissioners. 
d.  All new towers, excluding alternative tower structures, located within the highway corridor that are 70 feet or greater in height shall not be located within one statute mile from any existing or planned towers (within any local government jurisdiction) that are 70 feet or greater in height. This minimum distance requirement shall not apply from existing governmentally owned towers where co-location is not permitted or from alternative tower structures. 
(2)  Outside of the highway corridor. 
a.  Outside of the highway corridor, a tower may be located only in the following zoning districts: 
1.  Manufacturing and heavy industrial district (M-2); 
2.  Light Industrial District (M-1); 
3.  Highway Commercial District (C-H); 
4.  Community Commercial District (C-C); 
5.  Planned Unit Development (PUD) excluding PUD-PRD; 
6.  Agricultural-Residential (A-R); and 
7.  R-70 Single-Family Residential District. 
b.  Towers in excess of 180 feet in height outside of the highway corridor shall require public hearings before the planning commission and board of commissioners. 
c.  All new towers, excluding alternative tower structures, located outside of the highway corridor that are 70 feet or greater in height shall not be located within 1½ statute miles from any existing or planned towers (within any local government jurisdiction) that are 70 feet or greater in height. This minimum distance requirement shall not apply from existing government-owned towers where co-location is not permitted or from alternative tower structures. 
(3)  Alternative tower structures. 
a.  The purpose of an alternative tower structure is to diminish, camouflage, or conceal the appearance of towers and antennas to reduce the visual impact on surrounding properties and streets. Depending on the nature of the site, the proposed alternative tower structure shall be appropriate and in character with its surroundings. For example, the use of a monopine is more fitting on a site with stands of mature trees; whereas, the use of a flag pole or light pole alternative tower structure is more suitable for the developed portion of a site. 
b.  Alternative tower structures shall comply with the general requirements herein with the exception of the setback requirements from off-site residences, security fencing requirements, landscape requirements, and tower separation requirements of both the highway corridor and outside of the highway corridor. Alternative tower structures shall be allowed in the highway corridor, outside of the highway corridor in the zoning districts listed herein, and in conjunction with the following existing conditional uses: 
1.  Church or other place of worship; 
2.  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
3.  Private school; and 
4.  Telephone, electric, or gas sub-station or other public utility facilities. 
c.  Alternative tower structures, in conjunction with the above listed conditional uses, shall meet the setbacks established in the general requirements or the conditional use setbacks, whichever is greater. 
d.  An alternative tower in excess of 120 feet in height shall require public hearings before the planning commission and board of commissioners. 
e.  A maximum of one alternative tower structure shall be allowed per lot. 
f.  The alternative tower structure shall match the visual simulation depiction and engineering detail and specification drawings from the manufacturer/supplier of the alternative tower structure specifically proposed for the site. 
g.  Design review and approval process: alternative tower structures shall go through a design review and approval process before the planning commission. The purpose of this design review and approval process is to determine that the alternative tower structure type is appropriate for the site and surrounding area and set requirements for the alternative tower structure type, placement on the site, equipment structures, fencing and landscaping. The design review and approval process application shall include the following: 
1.  An analysis of the nature and character of the site and how the alternative tower structure is appropriate in context to the site and the view from surrounding properties and streets; 
2.  A visual simulation consisting of color photographs of the proposed site with the existing view and with a depiction of the proposed tower, from a minimum of four distinct quadrants (generally north, cast, south, and west), to demonstrate the visual impact on surrounding properties and streets; and 
3.  Engineering detail and specification drawings from the manufacturer/supplier of the alternative tower structure specifically proposed for the site which shall indicate all applicable requirements herein. 
h.  Monopine towers. 
1.  Monopine towers shall maintain the natural conical appearance of a loblolly pine tree. Antennas shall be placed a minimum of five feet below the top of the tower, as measured from the highest point of the antenna to maintain said appearance. 
2.  Foliage shall be green in color and the tower shall be brown in color. The antennas shall be green to blend with the foliage and the foliage shall extend a minimum of one foot beyond the antennas. The foliage shall be UV resistant to reduce degradation and fading and constructed to withstand winds of 110 mph, certification of such shall be supplied with the application. Foliage shall be placed on the tower down to the height of the foliage of surrounding trees. The structure shall have sufficient limbs at the time of initial installation so that there is no gap between the existing canopy and the lower most limbs of the monopine. 
3.  The installation of the foliage on the monopine shall be installed prior to final inspections. Foliage on the monopine shall be maintained and/or replaced to the specifications established by the engineering detail and specification drawings from the manufacturer/supplier of the alternative tower structure specifically proposed for the site to retain the screening of the antennas. Upon notice from the county that the foliage is in need of maintenance and/or replacement, the tower owner shall have 90 days to make such repairs. 
i.  Flag pole and light pole alternative tower structures shall utilize internal antennas and slick stick design. Flag poles utilized as an alternative tower structure shall be exempt from article V, General provisions, structures permitted above the height limit. 
(f)  Public hearings required to reduce or waive requirements. 
(1)  Public hearings before the planning commission and board of commissioners are necessary to reduce or waive requirements for a proposed tower, antenna, or equipment cabinet or building that cannot comply with the general requirements, and/or supplemental requirements. The procedure for said public hearings shall follow the procedure for rezoning (see article VII of this chapter). Applicants shall apply for public hearings through the planning and zoning department. The application with deadline submittal and public hearing dates is available in the planning and zoning department. The application shall include the following: 
a.  A scaled concept plan, drawn on the signed/sealed survey, graphically indicating the lot and leased area, total tower height including antennas, type and design of the tower structure, the boundary of the tower facility, all applicable setbacks (both on-site and off-site), ingress/egress, landscaping areas, and zoning of the subject property and adjacent property; 
b.  Inventory of existing or planned tower sites. When a proposed tower cannot meet the separation requirements between towers, an inventory of existing or planned tower sites shall be required to sufficiently demonstrate that no existing or planned tower can accommodate the proposed antenna. Each applicant for a new tower shall contact the owners of all existing and planned tower sites, including those located within all adjacent municipalities and counties that are within the search area of the applicant's proposed tower location. The inventory shall be prepared by a radio frequency engineer. The inventory shall include the following information: 
1.  All tower owners and the number of carriers for each tower site; 
2.  The site location, total height, and design type of each tower; 
3.  Details of all existing and planned towers or structures located within the search area and the ability of such to meet the applicant's engineering requirements, including, but not limited to: sufficient height, structural support strength, and electromagnetic interference with antennas on the existing towers or structures; 
4.  Other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable; and 
5.  Letters of rejection for requests to co-locate on all existing and planned towers within the search area of the proposed tower. 
The county will engage an independent expert review of the inventory of existing and planned tower sites. If the actual cost to the county for independent expert review of the document is greater than the application fee, the applicant shall be billed for the difference and payment shall be made prior to the hearing before the board of commissioners. An inventory of existing and planned tower sites which is lacking of the information above, as determined by the independent expert, shall require a resubmittal of the lacking information and postpone the tower application to the next scheduled cycle of public hearings. The inventories of existing or planned tower sites are available as an information source to assist other applicants applying for approval under this chapter, provided; however, that the planning and zoning department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
c.  A balloon test shall be conducted prior to the public hearings. The balloon shall be flown for a minimum of four daylight hours from the location of the proposed tower, at the requested height. The application shall include the date and time of the balloon test and an alternative date, in case of inclement weather. The initial balloon test shall be held on a Saturday and the alternative date may be held on any day of the week. A sign announcing the dates of the balloon test shall be posted on the property by the county a minimum of five calendar days prior to the initial balloon test; and 
d.  The applicant shall submit a visual simulation, based on the balloon test, a minimum of seven calendar days prior to the planning commission public hearing. Failure to meet this deadline will postpone the tower application to the next scheduled cycle of public hearings. The visual simulation shall consist of color photographs of the proposed site with the existing view and with a depiction of the proposed tower, from a minimum of four distinct quadrants (generally north, east, south, and west), to demonstrate the visual impact on surrounding properties and streets. An affidavit certifying that the correct location and height of the tower were utilized in the balloon test shall be submitted with the visual simulation photographs. 
(2)  Factors considered in public hearing applications. The following factors shall be considered when evaluating a tower application: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Distance of the tower to residential structures and residential zoning district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Topography of the site and its effect on the efficiency of the tower in terms of coverage; 
e.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage and its effect on the efficiency of the tower in terms of coverage, as well as, its effect on the visual impact of the tower on surrounding properties and streets; 
f.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
g.  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
h.  The degree of the tower's compliance with the one statute mile separation (inside the highway corridor) or 1½ statute mile separation (outside the highway corridor). 
In granting its approval to waive or reduce requirements, the county, through the board of commissioners or its designee, may impose conditions that are necessary to minimize the adverse effect of a proposed tower or antenna on adjoining property. A site application shall be submitted within 60 days of the date of approval by the board of commissioners or the proposed tower will no longer be deemed a planned tower. 
(g)  Site application requirements. All applicants for new tower construction shall include the following: 
(1)  Completed application forms signed and notarized; 
(2)  Proof of ownership of the parent tract (latest recorded warranty deed); 
(3)  Site plan prepared by an engineer, architect, or landscape architect registered by the state; 
(4)  Landscape plans (see general requirements); 
(5)  Provide number of carriers based on maximum height of tower; 
(6)  A lease agreement with a minimum of one carrier. 
(7)  Site plan requirements. All tower applicants for new towers shall be required to submit a scaled site plan which complies with all applicable requirements of chapter 104, development regulations. Additional information indicated on the site plan shall include: 
a.  A signed/sealed survey by a land surveyor registered in the state of the parent tract, leased area, and ingress/egress easement, indicating the metes and bounds for each; 
b.  Total tower height including antennas; 
c.  Type and design of any tower facility, including location of equipment buildings or cabinets; 
d.  Distance from nearest off-site residences; 
e.  Fencing and gate details; 
f.  All applicable setbacks for the tower, tower facility, and anchors for guyed tower, as applicable; 
g.  Distance from existing and planned towers; 
h.  Zoning and acreage of parent tract; 
i.  Zoning of adjacent property; and 
j.  Other information necessary to assess compliance with this chapter. 
Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. Site plan submittal shall include completion of a tower application, signed and notarized by both the property owner and the tower company representative/agent. 
(h)  Revision to a site plan for the relocation of an existing tower. The relocation of an existing tower shall require the following: 
(1)  The relocation site shall be within the same lot as the existing tower. 
(2)  Submittal of a site plan that meets the specifications of subsection (g) of this section. 
(3)  Letters from all carriers on the existing tower agreeing to the relocation of the tower. 
(4)  The existing tower being replaced shall be removed from the site within 120 calendar days from the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the relocated tower. 
(i)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure or co-locating or replacing an antenna on an existing tower. The following scenarios shall not require submittal of a site application or site plan: 
(1)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure, so long as said installation adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure (including buildings, light/utility poles, water towers, or other freestanding nonresidential structures excluding signs and towers). 
(2)  Co-locating or replacing an antenna on any existing tower, so long as, said installation does not increase the height of the tower and/or exceed the maximum height of administrative tower approval for that location and complies with all applicable conditions of approval associated with the tower site. 
(3)  Enlargement of an existing equipment building, or placement of additional equipment cabinets or buildings at a tower site which does not require an enlargement of the existing tower facility. Prior to the co-location or replacement of any antenna on an existing tower, enlargement of an existing equipment building, or placement of additional equipment cabinets or buildings at a tower site, the applicant shall provide written notice to the zoning administrator. The notice shall include a depiction of the location, size, and configuration of such antenna on the existing tower and equipment location within the existing tower facility in reference to an existing site plan and a copy of the FCC license. A certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued by the zoning administrator upon satisfaction of all applicable requirements, and any applicable building permits/inspections shall be required subsequent to the issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance. 
(j)  Site application timeframes. An application shall not be accepted for review unless, at minimum, it includes completed application forms (signed and notarized), proof of ownership of the parent tract (latest recorded warranty deed) and site plan prepared (sealed and signed) by an engineer, architect or landscape architect registered by the state. The zoning administrator has 30 days to determine if an application is complete. Upon notice that an application is incomplete, the applicant has 30 days to submit all necessary information to complete the application. Failure to complete the application in this timeframe shall result in an automatic withdrawal of the application and the proposed tower will no longer be deemed a planned tower and a site application shall not be submitted for the same property for 60 days. The county shall act on applications for co-locations within 90 days and all other applications within 150 days. If the zoning administrator requests additional information within the 30-day review period as mentioned above, the time it takes the applicant to respond will not count towards the 90- or 150-day timeframe limits. 
(k)  FAA determination. Prior to the approval and issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance, a copy of a FAA determination including "Does Not Exceed," "Exceeds But Okay," or "Determination of No Hazard" shall be submitted within the 90- or 150-day timeframe limits, as applicable. Failure to submit the determination in these timeframes shall result in an automatic withdrawal of the application, and the proposed tower will no longer be deemed a planned tower, and a site application shall not be submitted for the same property for 60 days. Any tower that receives a "Determination of Hazard" shall be denied. 
(l)  FCC license. Prior to the approval and issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance, a copy of the FCC license shall be submitted within the 90- or 150-day timeframe limits, as applicable. Failure to submit the copy of FCC license in these timeframes shall result in an automatic withdrawal of the application, and the proposed tower will no longer be deemed a planned tower, and a site application shall not be submitted for the same property for 60 days. 
(m)  Private airport or heliport zone. A one statute mile zone is established around any private airport or heliport that is registered with the FAA to prevent a hazard to aviation operations. Since the FAA does not make a determination for a private airport or heliport, a supplemental Federal Aviation Regulations Part 77/FAA Form 7460 study and a "No Hazard" letter prepared by a firm on the GDOT prequalified 1.08 Airport Master Planning list shall be submitted within the 90- or 150-day timeframe limits for an antenna or a tower that is proposed within this zone, as applicable. Any tower that creates a hazard for a private airport or heliport shall be denied. 
(n)  Tower approval expiration. Approval of a site application by the applicable departments for a tower shall expire 12 months from the date of approval and will no longer be deemed a planned tower, unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the tower or the building permit remains active. 
(Code 1992, § 20-5-45; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 3, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2013-20, § 2, 11-14-2013) 
Secs. 110-106—110-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICT USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 110-124. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to delineate the uses and requirements of the established zoning districts. 
(Code 1992, ch. 20, art. VI; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 3, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 110-125. - A-R, Agricultural-Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures having a very low density single-family residential and agricultural character and designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot, residential development and those uses which are incompatible with such a residential and agricultural environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the A-R zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); 
(3)  Growing of crops and the on-premises sale of produce and agricultural products, provided 50 percent of the produce/products sold shall be grown on-premises; 
(4)  Plant nurseries and greenhouses (no sales of related garden supplies); and 
(5)  Raising of livestock; aquaculture, including pay fishing; apiary (all beehives shall comply with the required setbacks); and the sale thereof. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the A-R zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article VII of this chapter. Conditional uses, nonconformances, transportation corridor overlay zone, and commercial development standards are met: 
(1)  Aircraft landing area; 
(2)  Animal hospital, kennel or veterinary clinic; 
(3)  A-R bed and breakfast inn; 
(4)  A-R wedding/event facility; 
(5)  Cemetery; 
(6)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(7)  Colleges and university, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and/or stadium; 
(8)  Commercial driving range and related accessories; 
(9)  Child care facility; 
(10)  Deer processing facility. 
(11)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(12)  Farm outbuildings, including horse stables, auxiliary structures, and greenhouses (permanent or temporary); 
(13)  Golf course (minimum 18-hole regulation) and related accessories; 
(14)  Home occupation; 
(15)  Horse show, rodeo, carnival, and/or community fair; 
(16)  Hospital; 
(17)  Kennel (see animal hospital, kennel, and/or veterinary clinic); 
(18)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium; 
(19)  Processing, packaging, or handling of perishable agricultural products (i.e. fruits and vegetables) which are grown on premises; 
(20)  Recreation centers and similar institutions owned by nonprofit organizations as so registered with the state secretary of state office; 
(21)  Religious tent meeting; and 
(22)  Shooting range, outdoor. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the A-R zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area: 217,800 square feet (five acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 250 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 1,200 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Collector: 100 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 75 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 75 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 50 feet. 
(7)  a.  35 feet as defined in article III of this chapter. 
b.  The limitation on height shall not apply to agricultural structures such as storage barns, silos, or other types of structure not normally designed for human occupation except that when an agricultural structure exceeds the maximum building height the minimum distance from property lines to any building shall be increased one foot for every two feet or part thereof of building height over 35 feet. 
(e)  Special regulations. Prior to the issuance of development and/or building permits, a site plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and approved by the appropriate county officials. This requirement shall apply to all permitted uses and conditional uses allowed in the AR zoning district except single-family dwellings; accessory buildings and uses; growing crops and the on-premises sale of produce at agricultural stands of 100 square feet or less of floor area; growing and seasonal sale of Christmas trees; plant nursery, landscape tree farm, or greenhouse operations existing prior to the effective date of June 26, 2003; and the raising and/or selling of livestock. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-1; Ord. of 7-28-2011; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 4, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2014-19, § 6,7, 12-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 2, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-12, § 3, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 2, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 110-126. - C-S, Conservation Subdivision District. 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of this section is to create a residential conservation subdivision procedure. A conservation subdivision is a residential subdivision where lots arc reduced in size and clustered to protect the natural attributes of the site and provide open space. This open space will be protected from development in perpetuity and will be utilized to protect water quality, water bodies, wetlands, riparian buffers, woodlands, archaeological resources, historic resources, agricultural areas and scenic areas. This open space will also provide flood protection, a reduction in soil erosion and be utilized for recreation. The aforementioned attributes should be taken into consideration in the design of the subdivision. The first step in designing a conservation subdivision is to locate and delineate the area and natural attributes to be preserved. The residential lots are located outside of this area. In addition, the clustering of lots can result in lower infrastructure costs both for installation and maintenance. The creation of the conservation subdivision (C-S) zoning district is to assist the county in fulfilling the goal of permanently protecting greenspace in the county. The conservation subdivision zoning district is intended for those areas designated low density residential (one unit/one to two acres) and rural residential (one unit/two to three acres) on the county land use plan map. 
(b)  Rezoning requirements. The following is required for a rezoning petition for the conservation subdivision zoning district in addition to what is normally required for a rezoning petition: 
(1)  A petition for the conservation subdivision zoning district will require a yield plan. The number of lots allowed in a conservation subdivision will be determined by a yield plan which is a conventional subdivision design based on the dimensional requirements of the R-70 zoning district. This concept is referred to as neutral density. The yield plan shall contain the check list requirements available in the office of the zoning administrator. The rezoning petition shall not be filed with the planning and zoning department until the yield plan has been approved by the applicable departments. 
(2)  A development plan shall be required for the rezoning petition. The development plan, as approved, shall establish the layout and uses planned for the development. Any change in the approved development plan, which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, shall be reviewed and approved by the board of commissioners upon the recommendation of the planning commission. A petition for a revision of the development plan shall be supported by a written statement as to why the revisions are necessary. Each conservation subdivision shall consist of two areas: the residential area and the conservation area. The conservation area will consist of the environmentally sensitive areas including waterways, water bodies, watershed protection areas, floodplains, wetlands, riparian buffers and woodlands, as well as agricultural areas, existing agricultural structures and historical structures. The conservation area will remain in a natural and undisturbed state with minimal improvements. In addition to what is normally required on the development plan, the development plan shall include the following: 
a.  A delineation of the attributes (see subsection (a) of this section) of the site which will be preserved; 
b.  A delineation of the residential area and the conservation area including the acreage within each area; 
c.  Uses and improvements planned for the conservation area with the acreage devoted to each; and 
d.  Indicate and label existing structures to remain. 
(c)  Uses permitted within the residential area of a conservation subdivision. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the residential area of the C-S zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; and 
(2)  Residential accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter). 
(d)  Conditional uses permitted within the residential area of a conservation subdivision. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the residential area of C-S zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Home occupation; 
(2)  Horse quarters; and 
(3)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas. 
(e)  Uses permitted within the conservation area of a conservation subdivision. The following permitted uses and structures shall be allowed in the conservation area of the C-S zoning district: 
(1)  Trails and paths (impervious trails and paths are limited to five percent of the conservation area and trails and paths shall comply with the watershed protection ordinance); 
(2)  Picnic areas which can include picnic tables, grills, benches, playground equipment (swing sets, slides, etc.). Picnic areas and one covered picnic pavilion are required to be set back 50 feet from any residential property line and are limited to five percent of the conservation area. The covered picnic pavilion shall be limited to a maximum of 900 square feet; 
(3)  Community gardens for the use of the residents of the subdivision only; 
(4)  The maintenance of existing orchards and groves including the harvesting of fruit and nuts; 
(5)  The maintenance of existing pastures including the harvesting of hay; and 
(6)  The maintenance of existing farm fields used for row crops including the harvesting of crops. Said fields shall be outside of watershed protection areas as described in chapter 104, article VII. All areas within a watershed protection area can no longer be used for row crops. The area within a watershed protection area could be used in accordance with subsection (e)(5) of this section. 
(f)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements within the residential area in the C-S zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 
a.  Where central sanitary sewage or central water distribution system is provided: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where neither a central sanitary sewage nor a central water distribution system is provided: 65,340 square feet (1½ acres). 
(2)  Lot width per dwelling unit: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 150 feet. 
2.  Collector: 150 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 125 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 2,100 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Collector: 75 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 30 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 20 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(g)  Use of existing structure. The preservation of existing historic residential structures listed in the architectural survey of the county is encouraged as these structures can be used as residences or community facilities for the subdivision. Existing residential structures used for a community facility shall meet all applicable building and safety codes and will be regulated as a conditional use under developed residential recreational/amenity areas. The preservation of existing agricultural structures is also encouraged as they will assist in maintaining a rural character. The use of these residential and agricultural structures will be subject to the approval of the zoning board of appeals in terms of nonconformance with this zoning district. 
(h)  Conservation area requirements. The conservation area of the subdivision shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Ownership. Title to the conservation area shall be conveyed to one of the following entities: 
a.  A homeowners' association that has been established according to the Georgia Property Owners' Association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq.); or 
b.  A conservation trust organization approved by the county board of commissioners; or 
c.  The county board of commissioners (for conservation areas with no structures only). 
(2)  Size. Each development eligible for treatment as a conservation subdivision shall place at least 40 percent of the total subject property into the conservation area notwithstanding the yield plan. This area shall be described by metes and bounds. 
(3)  Permanent protection. Each conservation area regardless of ownership shall have a conservation casement as approved by the county attorney filed in the records of the county clerk of superior court. The easement shall reserve the conservation area to conservation uses as defined herein in perpetuity. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-2; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-127. - EST, Estate Residential District. 
(a)  Purpose. An estate residential subdivision is a residential subdivision where lots are reduced in size and clustered to provide conservation area. Each estate residential subdivision will consist of two areas, a residential area and a conservation area. The conservation area will be protected from development in perpetuity by an easement or deed restriction. The conservation area will be utilized for approved recreation for the residents of the subdivision. The clustering of lots can result in lower infrastructure costs both for installation and maintenance. The estate residential zoning district is intended for those areas designated agricultural-residential (one unit/five acres) on the county land use plan map. The creation of the EST Estate Residential District is to assist the county in permanently protecting greenspace in the county. 
(b)  Rezoning requirements. The following is required for a rezoning petition for the estate residential zoning district in addition to what is normally required for a rezoning petition: 
(1)  A petition for the estate residential zoning district will require a yield plan. The number of lots allowed in an estate residential zoning district will be determined by a yield plan which is a conventional subdivision design based on the dimensional requirements of the A-R zoning district. This concept is referred to as neutral density. The yield plan shall contain the checklist requirements available in the office of the zoning administrator. The rezoning petition shall not be filed with the planning and zoning department until the yield plan has been approved by the applicable departments. 
(2)  A development plan shall be required for the rezoning petition. The development plan, as approved, shall establish the layout and uses planned for the development. Any change in the approved development plan, which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, shall be reviewed and approved by the board of commissioners upon the recommendation of the planning commission. A petition for a revision of the development plan shall be supported by a written statement as to why the revisions are necessary. Each EST subdivision shall consist of two areas: the residential area and the conservation area. The conservation area will consist of the environmentally sensitive areas, including waterways, water bodies, watershed protection areas, floodplains, wetlands, riparian buffers and woodlands, as well as, agricultural areas existing agricultural structures and historical structures. The conservation area will remain in a natural and undisturbed state with minimal improvements. In addition to what is normally required on the development plan, the development plan shall include the following: 
a.  A delineation of the attributes (see subsection (a) of this section) of the site which will be preserved; 
b.  A delineation of the residential area and the conservation area including the approximate acreage within each area; 
c.  Uses and improvements planned for the conservation area with the acreage devoted to each; and 
d.  Indicate and label existing structures to remain. 
(c)  Rezoning requirements. The following is required for a rezoning petition for the conservation subdivision zoning district in addition to what is normally required for a rezoning petition: 
(1)  A petition for the conservation subdivision zoning district will require a yield plan. The number of lots allowed in a conservation subdivision will be determined by a yield plan which is a conventional subdivision design based on the dimensional requirements of the R-70 zoning district. This concept is referred to as neutral density. The yield plan shall contain the check list requirements available in the office of the zoning administrator. Staff analysis of the yield plan will add an additional month to the normal rezoning schedule. The rezoning petition shall not be filed with the planning and zoning department until the yield plan has been approved by the applicable departments. 
(2)  A development plan shall be required for the rezoning petition. The development plan, as approved, shall establish the layout and uses planned for the development. Any change in the approved development plan, which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, shall be reviewed and approved by the board of commissioners upon the recommendation of the planning commission. A petition for a revision of the development plan shall be supported by a written statement as to why the revisions are necessary. Each conservation subdivision shall consist of two areas: the residential area and the conservation area. The conservation area will consist of the environmentally sensitive areas including waterways, water bodies, watershed protection areas, floodplains, wetlands, riparian buffers and woodlands, as well as agricultural areas, existing agricultural structures and historical structures. The conservation area will remain in a natural and undisturbed state with minimal improvements and will be regulated in a manner consistent with the Georgia Greenspace Program requirements to the greatest degree possible. In addition to what is normally required on the development plan, the development plan shall include the following: 
a.  A delineation of the attributes (see subsection (a) of this section) of the site which will be preserved; 
b.  A delineation of the residential area and the conservation area, including the acreage within each area; 
c.  Uses and improvements planned for the conservation area with the acreage devoted to each; and 
d.  Indicate and label existing structures to remain. 
(d)  Uses permitted within the residential area of an estate residential subdivision. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the residential area of the estate residential zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; and 
(2)  Residential accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter). 
(e)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the residential area of EST zoning district, provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(2)  Home occupation; and 
(3)  Horse quarters. 
(f)  Uses permitted within the conservation area of an estate residential subdivision. The following permitted uses and structures shall be allowed in the conservation area of the estate residential zoning district: 
(1)  Trails and paths (impervious trails and paths are limited to five percent of the conservation area and trails and paths shall comply with chapter 104, article VII); 
(2)  Picnic areas which can include picnic tables, grills, benches, playground equipment (swing sets, slides, etc.). Picnic areas and one covered picnic pavilion are required to be setback 50 feet from any residential property line and are limited to five percent of the conservation area. The covered picnic pavilion shall not exceed a maximum of 900 square feet; 
(3)  Community gardens for the use of the residents of the subdivision only; 
(4)  The maintenance of existing orchards and groves including the harvesting of fruit and nuts; 
(5)  The maintenance of existing pastures including the harvesting of hay; and 
(6)  The maintenance of existing farm fields used for row crops including the harvesting of crops. Said fields shall be outside of watershed protection areas as described in chapter 104, article VII. All areas within a watershed protection area can no longer be used for row crops. The area within a watershed protection area could be used in accordance with subsection (f)(5) of this section. 
(g)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements within the residential area in the estate residential zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 108,900 square feet (2.5 acres). 
(2)  Lot width per dwelling unit: 160 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 2,500 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Collector: 75 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(h)  Use of existing structure. The preservation of existing historic residential structures listed in the architectural Survey of the county is encouraged as these structures can be used as residences or community facilities for the subdivision. Existing residential structures used for a community facility shall meet all applicable building and safety codes and will be regulated as a conditional use under developed residential recreational/amenity areas. The preservation of existing agricultural structures is also encouraged as they will assist in maintaining a rural character. The use of these residential and agricultural structures will be subject to the approval of the zoning board of appeals in terms of nonconformance with this zoning district. 
(i)  Conservation area requirements. The conservation area of the subdivision shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Ownership. Title to the conservation area shall be conveyed to one of the following entities: 
a.  A homeowners' association that has been established according to the Georgia Property Owners' Association Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-220 et seq.); 
b.  A conservation trust organization approved by the county board of commissioners; or 
c.  The county board of commissioners (for conservation areas with no structures only). 
(2)  Size. A minimum of 40 percent of the total subject property shall be set aside in conservation area. The conservation area described in its entirety by metes and bounds, total acreage and percentage of total subject property shall be submitted to the county zoning department in the final plat or minor subdivision plat stage prior to final plat or minor subdivision plat approval. 
(3)  Permanent protection. Each conservation area regardless of ownership shall have a casement or deed restriction as approved by the county attorney filed in the records of the county clerk of superior court. The easement or deed restriction shall reserve the conservation area to uses as defined herein in perpetuity. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-3; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-128. - R-85, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures, having a low density single-family character and is designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the R-85 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-85 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the R-85 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 130,680 square feet (three acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 3,000 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Collector: 75 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 50 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-4; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-129. - R-80, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures having a very low density single-family residential character and designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the R-80 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-80 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the R-80 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling: 130,680 square feet (three acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 175 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 2,500 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 75 feet. 
2.  Collector: 75 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 30 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-5; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-130. - R-78, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures, having a low density single-family character and is designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the R-78 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-78 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the R-78 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 87,120 square feet (two acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 3,000 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Collector: 75 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-6; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-131. - R-75, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures, having a low density single-family character and is designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the R-75 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-75 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the R-75 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 87,120 square feet (two acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 2,500 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Collector: 75 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-7; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-132. - R-72, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures having a low density single-family residential character and designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the R-72 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-72 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the R-72 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 87,120 square feet (two acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 175 feet. 
2.  Collector: 175 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 150 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 2,100 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 75 feet. 
2.  Collector: 75 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-8; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-133. - R-70, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures having a low density single-family residential character and designed to protect against the depreciating effects of excessive densities and development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the R-70 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-70 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the R-70 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 87,120 square feet (two acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 175 feet. 
2.  Collector: 175 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 150 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 1,500 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 75 feet. 
2.  Collector: 75 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-9; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-134. - R-55, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures having a low density single-family character and is designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the R-55 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-55 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the R-55 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 
a.  Where central sanitary sewage or central water distribution system is provided: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where neither a central sanitary sewage nor a central water distribution system is provided: 65,340 square feet (1.5 acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 150 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 2,500 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Collector: 75 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 50 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-10; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-135. - R-50, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures having a low density single-family residential character and designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the R-50 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-50 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the R-50 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 
a.  Where central sanitary sewage or central water distribution system is provided: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where neither a central sanitary sewage nor a central water distribution system is provided: 65,340 square feet (1.5 acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 150 feet. 
2.  Collector: 150 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 125 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 2,100 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Collector: 75 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 50 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 30 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 20 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-11; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-136. - R-45, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures having a low density single-family residential character and designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the R-45 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-45 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the R-45 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 
a.  Where central sanitary sewage or central water distribution system is provided: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where neither a central sanitary nor central water distribution system is provided: 65,340 square feet (1.5 acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 1,800 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 60 feet. 
2.  Collector: 60 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 40 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 40 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 20 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-12; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-137. - R-40, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures in the county, having a low density single-family residential character and is designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the R-40 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-40 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements within the R-40 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 
a.  Where central sanitary sewage or central water distribution systems are provided: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where neither a central sanitary sewage nor a central water distribution system is provided: 65,340 square feet (1.5 acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 150 feet. 
2.  Collector: 150 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 125 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 1,500 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 60 feet. 
2.  Collector: 60 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 40 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 30 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 15 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-13; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-138. - R-20, Single-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures having a medium density single-family residential character and designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the R-20 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the R-20 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; 
(4)  Horse quarters; and 
(5)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the R-20 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling unit: 
a.  Where a central sanitary sewage or a central water distribution system is provided: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where neither a central sanitary sewage nor a central water distribution system is provided: 65,340 square feet (1.5 acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 150 feet. 
2.  Collector: 150 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 125 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 1,200 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 60 feet. 
2.  Collector: 60 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 40 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 30 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 15 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-14; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-139. - DR-15, One- and Two-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures having a high density one and two-family residential character and designed to protect against the depreciating effects of small lot development and those uses incompatible with such a residential environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the DR-15 zoning district: 
(1)  Single-family dwelling; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); 
(3)  Growing crops, gardens; and 
(4)  Two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the DR-15 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(2)  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas; 
(3)  Home occupation; and 
(4)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the DR-15 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area per dwelling: 
a.  Single-family or two-family dwelling with central sanitary sewage or central water distribution system: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where neither a central sanitary sewage nor a central water distribution system is provided: 65,340 square feet (1.5 acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 125 feet. 
2.  Collector: 125 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 100 feet. 
(3)  Floor area: 
a.  Single-family dwelling: 1,200 square feet. 
b.  Two-family dwelling: 1,800 square feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 50 feet. 
2.  Collector: 45 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 40 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 30 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 10 feet. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(8)  Off-street parking: Parking spaces for three motor vehicles per dwelling unit. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-15; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-140. - RMF, Multi-Family Residential District. 
(a)  Description of district. The intent of the RMF district is to provide locations in which high density residential uses can take place. The RMF district is designed to promote desirable housing conditions for high density residential uses, while minimizing the negative impacts associated with said uses on the county's roads, schools, and water supply. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses and structures shall be allowed in the RMF zoning district: 
(1)  Apartments; and 
(2)  Townhouses. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional use shall be allowed in the RMF zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: home occupation. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the RMF zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Maximum requirements per development: 
a.  Maximum density: five units per gross acre. 
b.  Maximum number of dwelling units per development: 160. 
(2)  Minimum requirements for a development: 
a.  Site area: five acres 
b.  Site frontage: 50 feel of immediate frontage on at least one street which has been identified as an arterial as specified by the county thoroughfare plan. 
c.  Peripheral yard requirements: 
1.  Front yard: 
(i)  Major thoroughfare: 
A.  State-numbered route: 150 feet. 
B.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
C.  Collector: 80 feet. 
(ii)  Minor thoroughfare: 60 feet. 
2.  Side yard: 40 feet. 
3.  Rear yard: 40 feet. 
(3)  Lot coverage and minimum open space. 
a.  No more than 40 percent of any development site may be covered with buildings, structures or parking areas. Driveways, sidewalks, covered patios, recreation facilities, and swimming pools shall not be computed as lot coverage. 
b.  Private, usable open space, such as balconies, sundecks or patios shall be provided contiguous to each dwelling unit. The area of such open space shall not be less than ten percent of the floor area of the unit served except that balconies shall not be less than five percent. 
c.  The minimum distance between buildings, including any projections, shall not be less than 50 feet. 
(4)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(5)  Floor area: 
a.  One bedroom: 600 square feet. 
b.  Two bedroom: 850 square feet. 
c.  Three bedroom: 1,200 square feet. 
(6)  Special location and spatial requirements: 
a.  No more than eight dwelling units shall compose a single building. 
b.  Within a townhouse development, no more than three consecutive dwelling units which form a part of a single building shall have the same front setback or roof line. Such setback and roof line shall be varied by a minimum of 16 inches. 
c.  All exterior refuse areas or outside storage shall be screened in accordance with article III of this chapter. 
d.  Recreation facilities, including swimming pools, and common facilities shall not be located within 150 feet of any single-family residential district, unless the recreational facility is screened from view of the single-family district by a principal dwelling or accessory building which exceeds the length of the recreational facility by 20 feet in each direction. 
e.  At least 15 percent of the total land area shall be reserved for recreation available to all residents of the development. At a minimum, recreation areas shall include the following: 
1.  One swimming pool at least 1,000 square feet; 
2.  Two standard tennis courts; 
3.  One children's playground; and 
4.  20 off-street parking spaces. 
f.  Parking areas shall not be located within the minimum required peripheral front, side, or rear yards of the development. A minimum of three spaces are required per dwelling unit. 
(7)  Circulation system requirements. 
a.  Principal access drives serving more than ten dwelling units shall be constructed to the county public street standards. 
b.  Parking areas shall be connected to living units by paved walkways. Sidewalks may be required where necessary for safe pedestrian circulation as determined by the county engineer. 
(8)  Landscape areas and buffers. If a rear or side peripheral yard adjoins a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be provided within the required setback. The front peripheral yard shall be landscaped in accordance with chapter 104. 
(9)  Subdivisions. Where developments are designed or otherwise proposed such that each dwelling therein is to be sold along with the land on which it sits and any yards, such divisions shall comply with chapter 104, article VII. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-16; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-141. - MHP, Manufactured Home Park District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures for purpose of providing the proper development of manufactured home parks. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the MHP zoning district: 
(1)  Manufactured home park; 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); 
(3)  Office trailer; and 
(4)  Growing crops, gardens. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the MHP zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Child care facility; and 
(2)  Home occupation. 
(d)  Special regulations. The following regulations shall apply to the MHP zoning district in addition to any other applicable regulations herein: 
(1)  Development plan: The applicant shall file a petition with the zoning administrator for approval of a manufactured home park. This application shall be supported by six copies of a written summary of the development planned, known as a letter of intent, which shall describe the proposed development in detail and a site plan. The site plan and letter of intent shall present the following information: 
a.  A draft of the proposed rules and regulations which shall be established and enforced by the management of the manufactured home park; 
b.  Existing topographic conditions, including where necessary, contour intervals of not less than two feet based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet; 
c.  The existing and proposed land uses and the approximate location of all buildings and structures; 
d.  The location of existing and proposed streets and parking areas; 
e.  A legal description of the subject property; 
f.  Typical elevation drawings, indicating general architectural style and building exterior materials, if possible, of all permanent buildings and structures to be constructed on the premises; 
g.  A statement of the present ownership of all land within the proposed development; 
h.  A summary of acres, dwelling units, and gross density, as well as a statement of the number of acres devoted to buffer areas, and green belts or other amenities, such as lakes, etc.; 
i.  A description of the phases under which construction shall be programmed, depicting the geographical limits of each phase of construction; and 
j.  Specific plans for provision of central water and central sanitary sewage systems. 
(2)  Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a formal application for a manufactured home park the applicant is required to appear before the planning commission in a public hearing in order to provide for review of the general character of the proposed manufactured home park development (on the basis of a tentative land use sketch, if available), and to obtain information on projected programs or improvements, as well as county requirements. 
(3)  Approval. An application for approval of a manufactured home park will be considered administratively as a petition for rezoning, and will be subject to the procedures established in this chapter. After review and public hearing, the board of commissioners may disapprove, approve or approve with modifications to the site plan and/or letter of intent, after receiving the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(4)  Use regulations. In addition to the above listed permitted uses, the buildings or land shall only be used as follows: 
a.  Parking and inhabiting of manufactured homes in parks with a minimum of 50 spaces, provided all facilities shown on the site plan submitted to and approved by the board of commissioners are installed and maintained according to the schedule submitted with the site plan and stipulations of the letter of intent; 
b.  Recreation facilities, office and/or maintenance and storage buildings, for residents of the manufactured home park only. No repair facilities of any type including automobile repair shall be permitted; 
c.  Convenience food stores with a maximum of 1,500 square feet including inside and outside storage, as an accessory to a manufactured home park as designated on an approved site plan; 
d.  Laundromat, including coin operated dry cleaning, as an accessory to a manufactured home park as designated on an approved site plan, upon approval by the county health department; 
e.  The sale or display of a manufactured home, provided each such manufactured home offered for sale shall be located on its individual lot and connected to all utilities. 
(5)  Perimeter requirements. 
a.  A buffer zone having a minimum width of 150 feet shall be provided so as to provide a continuous buffer along all side and rear yards of any manufactured home park. 
b.  A buffer zone having a minimum depth of 100 feet shall extend along the entire frontage of any manufactured home park. 
c.  Where the existing foliage in the buffer zones is not sufficient to provide and maintain an evergreen visual screen between adjacent properties, landscaping and planting shall be required sufficient to provide visual separation and privacy between a manufactured home park and adjacent properties and/or streets. 
(6)  Storage requirements. Each manufactured home park shall provide an area for the storage of boats, travel trailers and/or other vehicles which shall be at least ten percent of the gross area of the manufactured home park, provided, however, said ten percent is not located in a flood hazard area. 
(7)  Circulation system. Each manufactured home park shall have a minimum 200 feet of frontage and only access an arterial thoroughfare. 
a.  Each manufactured home park over 20 acres in size shall have a minimum of two access streets or drives to provide ingress and egress for vehicular traffic. 
b.  Provision shall be made for safe, all-weather pedestrian movement within the development. 
(8)  Night lighting. Streets, pedestrian walkways and parking areas shall be adequately lighted. 
(9)  Garbage refuse collection facilities. Garbage refuse collection shall be provided by the manufactured home park owner. 
(10)  Utilities. Each manufactured home shall be connected with water and sanitary facilities in a manner approved by the county health department and in compliance with the regulations of the county water system. Each manufactured home shall be served by electricity and gas. All utilities shall be placed underground. 
(11)  Recreation facilities. A minimum of ten percent of the gross acreage of the manufactured home park shall be provided for common facilities, open space, and recreation for the residents of the manufactured home park. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the MHP zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  No manufactured home park shall be constructed or maintained on a lot consisting of a total area of less than ten acres. 
(2)  Each manufactured home shall be located on a separate lot as follows: 
a.  Each lot shall have a minimum width of 60 feet. 
b.  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 6,000 square feet. 
c.  Each lot shall provide a paved concrete or all-weather patio area having a minimum area of 300 square feet. 
(3)  Manufactured home citing requirements. Within 60 days of the citing of a manufactured home on its lot, the undercarriage of the manufactured home shall be concealed from view, through the use of permanent nonflammable construction materials. No manufactured home or other structure shall be located within: 
a.  Four feet of its individual lot line; or 
b.  15 feet of any street or drive within the manufactured home park. 
(4)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-17; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-142. - O-I, Office-Institutional District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures having office and institutional uses which are compatible with or provide a transition into low-intensity land uses. 
(b)  Permitted principal uses and structures. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the O-I zoning district: 
(1)  Office; 
(2)  Art gallery; 
(3)  Bank and/or financial institution; 
(4)  College and/or university, including classrooms and/or administration only; 
(5)  Educational/instructional/tutorial facilities, including, but not limited to: academic, art, computer, dance, driving and/or DUI, martial arts, music, professional/business/trade, and similar facilities; 
(6)  Health club and/or fitness center; 
(7)  Hotel; 
(8)  Insurance carrier, agent, and/or broker; 
(9)  Laboratory, medical, and/or dental; 
(10)  Legal services; 
(11)  Massage therapy (see chapter 8); 
(12)  Medical/dental office (human treatment); 
(13)  Military recruiting office; 
(14)  Museum; 
(15)  Performing arts theater; 
(16)  Private school, including classrooms and/or administration only; 
(17)  Professional services, including, but not limited to: accounting; advertising and marketing research services; architectural firms; bookkeeping, tax preparation; brokerage firms; computer system software design; consulting services; engineering firms; internet and web hosting firms; payroll services; photographic services; research services; specialized design services; telemarketing; and translation and interpretation services; and 
(18)  Real estate agent and/or broker. 
(c)  Permitted principal uses and structures for office parks with at least 100,000 square feet of floor area. In an office park having at least 100,000 square feet of floor area, the following retail and service uses shall be permitted as long as collectively such uses comprise no more than ten percent of the total floor area, are located in a building in which office uses comprise at least 50 percent of the floor area and have no exterior advertising display: 
(1)  Beauty shop and/or barbershop; 
(2)  Blueprinting; 
(3)  Cafeteria; 
(4)  Commercial art and/or drafting service; 
(5)  Day care facility; 
(6)  Delivery and/or messenger service; 
(7)  Drug store; 
(8)  Florist; 
(9)  Gift shop; 
(10)  Photocopying and/or reproduction; 
(11)  Restaurant (limited to five percent of total floor area of office park and included in overall ten percent limitation); 
(12)  Stenographic and/or typing service; 
(13)  Teleconferencing center; and 
(14)  Travel agency and/or ticket office. 
(d)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the O-I zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Adult day care facility; 
(2)  Animal hospital and/or veterinary clinic (with no animal boarding or outdoor runs); 
(3)  Bed and breakfast inn; 
(4)  Care home, convalescent center, and/or nursing home; 
(5)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(6)  College and/or university, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium; 
(7)  Child care facility; 
(8)  Home occupation; 
(9)  Hospital; 
(10)  Non-emergency medical transport service; 
(11)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium; 
(12)  Religious tent meeting; and 
(13)  Single-family residence and accessory structures and/or uses (see article III of this chapter). 
(e)  Auxiliary conditional uses for an office building with a minimum of 10,000 square feet of floor area. The following auxiliary permitted uses shall be allowed within the area with a land use designation of office as indicated on the county future land use plan map defined as that area north of SR 54 West, east of Tyrone Road, and west of Sandy Creek Road. This area shall also be known as the county community hospital district (hospital district). Such uses will support and shall be compatible with the county community hospital, the medical industry, and the development of the office and institutional uses planned for this area. 
(1)  Uses. The following auxiliary conditional uses shall be allowed in the O-I zoning district: 
a.  Durable medical and rehabilitation equipment sales/rental (i.e., wheelchairs, crutches, etc.); 
b.  Pharmaceutical sales (for the purpose of filling prescriptions only); 
c.  Counter service restaurants, including but not limited to: a bakery, cafe, coffee shop, or deli. No drive-through, drive-in, or freestanding facilities shall be allowed; 
d.  Optical care center to include prescription eyeglass/contact lens sales; 
e.  Gift shop for the sale of items usually associated with a medical condition and/or hospital stay (i.e., get well cards, etc.); and 
f.  Floral sales. 
(2)  Auxiliary conditional use limitations. 
a.  These auxiliary conditional uses shall be allowed in an office building with a minimum of 10,000 square feet and such uses shall comprise no more than a total of 20 percent of the total floor area of the building and shall occupy space on the first floor of the building. 
b.  Multiple uses may be permitted concurrently, but may not exceed the 20 percent limitation. 
(3)  Architectural requirements. 
a.  Architecture shall conform to the existing hospital/medical office development. The architectural standards of the transportation corridor overlay zone shall not apply. 
b.  Elevation drawings shall be submitted as part of site plan approval. 
(f)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the O-I zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area: 
a.  Where a central water distribution system is provided: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where central sanitary sewage and central water distribution systems are provided: 21,780 square feet (0.50 acre). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Outside storage shall not be permitted. 
(4)  Setbacks, yards adjoining rights-of-way: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 75 feet. 
2.  Collector: 70 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 55 feet. 
(5)  Setbacks, yards not adjoining rights-of-way: 
a.  Side yard: 15 feet. 
b.  Rear yard: 15 feet. 
(6)  Buffer: If the rear or side yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum buffer of 30 feet adjacent to such lot line shall be provided in addition to the required setback, and the setback shall be measured from the buffer. Additional buffer and setback requirements may be established as a condition of zoning approval. 
(7)  Height limit: 
a.  40 feet as defined in article I of this chapter. 
b.  When a structure reaches a minimum height of four floors (including basements), it shall be sprinkled. 
(8)  Use of existing structure. When property containing legally conforming structures, under the current zoning, is rezoned to O-I, the dimensional requirements shall be reduced to the extent of, but only at the location of, any encroachment by the structures and said structures shall be considered legal nonconforming structures. 
(9)  Lot coverage limit, including structure and parking area: 60 percent of total lot area. 
(g)  SR 74 North-East Side Special Development District. 
(1)  The following will apply to the area identified in the county Comprehensive Plan, SR 74 North Overlay District on the east side of SR 74 North and designated as special development district and office on the county future land use plan map. The purpose of this special development district is to promote planned office development along the frontage of SR 74 North to a depth of approximately 800 feet to fulfill the stated goals for the future development of the corridor. The goals of the SR 74 North Overlay District are: 
a.  To maintain the efficient traffic flow of SR 74 North as the county's main connection to Interstate 85; 
b.  To enhance and maintain the aesthetic qualities of the corridor, as it is the gateway into the county; and 
c.  To protect existing and future residential areas in the SR 74 North corridor. 
(2)  The assemblage of parcels will be necessary in some areas to meet the intent of the special development district. The minimum requirements for acreage and road frontage will necessitate large tracts of land to achieve a reduction in individual curb cuts, consistency and coordination in architectural scheme, and capacity to develop a required service road where applicable. 
a.  In a planned office development consisting of a minimum of ten acres and 600 feet of road frontage on SR 74 North, a maximum of 20 percent of the floor area of each individual building may consist of businesses providing support services for the larger development. Permitted support service uses include: 
1.  Restaurants (no drive-through, drive-in, or freestanding facilities shall be allowed); 
2.  Personal services, including, but not limited to: alterations; barber shop; beauty salon; clothing/costume rentals; electrolysis and/or hair removal; laundry drop-off/pick-up; locksmith; nail salon; photography studio; shoe repair; and tanning salon; 
3.  Convenience store (no gasoline sales); 
4.  Blueprinting, graphic, and/or copying service; 
5.  Office and/or computer sales and/or service; and 
6.  Cellular phone/communication device sales and/or service. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-18; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2017-04, §§ 3, 4, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 110-143. - C-C, Community Commercial District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures providing for convenient community shopping facilities having a broad variety of sales and services. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the C-C zoning district: 
(1)  Amusement or recreational facility, indoor or outdoor (see chapter 18); 
(2)  Appliance sales and incidental repair; 
(3)  Art studio; 
(4)  Auto parts and/or tire sales and installation; 
(5)  Bakery; 
(6)  Bank and/or financial institution; 
(7)  Banquet hall; 
(8)  Catering service; 
(9)  Church and/or other place of worship, excluding outdoor recreation, parsonage, and cemetery or mausoleum; 
(10)  College and/or university, including classrooms and/or administration only; 
(11)  Copy shop; 
(12)  Cultural facility; 
(13)  Day spa; 
(14)  Department store, variety store, and/or clothing store; 
(15)  Drug store; 
(16)  Educational/instructional/tutoring facilities, including, but not limited to: academic, art, computer, dance, driving and/or DUI school, martial arts, music, professional/business/trade, and similar facilities; 
(17)  Electronic sales and incidental repair; 
(18)  Emission testing facility (inside only); 
(19)  Firearm sales and/or gunsmith; 
(20)  Florist; 
(21)  Gift shop; 
(22)  Grocery store; 
(23)  Hardware store; 
(24)  Health club and/or fitness center; 
(25)  Jewelry shop; 
(26)  Laboratory serving professional requirements, (e.g., medical, dental, etc.); 
(27)  Library; 
(28)  Medical/dental office (human treatment); 
(29)  Messenger/courier service; 
(30)  Military recruiting office; 
(31)  Movie theatre (excluding drive-in); 
(32)  Museum; 
(33)  Office; 
(34)  Office equipment sales and/or service; 
(35)  Parking garage/lot; 
(36)  Personal services, including, but not limited to: alterations; barber shop; beauty salon; clothing/costume rentals; counseling services; electrolysis and/or hair removal; fitness center; laundry drop-off/pick-up; locksmith; nail salon; photography studio; shoe repair; and tanning salon. 
(37)  Plant nursery, growing crops/garden, and related sales; 
(38)  Printing, graphics, and/or reproductions; 
(39)  Private clubs and/or lodges; 
(40)  Private school, including, classrooms and/or administration only; 
(41)  Radio studio; 
(42)  Recording studio (audio and video); 
(43)  Restaurant, (including drive-in and/or drive-through); 
(44)  Retail establishment; 
(45)  Smoking lounge (subject to state and local tobacco sales and smoking laws); 
(46)  Taxidermist; and 
(47)  Television/movie studio. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the C-C zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Adult day care facility; 
(2)  Animal hospital, kennel (commercial or noncommercial), and/or veterinary clinic; 
(3)  Automobile service station, including, gasoline sales and/or inside or outside emission testing, in conjunction with a convenience store; 
(4)  Care home, convalescent center, and/or nursing home; 
(5)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(6)  College and/or university, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and/or stadium; 
(7)  Commercial driving range and related accessories; 
(8)  Child care facility; 
(9)  Dry cleaning plant; 
(10)  Golf course (minimum 18-hole regulation) and related accessories; 
(11)  Home occupation; 
(12)  Hospital; 
(13)  Kennel (see animal hospital, kennel (commercial or noncommercial), and/or veterinary clinic); 
(14)  Laundromat, self-service or otherwise; 
(15)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and/or stadium; 
(16)  Religious tent meeting; 
(17)  Seasonal sales, outdoor; 
(18)  Single-family residence and accessory structures and/or uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(19)  Temporary tent sales. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the C-C zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area: 
a.  Where a central water distribution system is provided: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where central sanitary sewage and central water distribution systems are provided: 21,780 square feet (one-half acre). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 75 feet. 
2.  Collector: 70 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 65 feet. 
(4)  Rear yard setback: 15 feet. 
(5)  Side yard setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Buffer. If the rear or side yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum buffer of 50 feet adjacent to the lot line shall be provided in addition to the required setback and the setback shall be measured from the buffer. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(8)  Screening dimensions for parking and service areas as provided in article III of this chapter and chapter 104. 
(9)  Lot coverage limit, including structure and parking area: 60 percent of total lot area. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-19; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-144. - C-H, Highway Commercial District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures to provide and encourage proper grouping and development of roadside uses, which include a wide variety of sales and services that will best accommodate the needs of the county and the traveling public, reducing traffic congestion, hazards and blight along the public streets. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the C-H zoning district: 
(1)  Ambulance service, including non-emergency medical transport service; 
(2)  Amusement or recreational facility, indoor or outdoor; 
(3)  Appliance sales and/or repair; 
(4)  Armories, for meetings and training military organizations; 
(5)  Art studio; 
(6)  Auto parts, tire store/installation, brake installation, muffler repair, off change, tune-up, and emission testing facilities. All service, repairs and diagnostics shall be conducted within an enclosed building; 
(7)  Bakery; 
(8)  Bank and/or financial institution; 
(9)  Banquet hall; 
(10)  Bookbinding; 
(11)  Building, contracting and related activities, (e.g., sales and storage of building supplies and materials); 
(12)  Bus passenger station (pick-up and drop-off only); 
(13)  Cabinet manufacturing, sales, repair and/or installation; 
(14)  Car wash and/or detailing facility; 
(15)  Catering service; 
(16)  Church and/or other place of worship excluding outdoor recreation, parsonage, and cemetery or mausoleum; 
(17)  Clothing store and/or variety store; 
(18)  College and/or university, including classrooms and/or administration only; 
(19)  Copy shop; 
(20)  Cultural facility; 
(21)  Day spa; 
(22)  Department store; 
(23)  Drug store; 
(24)  Educational/instructional/tutoring facilities, including, but not limited to: academic; art; computer; dance; driving and/or DUI; music; professional/business/trade; martial arts; and similar facilities; 
(25)  Electronic sales and/or repair; 
(26)  Emission testing facility (inside only); 
(27)  Engraving; 
(28)  Firearm sales and/or gunsmith; 
(29)  Flea market, indoor; 
(30)  Florist shop; 
(31)  Freezer locker service, ice storage; 
(32)  Freight express office; 
(33)  Funeral home; 
(34)  Gift shop; 
(35)  Glass sales; 
(36)  Grocery store; 
(37)  Hardware store; 
(38)  Health club and/or fitness center; 
(39)  Hotel; 
(40)  Jewelry shop; 
(41)  Laboratory serving professional requirements, (e.g., medical, dental, etc.); 
(42)  Library; 
(43)  Magazine publication and/or distribution; 
(44)  Manufactured home and/or building sales; 
(45)  Medical/dental office (human treatment); 
(46)  Messenger/courier service; 
(47)  Military recruiting office; 
(48)  Movie theatre and/or drive-in; 
(49)  Museum; 
(50)  Music teaching studio; 
(51)  Newspaper publication and/or distribution; 
(52)  Office; 
(53)  Office equipment sales and/or service; 
(54)  Parking garage/lot; 
(55)  Pawn shops; 
(56)  Personal services, including, but not limited to: alterations; barber shop; beauty salon; clothing/costume rentals; counseling services; electrolysis and/or hair removal; fitness center; laundry drop-off/pick-up; locksmith; nail salon; photography studio; shoe repair; and tanning salon; 
(57)  Pest control; 
(58)  Plant nursery, growing crops/garden, and/or related sales; 
(59)  Printing, graphics, and/or reproductions; 
(60)  Private clubs and/or lodges; 
(61)  Private school, including classrooms and/or administration only; 
(62)  Recording studio (audio and video); 
(63)  Radio studio; 
(64)  Railroad station; 
(65)  Rent-alls; 
(66)  Restaurant, including drive-in and/or drive-through; 
(67)  Retail establishment; 
(68)  Smoking lounge (subject to state and local tobacco sales and smoking laws); 
(69)  Tattoo parlor; 
(70)  Taxidermist; 
(71)  Taxi service/limousine service/shuttle service (no on-site maintenance and/or repair); 
(72)  Television/movie studio; 
(73)  Upholstery shop; and 
(74)  Utility trailers sales and/or rental. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the C-H zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Adult day care facility; 
(2)  Amphitheater; 
(3)  Animal hospital, kennel (commercial or noncommercial), and/or veterinary clinic; 
(4)  Automobile, truck, farm equipment, or motorcycle sales and incidental repairs; 
(5)  Automobile service station, including gasoline sales and/or inside or outside emission testing, in conjunction with a convenience store; 
(6)  Bed and breakfast inn; 
(7)  Campground facilities; 
(8)  Care home, convalescent center, and/or nursing home; 
(9)  Cemetery; 
(10)  Charter motor coach service; 
(11)  Church and/or other place of worship; 
(12)  College and/or university, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and/or stadium; 
(13)  Commercial driving range and related accessories; 
(14)  Child care facility; 
(15)  Dry cleaning plant; 
(16)  Experimental laboratory; 
(17)  Golf course (minimum 18-hole regulation) and related accessories; 
(18)  Home occupation; 
(19)  Horse show, rodeo, carnival, and/or community fair; 
(20)  Hospital; 
(21)  Laundromat, self-service or otherwise; 
(22)  Outdoor amusement facilities, rides, structures over 35 feet in height, including, but not limited to bungee and parachute jumping; 
(23)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and/or stadium; 
(24)  Religious tent meeting; 
(25)  Seasonal sales, outdoor; 
(26)  Self-storage facility; 
(27)  Single-family residence and accessory structures and/or uses (see article III of this chapter); 
(28)  Shooting range, indoor; 
(29)  Stadium, athletic; and 
(30)  Temporary tent sales. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the C-H zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area: 
a.  Where a central water distribution system is provided: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where central sanitary sewage and central water distribution systems are provided: 21,780 square feet (one-half acre). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 75 feet. 
2.  Collector: 70 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 65 feet. 
(4)  Rear yard setback: 15 feet. 
(5)  Side yard setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Buffer. If the rear or side yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum buffer of 50 feet adjacent to the lot line shall be provided in addition to the required setback and the setback shall be measured from the buffer. 
(7)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(8)  Screening dimensions for parking and service areas as provided in article III of this chapter and chapter 104. 
(9)  Lot coverage limit, including structure and parking area: 60 percent of total lot area. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-20; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 3, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2017-04, §§ 5, 6, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 110-145. - L-C-1, Limited-Commercial (1) District. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the L-C-1 zoning district is to establish small scale business areas which do not generate large amounts of traffic, noise or light. The L-C-1 zoning district includes small retail establishments, personal services, and business and professional offices. The L-C-1 zoning district will control architectural character and scale. The adaptive use of existing structures is encouraged when possible. 
(b)  Permitted principal uses. The following permitted principal uses shall be allowed in the L-C-1 zoning district: 
(1)  Antique shop, vintage store, thrift/second hand store, consignment store; 
(2)  Art and/or crafts studio; 
(3)  Bakery; 
(4)  Bank and/or financial institution such as a brokerage firm, credit union, financial planning, or mortgage brokerage (no pay-day loan, check cashing or pawn establishments); 
(5)  Book store: 
(6)  Card, gift, and/or stationery shop; 
(7)  Cellular phone sales and service; 
(8)  Clothing and/or accessories such as belts and suspenders, boots and shoes, gloves, hats, jewelry, purses and handbags, ties, scarves, shawls, socks, and stockings, umbrellas, or watches; 
(9)  Educational/instructional/tutoring facilities, including, but not limited to: academic; art; computer; dance; driving and/or DUI; music; professional/business/trade; martial arts; and similar facilities; 
(10)  Florist shop; 
(11)  Hardware store; 
(12)  Home furnishings and accessories such as area rugs, decorative items, cutlery, dishware, glassware, lamps, pictures, pillows and tablecloths; 
(13)  Jewelry shop; 
(14)  Mail services store; 
(15)  Medical/dental office (human treatment); 
(16)  Office (business and/or professional); 
(17)  Personal services, including, but not limited to: alterations; barber shop; beauty salon; clothing/costume rentals; counseling services; electrolysis and/or hair removal; fitness center; laundry drop-off/pick-up; locksmith; nail salon; photography studio; shoe repair; and tanning salon; and 
(18)  Restaurant/restaurant takeout and catering. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the L-C-1 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Single-family residence and accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(2)  Home occupation. 
(d)  Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to the L-C-1 zoning district in addition to any other applicable regulations. 
(1)  These structures shall maintain a residential character. Elevation drawings denoting compliance with the following requirements shall be submitted as part of the site plan. Properties within an Overlay Zone shall comply with the applicable Architectural Standards of the Overlay Zone in lieu of the architectural requirements below: 
a.  A pitched peaked (gable or hip) roof with a minimum pitch of four and one-half inches in one foot and shall be of a type and construction complementary to the façade. A pitched mansard roof façade with a minimum pitch of four and one-half inches in one foot and a minimum height of eight feet around the entire perimeter of the structure can be used if the structure is two stories or more or the use of a pitched peaked roof would cause the structure to not meet the applicable height limit requirements. The mansard roof façade shall be of a residential character with the appearance of shingles, slate or terra cotta; 
b.  All buildings shall be constructed in a residential character of fiber-cement siding (e.g., Hardiplank), wood siding, wood-textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or stucco (including synthetic stucco); 
c.  Framed doors and windows of a residential character. To maintain a residential character, large display windows shall give the appearance of smaller individual panes and framing consistent with the standard residential grid pattern for doors and windows; 
d.  Accessory structures shall maintain the same architectural character of the principal structure, including the pitched peaked (gable or hip) roof with a minimum pitch of four and one-half inches in one foot, and shall be constructed of the same materials or materials which simulate same. An elevation drawing denoting compliance with this requirement shall be submitted as part of the site plan. 
(2)  No outside storage will be permitted. 
(3)  The lot shall have direct access to an arterial street. 
(4)  No drive-through, drive-in, or drive-up facilities allowed. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the L-C-1 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area: 
a.  Where public water is available: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where public water is not available: 65.340 square feet (one and one-half acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 75 feet. 
2.  Collector: 60 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 55 feet. 
(4)  Rear yard setback: 15 feet. 
(5)  Side yard setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(7)  Floor to area ratio (gross square footage of site times 0.1 equals square footage of structure): The total maximum square footage for all structures combined on the lot shall not exceed 10,000 square feet. However, to discourage the development of one linear building and to encourage the development of separate clustered buildings on the site, the square footage for the structures may be increased by 15 percent when more than one building is developed. The distance between structures shall be a minimum of 26 feet. In addition to the area required to facilitate vehicular access, each building wall bordering the space between structures shall have a five-foot landscaped area consisting of five shrubs, two feet tall at planting, per 25 linear feet of building wall. 
(8)  Buffer. If the rear or side yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum buffer of 50 feet adjacent to such lot line shall be provided in addition to the required setback (the setback shall be measured from the buffer). 
(9)  Lot coverage limit, including structure and parking area: 60 percent of the total lot area. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-21; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2016-15, § 2, 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 110-145.5. - L-C-2, limited-commercial (2) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the L-C-2 zoning district is to establish small scale business areas which do not generate large amounts of traffic, noise or light. The L-C-2 zoning district includes small retail and convenience commercial establishments, personal services, and business and professional offices. The L-C-2 zoning district will control architectural character and scale. The adaptive use of existing structures is encouraged when possible. The L-C-2 zoning district will discourage the development of a strip commercial building. 
(b)  Permitted principal uses. The following permitted principal uses shall be allowed in the L-C-2 zoning district: 
(1)  Antique shop, vintage store, thrift/second hand store, consignment store; 
(2)  Art and/or crafts studio; 
(3)  Bakery; 
(4)  Bank and/or financial institution such as a brokerage firm, credit union, financial planning, or mortgage brokerage (no pay day loan, check cashing or pawn establishments); 
(5)  Book store; 
(6)  Card, gift, and/or stationery shop; 
(7)  Cellular phone sales and service; 
(8)  Clothing and/or accessories such as belts and suspenders, boots and shoes, gloves, hats, jewelry, purses and handbags, ties, scarves, shawls, socks, and stockings, umbrellas, or watches; 
(9)  Copy and/or print shop; 
(10)  Educational/instructional/tutoring facilities, including, but not limited to: academic; art; computer; dance; driving and/or DUI; music; professional/business/trade; martial arts; and similar facilities; 
(11)  Florist shop; 
(12)  Hardware store; 
(13)  Home furnishings and accessories such as area rugs, decorative items, cutlery, dishware, glassware, lamps, pictures, pillows and tablecloths; 
(14)  Jewelry shop; 
(15)  Mail services store; 
(16)  Medical/dental office (human treatment); 
(17)  Office (business and/or professional); 
(18)  Personal services, including, but not limited to: alterations; barber shop; beauty salon; clothing/costume rentals; counseling services; electrolysis and/or hair removal; fitness center; laundry drop-off/pick-up; locksmith; nail salon; photography studio; shoe repair; and tanning salon; and 
(19)  Restaurant/restaurant takeout and catering. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the L-C-2 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Convenience commercial establishment; 
(2)  Single-family residence and accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); and 
(3)  Home occupation. 
(d)  Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to the L-C-2 zoning district in addition to any other applicable regulations. 
(1)  These structures shall maintain a residential character. Elevation drawings denoting compliance with the following requirements shall be submitted as part of the site plan. Properties within an Overlay Zone shall comply with the applicable Architectural Standards of the Overlay Zone in lieu of the architectural requirements below: 
a.  A pitched peaked (gable or hip) roof with a minimum pitch of four and one-half inches in one foot and shall be of a type and construction complementary to the façade. A pitched mansard roof façade with a minimum pitch of four and one-half inches in one foot and a minimum height of eight feet around the entire perimeter of the structure can be used if the structure is two stories or more or the use of a pitched peaked roof would cause the structure to not meet the applicable height limit requirements. The mansard roof façade shall be of a residential character with the appearance of shingles, slate or terra cotta; 
b.  All buildings shall be constructed in a residential character of fiber-cement siding (e.g., Hardiplank), wood siding, wood-textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or stucco (including synthetic stucco); 
c.  Framed doors and windows of a residential character. To maintain a residential character, large display windows shall give the appearance of smaller individual panes and framing consistent with the standard residential grid pattern for doors and windows; 
d.  Accessory structures shall maintain the same architectural character of the principal structure, including the pitched peaked (gable or hip) roof with a minimum pitch of four and one-half inches in one foot, and shall be constructed of the same materials or materials which simulate same. An elevation drawing denoting compliance with this requirement shall be submitted as part of the site plan. 
(2)  No outside storage will be permitted. 
(3)  The lot shall have direct access to an arterial street. 
(4)  No drive-through, drive-in, or drive-up facilities allowed. 
(e)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the L-C-2 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area: 
a.  Where public water is available: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where public water is not available: 65,340 square feet (one and one-half acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 75 feet. 
2.  Collector: 60 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 55 feet. 
(4)  Rear yard setback: 15 feet. 
(5)  Side yard setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(7)  Floor to area ratio (gross square footage of site times 0.1 equals square footage of structure): The total maximum square footage for all structures combined on the lot shall not exceed 10,000 square feet. However, to discourage the development of one linear building and to encourage the development of separate clustered buildings on the site, the square footage for the structures may be increased by 15 percent when more than one building is developed. The distance between structures shall be a minimum of 26 feet. In addition to the area required to facilitate vehicular access, each building wall bordering the space between structures shall have a five-foot landscaped area consisting of five shrubs, two feet tall at planting, per 25 linear feet of building wall. 
(8)  Buffer. If the rear or side yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum buffer of 50 feet adjacent to such lot line shall be provided in addition to the required setback (the setback shall be measured from the buffer). 
(9)  Lot coverage limit, including structure and parking area: 60 percent of the total lot area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-15, § 3, 7-28-2016 
Sec. 110-146. - M-1, Light Industrial District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures which are suitable for light industrial development, but where proximity to existing or proposed residential or commercial districts make it desirable to limit the manner and extent of industrial operations and thereby protect the nearby residential or commercial land. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the M-1 zoning district: 
(1)  Ambulance service, including non-emergency medical transport service; 
(2)  Amusement and recreational facilities, indoor or outdoor (athletic/sports instruction facilities and recreation and athletic fields and facilities); 
(3)  Appliance sales and/or repair; 
(4)  Architectural and/or design firms; 
(5)  Armories, for meeting and training of military organizations; 
(6)  Automobile, truck, farm equipment, and heavy equipment sales and repairs, paint and/or body shop, parts store including rebuilding of parts, parking lot or garage, upholstery shop; 
(7)  Blueprinting and/or graphics service; 
(8)  Bookbinding; 
(9)  Building construction/contracting and related activities; 
(10)  Building supply sales; 
(11)  Bus passenger station; 
(12)  Cabinet manufacturing, sales, repair, and/or installation; 
(13)  Carwash and/or detailing facility; 
(14)  Charter motor coach service; 
(15)  Copy shop; 
(16)  Dental laboratory; 
(17)  Delivery and/or courier service; 
(18)  Electronic sales and/or repair; 
(19)  Emission testing facility (inside only); 
(20)  Engineering firms; 
(21)  Engraving; 
(22)  Farmer's market; 
(23)  Feed and/or fertilizer sales; 
(24)  Firearm sales and/or gunsmith; 
(25)  Flooring sales and/or installation; 
(26)  Freezer locker service; 
(27)  Freight express office; 
(28)  Furniture store; 
(29)  Glass sales; 
(30)  Grading service; 
(31)  Greenhouse; 
(32)  Home furnishings and accessories; 
(33)  Horse show and equine activity facilities; 
(34)  Ice storage; 
(35)  Insecticide sales and/or storage; 
(36)  Janitorial service and/or supply; 
(37)  Land development firms; 
(38)  Land surveying service; 
(39)  Landscaping service; 
(40)  Light manufacturing, including the following: 
a.  Appliance and/or electronic device assembly plant, including the manufacturing of parts for appliances and/or electronic devices; 
b.  Assembly of products from previously prepared materials; 
c.  Bottling and/or canning plant; 
d.  Ceramic products, provided that kilns shall only be by gas and/or electricity; 
e.  Construction of signs, including painted signs; 
f.  Cooperage; 
g.  Ice manufacturing; 
h.  Laundry, cleaning and/or dying plants; 
i.  Light sheet metal products such as ventilating ducts and eaves; 
j.  Manufacturing of food, cosmetic and pharmaceutical products, but not including fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and rendering plants; 
k.  Machine/welding shop and related activities; 
l.  Other manufacturing, processing, packaging, or handling of a similar nature which shall not emit or produce more smoke, noise, odor, dust, vibration, or fumes than the uses listed herein; 
m.  Production and/or sales of commercial/industrial hardware, such as tools, fasteners, fittings, machine parts, etc.; 
n.  Tinsmith and/or roofing service; 
(41)  Locksmith; 
(42)  Magazine publication and/or distribution; 
(43)  Medical laboratory; 
(44)  Manufactured home and/or building assembly and/or sales; 
(45)  Newspaper publication and/or distribution; 
(46)  Office equipment service and repair; 
(47)  Parking garage/lot; 
(48)  Pest control; 
(49)  Petroleum bulk plant (storage); 
(50)  Photostating; 
(51)  Planing and/or saw mill; 
(52)  Plant nursery, growing crops/garden and related sales; 
(53)  Printing plant; 
(54)  Radio studio; 
(55)  Railroad freight station; 
(56)  Railroad passenger station; 
(57)  Rent-alls; 
(58)  Restaurants (drive-in/drive-through prohibited); 
(59)  Restaurant supply; 
(60)  Rodeo/rodeo facilities; 
(61)  Seed sales and/or storage; 
(62)  Security system service; 
(63)  Shell home display; 
(64)  Solar farm; 
(65)  Taxidermist; 
(66)  Taxi service/limousine service/shuttle service/charter motor coach service; 
(67)  Television/movie studio/media productions; 
(68)  Tire sales; 
(69)  Trade school; 
(70)  Uniform services; 
(71)  Utility trailer sales and/or rentals; 
(72)  Warehousing and/or distribution; 
(73)  Wholesaling; and 
(74)  Wrecker, towing, impoundment, and/or automotive recovery/transport. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the M-1 zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Aircraft landing area; 
(2)  Amphitheatre; 
(3)  Animal hospital, kennel (commercial or noncommercial), and/or veterinary clinic; 
(4)  Experimental labs; 
(5)  Feed lot and/or commercial barn; 
(6)  Home occupation; 
(7)  Outdoor amusement facilities, rides, structures over 35 feet in height, including, but not limited to, bungee and parachute jumping; 
(8)  Recycling facility; 
(9)  Self-storage facility; 
(10)  Shooting range, indoor; 
(11)  Shooting range, outdoor; 
(12)  Single-family residence and accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); 
(13)  Stadium, athletic; and 
(14)  Wind farm. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the M-1 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area: 
a.  Where a central water distribution system is provided: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where central sanitary sewage and central water distribution systems are provided: 21,780 square feet (one-half acre). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Collector: 80 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 65 feet. 
(4)  Rear yard setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Side yard setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Buffer: If the rear or side yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district a minimum buffer of 75 feet shall be provided adjacent to the lot line in addition to the required setback. The setback shall be measured from the buffer. 
(7)  Height limit: 50 feet. 
(8)  Lot coverage limit, including structure and parking area: 70 percent of total lot area. 
(9)  Screening dimensions for storage areas, loading docks and parking (see article III of this chapter and chapter 104). 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-22; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2013-20, § 3, 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 110-147. - M-2, Manufacturing and Heavy Industrial District. 
(a)  Description of district. This district is composed of certain lands and structures providing for those industrial uses which cannot comply with the regulations of the M-1 zoning district and located in such a manner as not to be injurious to lands and development in nearby districts. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the M-2 zoning district: 
(1)  Acid storage and manufacture; 
(2)  Railroad classification and repair yard; 
(3)  Truck terminal; 
(4)  Ambulance service, including non-emergency medical transport service; 
(5)  Armories, for meeting and training of military organizations; 
(6)  Automobile, truck, farm equipment, and heavy equipment sales and repairs, paint and/or body shop, parts store, including rebuilding of parts, parking lot or garage, tire recapping facility, upholstery shop; 
(7)  Bookbinding; 
(8)  Building construction/contracting and related activities; 
(9)  Building supply sales; 
(10)  Engraving; 
(11)  Feed, pesticides, and/or fertilizer sales and/or storage; 
(12)  Freezer locker service; 
(13)  Freight express office; 
(14)  Glass manufacturing; 
(15)  Grading service; 
(16)  Greenhouse; 
(17)  Ice storage; 
(18)  Light manufacturing, including the following: 
a.  Appliance and/or electronic device assembly plant, including the manufacturing of parts for appliances and/or electronic devices; 
b.  Assembly of products from previously prepared materials; 
c.  Bottling and/or canning plant; 
d.  Ceramic products provided that kilns shall only be by gas and/or electricity; 
e.  Construction of signs, including painted signs; 
f.  Cooperage; 
g.  Ice manufacturing; 
h.  Laundry, cleaning and/or dying plants; 
i.  Light sheet metal products such as ventilating ducts and eaves; 
j.  Manufacturing of food, cosmetic and pharmaceutical products, but not including fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and rendering plants; 
k.  Machine and/or welding shop and related activities; 
l.  Other manufacturing, processing, packaging, or handling of a similar nature, which shall not emit or produce more smoke, noise, odor, dust, vibration, or fumes than the uses listed herein; 
m.  Production and/or sales of commercial/industrial hardware, such as tools, fasteners, fittings, machine parts, etc.; and 
n.  Tinsmith and/or roofing service. 
(19)  Magazine publication and/or distribution; 
(20)  Manufactured home and/or building assembly and/or sales; 
(21)  Newspaper publication and distribution; 
(22)  Parking lot and/or garage; 
(23)  Pest control; 
(24)  Petroleum bulk plant (storage and/or recycling); 
(25)  Photostating; 
(26)  Planing and/or saw mill; 
(27)  Plant nursery, growing crops/garden and related sales; 
(28)  Printing plant; 
(29)  Public utility facilities; 
(30)  Railroad freight station; 
(31)  Seed sales and/or storage; 
(32)  Solar farm; 
(33)  Tire recapping; 
(34)  Warehousing and/or distribution; 
(35)  Wholesaling; and 
(36)  Wrecker, towing, impoundment, and/or automotive recovery/transport. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the M-2 zoning district, provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Aircraft landing area; 
(2)  Experimental lab; 
(3)  Heavy manufacturing, packaging, processing or handling of materials; 
(4)  Home occupation; 
(5)  Junkyard and/or auto graveyard; 
(6)  Landfill; 
(7)  Mining and/or quarrying; 
(8)  Single-family residence and accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); 
(9)  Transfer station for household/commercial garbage and/or recyclable materials (including processing and handling); and 
(10)  Wind farm. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the M-2 zoning district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area: 87,120 square feet (two acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Collector: 80 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 65 feet. 
(4)  Rear yard setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Side yard setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Buffer. If the rear or side yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district a minimum buffer of 75 feet shall be provided adjacent to the lot line in addition to the required setback. The setback shall be measured from the buffer. 
(7)  Height limit: 50 feet. 
(8)  Lot coverage limit, including structure and parking area: 70 percent of total lot area. 
(9)  Screening dimensions for storage areas, loading docks, and parking (see article III of this chapter and chapter 104). 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-23; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2013-20, § 4, 11-14-2013) 
Sec. 110-148. - BTP, Business Technology Park District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the Business Technology Park District (BTP) is to provide a business/employment center in a planned campus setting with internal streets serving individual lots that contain a single business or multi-tenant buildings housing uses which are free from such nuisances as noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fume, odor, dust, radiation or other injurious or noxious conditions related to those uses. Additional requirements would include architectural standards. This district is to provide for high tech firms, light manufacturing/distribution firms, and professional firms with some support establishments (commercial and personal services) primarily for the employees. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the BTP zoning district: 
(1)  Business, professional, and/or government offices; 
(2)  Scientific, medical, and/or research laboratories; 
(3)  Business support centers and/or call centers; 
(4)  Financial, credit, real estate, and/or insurance establishments; 
(5)  Publishing and/or printing; 
(6)  Computer services and/or information technology; 
(7)  Television/radio broadcasting studio, movie/media productions and/or telecommunication; 
(8)  Training center, trade school, and/or vocational center; 
(9)  Educational/instructional/tutoring facilities, including, but not limited to: art; computer; dance; driving and/or DUI; martial arts; music; professional/business/trade; and similar facilities; 
(10)  College and/or university, classrooms and/or administration only; 
(11)  Warehousing, wholesaling and/or distribution of products and/or merchandise, but not including, retail sales of consumer goods such as are usually sold to the general public; 
(12)  Shipping and/or courier service; and 
(13)  Light manufacturing and/or fabricating and/or assembling of products, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Production of food, beverages, cosmetics, and/or pharmaceuticals, but not including, fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and rendering plants; 
b.  Fabrication and assembly of metal, wood, cloth, and/or plastic products; and 
c.  Production of computer and/or electronic components and products. 
Each BTP development will consist of two basic sets of uses: the business uses consisting of permitted uses enumerated in subsections (b)(1) through (10) of this section and the light manufacturing/distribution uses consisting of permitted uses enumerated in subsections (b)(11) through (13) of this section. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the BTP zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Single-family residence and accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); 
(2)  Home occupation; and 
(3)  College and/or university, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the BTP shall be as follows: 
(1)  Minimum site area for a BTP development: 20 acres. 
(2)  Lot area: 87,120 square feet (two acres). 
(3)  Lot width: 150 feet. 
(4)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Major arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
3.  Collector: 80 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 65 feet. 
(5)  Rear yard setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Side yard setback: 25 feet. 
(7)  Buffer. If the rear or side yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum buffer of 75 feet shall be provided adjacent to the lot line, in addition to the required setback. The setback shall be measured from the buffer. The business use areas shall be separated from the light manufacturing/distribution use areas by a 30-foot buffer. 
(8)  Height limit: 40 feet. 
(9)  Lot coverage limit, including structure and parking area: 70 percent of total lot area. 
(10)  Outside storage and refuse area requirements. The following requirements shall apply to outside storage and refuse areas. Where this section contradicts any other requirement, the most restrictive shall apply. 
a.  Outside storage of merchandise, equipment, and parts shall be allowed in rear yards only, subject to screening, setback and buffer requirements. 
b.  All refuse areas shall be allowed in side or rear yards only, shall be screened, and comply with the required buffers and setbacks. 
(11)  Each BTP development shall have a minimum of 500 feet of frontage, and access, on an arterial street as specified by the county thoroughfare plan. 
(e)  Other requirements. 
(1)  Utilities. All utilities shall be underground. 
(2)  Multi-tenant buildings. 
a.  Location. Developable frontage on a major arterial road to a minimum depth of 300 feet shall be reserved for multi-tenant buildings. 
b.  Uses limited. Multi-tenant buildings in this area will be limited to the aforementioned business uses. 
c.  Support uses. In addition to the permitted uses in subsection (b) of this section, no more than 20 percent of the floor area of an individual multi-tenant building may consist of business operations providing support services for the larger development. Permitted support service uses include: 
1.  Restaurant/restaurant take-out (no drive-through, drive-in, or freestanding facilities shall be allowed); 
2.  Personal services (i.e., alterations; barber shop; beauty salon; clothing/costume rentals; counseling services; electrolysis and/or hair removal; fitness center; laundry drop-off/pick-up; locksmith; nail salon; photography studio; shoe repair; and tanning salon; 
3.  Convenience store (no gasoline sales); 
4.  Blueprinting, graphic, and/or copying service; 
5.  Office and/or computer supplies; and 
6.  Cellular phone/communication device supplies and/or service. 
(f)  Rezoning requirements. The following is required for a rezoning petition for the BTP zoning district in addition to what is normally required for a rezoning petition: 
(1)  A development plan is required for the rezoning petition and will take the place of the required concept plan. The development plan, as approved, shall establish the layout and uses planned for the development. Any change in the approved development plan, which affects the intent and character of the development, the land use pattern, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, shall be reviewed and approved by the board of commissioners upon the recommendation of the planning commission. A petition for a revision of the development plan shall be supported by a written statement as to why the revisions are necessary. The development plan shall include what is normally required on the concept plan, as well as the following: 
a.  A delineation of the business use area and the light manufacturing/distribution use area, including the acreage within each area and the 30-foot separation buffer; 
b.  A delineation of the internal transportation network, including roads, multi-use paths, and inter-parcel access/roads as applicable; 
c.  Requirements of any overlay zone which is applicable to the property; and 
d.  Indicate and label existing structures to remain. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-24; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 5, 12-13-2012) 
Sec. 110-149. - Planned unit development. 
(a)  Purpose . The intent of this section is to: 
(1)  Encourage the development of large lots of land as: planned residential developments (PRD), planned industrial parks (PIP), planned retreats or lodges (PRL), planned entertainment farming (PEF), planned outdoor recreation (POR), planned small business center (PSBC), and planned residential and business development (PRBD); 
(2)  Encourage flexible and creative concepts in site planning; 
(3)  Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open spaces; 
(4)  Accomplish a more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of minimum requirements of this chapter; 
(5)  Provide for an efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lower development and housing costs; and 
(6)  Provide an environment of stable character compatible with surrounding areas. 
(b)  Development standards . Each planned unit development shall meet the following standards in addition to any other as hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  The development shall utilize creative and flexible design including, but not limited to: varied lot sizes, amenities, mixed uses, etc.; 
(2)  The development shall be compatible with surrounding uses and with the land use plan of the county; and 
(3)  Paving of roads . Developers of approved planned unit developments shall be required to pave all new subdivision streets contained within said development in conformance with the rules and regulations of the development regulations of the county (see chapter 104). Improvements to existing county-maintained roads or planned county roads which pass through a planned unit development will be handled conditionally at the time of rezoning or at the time of a revision to a development plan. However, in any planned retreat or lodge (PRL), the developer shall be required to provide for all-weather roads, as approved by public works, suitable for the passage of emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Relation to zoning districts . An approved planned unit development shall be considered to be a separate zoning district in which the development plan, as approved, establishes the uses, restrictions and regulations according to which development shall occur. Upon approval, the zoning map shall be changed to indicate the area as a planned unit development. 
(1)  Procedures . The following procedures shall be followed in the establishment of each and every planned unit development: 
a.  Pre-application conference . The deadline to submit copies of the development plan and Letter of Intent shall be the first of each month by noon. If the first of the month falls on the weekend or on a holiday, the deadline is automatically extended to the next working day by noon. Prior to filing a rezoning petition for a planned unit development, the applicant shall meet with the technical review committee (TRC) in order to review the general character of the proposed development, including, but not limited to: its scope, nature and location. At this time, the applicant shall be fully advised of the approval procedures contained herein and the various information, studies, etc., which the applicant may need in order to continue with the said procedures. 
b.  Pre-recommendation meetings . Prior to filing a rezoning petition for a planned unit development and subsequent to the pre-application conference with the planning and zoning department, the applicant shall meet with the planning commission in a plan review session. At this meeting, the applicant shall be required to review any plan with the planning commission and provide preliminary data concerning said plan as required by the planning commission. The planning commission may require additional pre-recommendation meetings to review said preliminary data prior to their pre-recommendation. 
c.  Rezoning petition . A rezoning petition for a planned unit development shall only be submitted subsequent to the pre-application conference with the planning and zoning department and the pre-recommendation meetings with the planning commission. This petition shall contain a development plan and a written summary of intent, and shall show the relation between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both proposed and existing. A rezoning petition for a planned unit development shall follow the procedures in article VII of this chapter. 
d.  Development plan . The following information shall be submitted as the development plan: 
1.  General location map; 
2.  Current topographical map clearly showing existing topographic conditions, including contour intervals of no more than 20 feet based on field survey or photogrammetric methods; 
3.  Map showing the existing floodplains and flood soil as indicated by FEMA; 
4.  Legal description of the subject property; 
5.  Location and use of existing and proposed public, semi-public, or community facilities such as schools, parks and other open space. This will include areas proposed to be deducted or reserved for community or public use; 
6.  Elevations of building types for all nonresidential structures which indicate the proposed general architectural style and appearance; and 
7.  If a proposed development creates special problems or involves unusual circumstances, additional information may be required in order to properly evaluate the proposal as follows: 
(i)  Off-street parking and loading plan; 
(ii)  Economic feasibility report or market analysis; 
(iii)  Area traffic study and circulation plan within the development and to and from existing thoroughfares; 
(iv)  Hydraulic, hydrologic; and drainage engineering studies; 
(v)  Environmentally sensitive areas, including, but not limited to: watershed protection, wetlands, or groundwater recharge, impact study; 
(vi)  Based on the pre-application meeting with the planning and zoning department and/or the pre-recommendation meetings with the planning commission, other information as is deemed necessary may be requested, in addition any of the aforementioned required information (items enumerated in subsections (c)(1)a through h of this section) may be excluded if deemed not applicable. 
e.  Summary of intent . The written statement submitted with the development plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Statement of the present ownership of all land within the proposed development; 
2.  Explanation of the character of the proposed development, including, but not limited to: a summary of uses, number and type of dwelling units, a net residential density calculation, and minimum standards for floor area, lot size, yard and spacing requirements; 
3.  General statement of the proposed development schedule and progression of unit development or staging; and 
4.  Agreements, provisions, and covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and protection of the development and any common or open space, including the provisions which will organize, regulate and sustain the property owners' association, where applicable. 
f.  Approval . 
1.  After review and public hearing, the board of commissioners may disapprove, approve or approve with modifications the proposed development after receiving the recommendations of the planning and zoning department and planning commission. Modifications can include, but are not limited to, establishing residential densities, limitations in nonresidential uses and intensities, architectural controls, traffic improvements such as decel-accel lanes, service drives, internal street configurations, turn lanes, etc. as may be required to mitigate traffic impacts and increased setbacks, buffers and/or screening as may be required to lessen the impact and/or shield views from adjacent properties and/or streets. 
2.  If the proposed development is approved as submitted, the planning and zoning department shall cause the official zoning map to be changed to indicate the planned unit development. If the plan is approved with modifications, the applicant shall file written notice of consent to the modification and a properly revised development plan with the planning and zoning department prior to changing the map. The development plan and all other accompanying information shall be properly identified and permanently filed with the planning and zoning department. 
g.  Subdivision approval . 
1.  At the option of the applicant, a preliminary subdivision plat may be filed along with the development plan in order that tentative approval of the subdivision by the planning commission may be granted, pending the approval by the board of commissioners of the development plan. 
2.  In no case shall final subdivision approval precede the approval of the development plan. 
3.  Site development regulations, specifications, and procedures governing the platting of a planned unit development and plat approval shall be in accordance with chapter 104, article XV. 
h.  Ownership control . At the time a final plat or minor subdivision plat is approved and recorded for a planned unit development, as applicable, the land comprising the area for the final plat or minor subdivision plat shall be under one ownership (i.e., an individual, a corporation, or some other single legal entity). Individual lots may be sold only after the final plat or minor subdivision plat has been approved and recorded and the deed contains sufficient covenants assuring the continuance of the planned unit development as originally approved and developed. 
i.  Building and occupancy permits . The planning and zoning department shall approve of the issuance of building permits for buildings and structures in the planned unit development if they are in substantial conformity with the approved development plan, the development schedule, and with all other applicable regulations. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any completed building or structure if it conforms to the requirements of the approved development plan and all other applicable regulations. 
j.  Revision of development plan . Any change in the approved development plan, which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the approved uses, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, shall be reviewed and approved by the board of commissioners upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning department and planning commission. A petition for a revision of the development plan shall be supported by a written statement as to why the revisions are necessary or desirable. 
(d)  Planned residential development . 
(1)  Purpose . The intent of a planned residential development (PRD) is to encourage creativity and resourcefulness in residential development and to provide open space, parks and recreational facilities for the residents of the development and/or the general public. The board of commissioners may approve the proposed development with modifications which could include, but are not limited to, establishing residential densities, limitations in nonresidential uses and intensities, architectural controls, traffic improvements such as decel-accel lanes, service drives, internal street configurations, turn lanes, etc. as may be required to mitigate traffic impacts and increased setbacks, buffers and/or screening as may be required to lessen the impact and/or shield views from adjacent properties and/or streets. 
(2)  Permitted residential uses . Planned residential developments may contain single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, townhouses, or a combination thereof. Residential accessory buildings and uses shall also be allowed per article III of this chapter. 
(3)  Permitted recreational uses . A list of proposed recreational uses shall be submitted with the summary of intent. Only those uses approved through the rezoning process shall be allowed in the PRD. 
(4)  Permitted incidental uses . The following incidental uses shall be allowed in a PRD: 
a.  Day care facility (including an outdoor play area only); 
b.  Church and/or other place of worship (including a parsonage and outdoor play area only); and 
c.  School, private (including an outdoor play area but excluding housing or a stadium). 
The buffers and setbacks for these uses along the exterior boundary of the PRD shall be consistent with the applicable conditional use requirements listed in article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Conditional uses . The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the PRD zoning district, provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
a.  Home occupation; and 
b.  Horse quarters (see article III of this chapter). 
(6)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements . The minimum dimensional requirements in the PRD shall be as follows: 
a.  Development size: 100 contiguous acres located within the A-R and/or residential zoning districts 
b.  Each single-family dwelling shall be placed on a separate lot. 
c.  Side yard setback: 15 feet. 
d.  Rear yard setback: 30 feet. 
e.  Maximum density: Four units per acre (single-family attached); and one unit per acre (single-family detached). For purposes of this section, density shall be interpreted as the number of dwelling units per net acre devoted to residential development. 
(7)  Common open space requirements . Planned residential developments shall meet the following common open space requirements: 
a.  A minimum of 2,500 square feet per lot shall be reserved for open space. The open space shall not be located in the following areas: street rights-of-way (public or private); all land located within the 100-year floodplain; water impoundments; and all lands proposed to be dedicated to a governing authority. 
b.  The open space may be publicly owned, privately owned, or be deeded to and maintained by the property owners' association, comprised of the residents of the development. When the open space is to be deeded to the property owners' association the initial owner of the development shall be responsible for the organization of said association. The organization, responsibilities and financing of the property owners' association shall be established in appropriate deed covenants, which shall run with the land and which shall appear in each and every deed of property given by the initial owner. 
c.  Approved recreational uses may be located in the open space. 
(8)  General deed covenants . Appropriate deed covenants, which shall run with the land, shall be made a part of each deed of property given by the initial owner of the development in order to ensure the continuance of the planned residential development in accordance with all approved plans and this section. A copy of the covenants shall be given to the planning and zoning department as a part of the record of the planned residential development. 
(e)  Planned industrial park. 
(1)  Purpose . The intent of a planned industrial park (PIP) is to encourage the development of a localized industrial park designed to meet light and heavy industrial purposes. The board of commissioners may approve the proposed development with modifications which could include, but are not limited to, establishing nonresidential uses and intensities, architectural controls, traffic improvements such as decel-accel lanes, service drives, internal street configurations, turn lanes, etc. as may be required to mitigate traffic impacts and increased setbacks, buffers and/or screening as may be required to lessen the impact and/or shield views from adjacent properties and/or streets. 
(2)  Permitted uses . Only those uses (permitted and conditional) in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts shall be proposed for the PIP. Only those uses approved through the rezoning process will be allowed in the PIP. 
(3)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements . The minimum requirements for a PIP shall be as follows: 
a.  Location: M-1 or M-2 Zoning District. 
b.  The development shall have access and egress only to an arterial thoroughfare. 
c.  Development size: ten acres. 
d.  Front, side, and rear yard setbacks along the exterior boundaries of the development shall be consistent with either the M-1 or M-2 zoning district, whichever is applicable. 
e.  Height limit: 35 feet. 
f.  A buffer of 75 feet shall be provided around the periphery of the development. 
(f)  Planned retreat and/or lodge . 
(1)  Purpose . The intent of a planned retreat and/or lodge (PRL) is to provide a development exclusively designed to accommodate the assembly of groups or organizations for the purpose of association, education, therapy, or instruction through conferences, seminars, and/or camps. Food and lodging may be furnished for a definite and temporary period. The board of commissioners may approve the proposed development with modifications which could include, but are not limited to, establishing residential densities, limitations in nonresidential uses and intensities, architectural controls, traffic improvements such as decel-accel lanes, service drives, internal street configurations, turn lanes, etc. as may be required to mitigate traffic impacts and increased setbacks, buffers and/or screening as may be required to lessen the impact and/or shield views from adjacent properties and/or streets. 
(2)  Permitted uses . The following uses may be proposed in a PRL: 
a.  Assembly/meeting facilities (indoor and outdoor); 
b.  Dining facilities; 
c.  Lodges, dormitories, cabins, and/or tent campsites for temporary occupancy; 
d.  Recreational facilities, including, but not limited to: recreational courts/fields, playgrounds, picnic pavilions, swimming pools; 
e.  Caretaker and/or staff housing; and 
f.  Solar farm (limited to a net metered facility only), provided that any inoperative equipment is repaired or disposed of in a reasonable time and manner. 
In addition, only those uses (permitted and conditional) allowed in the A-R zoning district may be proposed for a PRL. Only those uses approved through the rezoning procedure will be allowed in the PRL. 
(3)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements . The minimum requirements for a PRL shall be as follows: 
a.  Location: A-R zoning district. 
b.  Development size: 50 contiguous acres. 
c.  Maximum density: One single-family unit for each ten net acres of the development. 
d.  The proposed site shall be permitted only on a lot which fronts on and accesses a major thoroughfare, as specified by the county thoroughfare plan. 
e.  A site plan will be required prior to the construction of structures and/or recreational facilities, as applicable, per chapter 104. 
f.  Each structure whose purpose is to provide lodging shall have paved access to a public street. Said access shall meet the requirements of chapter 104. 
g.  No structure shall be permitted within 150 feet of the right-of-way (existing or required) of any existing street abutting or bisecting the development. 
h.  A minimum buffer of 75 feet shall be provided around the periphery of the development. To provide sufficient separation from proposed uses to alleviate any adverse effect on the use or usability of abutting or nearby properties, said buffer may be increased through the rezoning procedure by the board of commissioners as a condition of approval and shall be indicated on the development plan. Any vehicular or multi-use path access proposed within the buffer shall be approved through the rezoning procedure and indicated on the development plan; conditions of approval may be incorporated by the board of commissioners. 
i.  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(g)  Planned entertainment farming. 
(1)  Purpose . To allow certain incidental uses to an active farming operation to preserve agricultural areas. An active farming operation is defined as any area of 100 or more contiguous acres from which $10,000.00 or more of agricultural products are grown and sold on an annual basis. Income verification may be required. Agricultural products are defined here as the growing of annual crops, the raising of livestock and/or horses, and dairy farming. The board of commissioners may approve the proposed development with modifications which could include, but are not limited to, establishing residential densities, limitations in nonresidential uses and intensities, architectural controls, traffic improvements such as decel-accel lanes, service drives, internal street configurations, turn lanes, etc. as may be required to mitigate traffic impacts and increased setbacks, buffers and/or screening as may be required to lessen the impact and/or shield views from adjacent properties and/or streets. 
(2)  Permitted uses . The following permitted uses shall be allowed in a PEF: 
a.  Single-family dwelling and accessory uses and structures associated with the single-family dwelling exclusively as per article III of this chapter; 
b.  Farm buildings (shall be bona fide structures related to the farming operation); 
c.  Growing of crops; 
d.  Raising and selling livestock; 
e.  Dairy farm and production; 
f.  Greenhouses and shrubbery sales; 
g.  Farmer's market (limited to sales of crops grown on premises by owner of property); 
h.  Pick-your-own produce; 
i.  Processing of agricultural products (shall meet conditional use requirements per the A-R zoning district); 
j.  Horse stables and horseback riding; 
k.  Horse show (by permit, temporary, 14 days per year); 
l.  Rodeo (by permit, temporary, 14 days per year); 
m.  Petting zoo; 
n.  Educational tours; 
o.  Picnic area; 
p.  Sit-down restaurant, banquet facility, bakery and catering (no drive-through, and selling of alcoholic beverages, shall be prohibited) (minimum seating capacity of 50 persons); 
q.  Gift shop in association with restaurant only; and 
r.  Pay fishing and bait sales in association with pay fishing. 
(3)  Conditional uses . The following conditional use shall be allowed in the PUD PEF zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: home occupation. 
(4)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements . The minimum requirements for PEF shall be as follows: 
a.  Location: A-R zoning district. 
b.  Development size: 100 contiguous acres. 
c.  Single-family dwellings and those accessory uses and structures associated with the single-family dwelling shall meet those requirements established within the A-R zoning district. 
d.  All other nonresidential structures shall meet the following setbacks: 
1.  Front yard: 200 feet. 
2.  Rear yard: 100 feet. 
3.  Side yard: 100 feet. 
e.  A site plan is required indicating the location of all structures/activities per chapter 104. 
f.  All parking and access areas shall be paved and landscaped per chapter 104. 
g.  All service areas shall be screened per article III of this chapter. 
h.  All parking and service areas shall be to the rear of any restaurant building. 
i.  Only structures whose principal purpose is for the storage of farm equipment and/or animals may have a metal facade. All other structures shall have a non-metallic facade. 
j.  Shall comply with all county, (including fire marshal), state and federal requirements. 
(h)  Planned outdoor recreation . 
(1)  Purpose . The intent of a planned outdoor recreation development (POR) is to provide the residents of the county adequate recreational opportunities outside of existing public facilities, parks, private recreation and amenity areas. The board of commissioners may approve the proposed development with modifications which could include, but are not limited to, limitations in nonresidential uses and intensities, architectural controls, traffic improvements such as decel-accel lanes, service drives, internal street configurations, turn lanes, etc. as may be required to mitigate traffic impacts and increased setbacks, buffers and/or screening as may be required to lessen the impact and/or shield views from adjacent properties and/or streets. 
(2)  Permitted uses . The following permitted uses shall be allowed in a POR: 
a.  Outdoor athletic fields; 
b.  Outdoor athletic courts; 
c.  Accessory uses: 
1.  Picnic and playground areas; 
2.  Concession facilities; 
3.  Press box facilities; 
4.  Restroom facilities; 
5.  Maintenance and/or equipment facilities; 
6.  Ticket sales facilities; 
7.  Bleachers; 
8.  Dugouts; 
9.  Lights; and 
10.  Scoreboards. 
(3)  Prohibited uses . The following uses shall be prohibited in a POR: 
a.  Motorized or other wheeled vehicle sports; 
b.  Swimming pools and water related activities; 
c.  Archery; 
d.  Firearms and target range; 
e.  Explosives and fireworks; 
f.  Paintball and similar activities; and 
g.  Amusement park activities and rides. 
(4)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements . The minimum requirements for a POR shall be as follows: 
a.  Development size; 50 contiguous acres. 
b.  The development shall have ingress and egress only to an arterial thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. 
c.  Maximum number of outdoor athletic fields and/or courts: eight. 
d.  Setbacks: 
1.  No permitted uses shall be allowed within 100 feet of the right-of-way. 
2.  No permitted uses shall be allowed within 500 feet from any A-R or residential zoning district. 
3.  No permitted uses shall be allowed within 50 feet from any nonresidential zoning district. 
e.  A buffer of 100 feet plus the required setbacks shall separate all permitted uses from any A-R or residential zoning district. Off-street parking areas may be located within the setback areas. 
f.  Landscaping and buffer areas shall be planted in accordance with chapter 104. 
g.  Paved access and paved parking shall be provided as follows: 
1.  40 spaces per outdoor athletic field; and 
2.  Ten spaces per outdoor athletic court. 
h.  Hours of operation are to be determined at the time of development plan approval. No play permitted after 10:00 p.m. 
i.  Lights shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and residents are not adversely affected, and that no direct light is cast upon said properties and residents. No lighting permitted after 10:30 p.m. 
j.  Adequate trash receptacles and grounds maintenance shall be provided to maintain a litter-free recreation area. Dumpsters shall be screened on all sides. 
k.  Outside loudspeaker system use permitted until 10:00 p.m. 
l.  Height limit: 35 feet, with the exception of lights. 
(i)  Planned small business center . 
(1)  Purpose . The intent of the planned small business center is to provide a business incubator center through a planned, mixed-use nonresidential development consisting primarily of a mix of office uses, service uses, and light industrial uses, with limited small scale commercial uses as appropriate for the area. A PUD-PSBC will allow innovative and creative design and promote high standards in the development layout to alleviate incompatibility between the internal uses in the development to protect public safety to the greatest degree possible. The board of commissioners may approve the proposed development with modifications which could include, but are not limited to, limitations in nonresidential uses and intensities, architectural controls, traffic improvements such as decel-accel lanes, service drives, internal street configurations, turn lanes, etc. as may be required to mitigate traffic impacts and increased setbacks, buffers and/or screening as may be required to lessen the impact and/or shield views from adjacent properties and/or streets. 
(2)  Uses . Only those uses (permitted and conditional) allowed in the O-I, C-C, C-H, and M-1 zoning districts shall be proposed for the PUD-PSBC. Only those uses approved through the rezoning process shall be allowed. 
(3)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements . 
a.  Minimum lot size: minimum often acres. 
b.  The proposed site shall be permitted only on a lot which fronts on and accesses a major thoroughfare, as specified by the county thoroughfare plan. 
c.  Front, side, and rear yard setbacks and buffers along the exterior boundaries of the development shall be consistent with either the O-I, C-C, C-H, or M-1 zoning district, as applicable to the use. 
d.  The development plan shall indicate the different use areas for the proposed development. Appropriate separation, buffering, and vehicular circulation between uses internal to the development shall be established to alleviate incompatibility and protect public safety. Vehicular access facilities shall be designed in a manner to preclude large vehicles (semi-tractor trailers, delivery trucks, etc.) from utilizing areas where pedestrians are likely to be present. 
e.  Location: only those areas indicated in the county Comprehensive Plan shall be given consideration for PUD-PSBC. 
f.  Height limit: 35 feet. 
(j)  Planned residential and business development (PRBD). 
(1)  Purpose . The intent of a planned residential and business development is to allow mixed-use development with principal single-family residential and incidental business uses and, through the use of large lots and the preservation of existing single-family dwellings, to maintain rural character. This zoning district may be considered in all residential land use designations as indicated on the Fayette County Future Land Use Plan map. The characteristics of a PRBD are: in conjunction with a principal residence the occupant conducts on-site business operations, clients/customers visit the site, receipt and shipments of goods occur, and non-occupant employees will be on site. The board of commissioners may approve the proposed development with modifications which could include, but are not limited to, establishing residential densities, limitations in nonresidential uses and intensities, architectural controls, traffic improvements such as decel-accel lanes, service drives, internal street configurations, turn lanes, etc. as may be required to mitigate traffic impacts and increased setbacks, buffers and/or screening as may be required to lessen the impact and/or shield views from adjacent properties and/or streets. 
(2)  Permitted residential uses and structures . Planned residential and business development shall contain single-family dwellings and residential accessory structures and uses shall also be allowed per article III of chapter 110. The summary of intent shall specify the minimum floor area of existing single-family dwellings. In addition, a home occupation is allowed per article V of chapter 110. 
(3)  Permitted business uses and structures . A list of proposed business uses shall be submitted with the summary of intent. Low-intensity businesses that are incidental and subordinate to the residential use of the property and which do not create offensive noise, dust, smoke, odor, vibrations, or glare that would adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property and/or do not produce traffic that would be an excessive or burdensome use of existing or planned streets are appropriate for this zoning district. Only those business uses approved through the rezoning process shall be allowed in the PRBD. Any approved business that is listed as a conditional use in article V shall meet the conditional use requirements, as is applicable. The summary of intent shall specify the list of proposed businesses, number of proposed on-site employees per business, and the number, size and architectural character of the business structures proposed for the individual businesses in the PRBD. The architectural character of the business structures shall be agricultural in nature with roof types including hip, gambrel and gable. Appropriate facades shall include fiber-cement siding, wood siding, wood textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or finished/baked enamel aluminum/metal siding which establishes a horizontal pattern. 
(4)  Business vehicles . The summary of intent shall specify the type, size and number of business vehicles and trailers proposed per business in the PRBD and the anticipated frequency of business vehicular trips. Motor vehicles cannot exceed two axles, 22 feet in length, ten feet in height, and/or 8,000 pounds (curb weight). Vehicles that exceed these parameters shall be allowed only during business hours (see item o. of subparagraph (5) below) and only for the purpose of making deliveries, making pickups, and providing services. 
(5)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements in the PRBD shall be as follows: 
a.  Development size: 75 contiguous acres. 
b.  The proposed development shall be permitted only on a lot which fronts on and accesses a major thoroughfare, as specified by the county thoroughfare plan. 
c.  A minimum buffer of 100 feet shall be provided around the side and rear periphery of the development (see Sec. 110-94). 
d.  Minimum lot size: 15 acres. 
e.  Minimum lot width: 250 feet. 
f.  Front yard setback: 75 feet. 
g.  Side yard setback: 50 feet (except where the 100 foot buffer is applicable). 
h.  Rear yard setback: 75 feet (except where the 100 foot buffer is applicable). 
i.  New single-family dwelling minimum floor area: 2,100 square feet. 
j.  Height limit: 35 feet. 
k.  Lights shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and residents are not adversely affected, and that no direct light is cast upon said properties and residents. 
l.  The operator of the business shall be one of the following: 
1.  The business operator is the owner/occupant of the property and the business is not owned by a corporation or partnership; or 
2.  The property and business is owned by a corporation or partnership in which case the operator/occupant shall be an officer of the corporation or a partner in the case of a partnership. 
m.  No more than five (5) persons shall be employed on-site by a business, not including the owner/occupants. 
n.  All structures associated with the business are allowed in the rear yard only behind the principal residence and must be fully enclosed and shall not be used for any residential purposes. Business structures shall not be located within 100 feet of the principal residential structure. 
o.  All vehicles associated with the business must be parked in the rear yard only. 
p.  The hours of operation, in the context of clients/customers shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
q.  All materials, equipment, supplies, and inventory associated with the business shall be stored, operated and maintained within the business structure. Semi-trailers or shipping containers cannot be used for storage. 
r.  Stormwater Requirements: In the event that 5,000 or more square feet of impervious surface (including driveways and parking for the business) is added in conjunction with a business structure, a site plan compliant with stormwater requirements of the county development regulations shall be required for that lot. The lot will be exempt from site plan requirements, the nonresidential development landscape requirements and tree retention, protection, and replacement requirements of the county development regulations. In the event that the property is subdivided with an internal street, the development shall comply with stormwater requirements of the county development regulations, as applicable. 
s.  Adequate off-street parking shall be required. A prepared surface is required for the parking areas. The parking area shall comply with Article VIII. - Off-Street Parking and Service Requirements of the Development Regulations and must be depicted on a sketch, drawn to scale on a survey of the lot. Gravel parking areas shall be exempt from Nonresidential Development Landscape Requirements of the Fayette County Development Regulations. The following is required for gravel parking areas: 
(i)  Exterior and interior parking aisles shall be terminated at both ends by a landscape island. 
(ii)  Landscape islands shall be provided for each 150 feet of continuous parking length. 
(iii)  One (1) canopy tree, six (6) feet high at planting, is required per landscape island. 
Paved parking areas shall meet the nonresidential development landscape requirements of the Fayette County Development Regulations. 
t.  Signage on individual lots shall be regulated under Sec. 108-135(a). Signage located at the entrance of a subdivision served by an internal local road shall be regulated under Sec. 108-135(b). 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-25; Ord. of 8-25-2011; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 4, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2016-11, § 1, 5-26-2016; Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, 10-26-2017) 
Sec. 110-150. - G-B, General-Business District. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the General Business District (G-B) is to provide for business development that contains uses which are free from such nuisances as noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fume, odor, dust, radiation or other injurious or noxious conditions related to those uses. The G-B zoning district limits the development of retail commercial uses and reduces the resulting traffic generation and noise associated with this type of development. The uses allowed in this zoning district could lend to a business park development pattern. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses shall be allowed in the G-B zoning district: 
(1)  Auction house (indoor only); 
(2)  Banquet hall and/or catering service; 
(3)  Business, professional, and/or government offices; 
(4)  Business support centers and/or call centers; 
(5)  College and/or university, classrooms and/or administration only; 
(6)  Computer data services and/or information technology; 
(7)  Educational/instructional/tutoring facilities, including, but not limited to: art; computer; dance; driving and/or DUI; martial arts; music; professional/business/trade; and similar facilities; 
(8)  Financial, credit, real estate, and/or insurance establishments (excluding retail banking facilities or pawn establishments); 
(9)  Health club, fitness center, and/or indoor athletic facility (excluding bowling alleys, pool rooms and skating rinks); 
(10)  Medical supply and equipment sales; 
(11)  Printing, graphic, blue printing, photography lab, and/or reproduction service; 
(12)  Private school, including, classrooms and/or administration only; 
(13)  Publishing and distribution; 
(14)  Restaurant supply; 
(15)  Scientific, medical/dental, and/or research laboratories; 
(16)  Television/radio broadcasting studio, recording studio, telecommunication, and/or movie/media productions (including on-site with movie/media productions, ancillary businesses that supply support services, equipment and resources to the movie/media industry); and 
(17)  Training center, trade school, and/or vocational centers. 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the G-B zoning district provided that all conditions specified in article V of this chapter are met: 
(1)  Single-family residence and accessory structures and uses (see article III of this chapter); 
(2)  Home occupation; 
(3)  College and/or university, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and stadium; and 
(4)  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic fields, gymnasium, and/or stadium. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The minimum dimensional requirements in the G-B shall be as follows: 
(1)  Lot area: 
a.  Where public water is available: 43,560 square feet (one acre). 
b.  Where public water is not available: 65,340 square feet (1.5 acres). 
(2)  Lot width: 125 feet. 
(3)  Front yard setback: 
a.  Major thoroughfare: 
1.  Major arterial: 100 feet. 
2.  Arterial: 100 feet. 
3.  Collector: 80 feet. 
b.  Minor thoroughfare: 65 feet. 
(4)  Rear yard setback: 25 feet. 
(5)  Side yard setback: 25 feet. 
(6)  Buffer. If the rear or side yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be provided adjacent to the lot line, in addition to the required setback. The setback shall be measured from the buffer. 
(7)  Height limit: 
a.  40 feet. 
b.  Only soundstages associated with movie/media productions in this zoning district may exceed 40 feet in height. The front setback shall be increased eight feet for every one foot of building height over 40 feet. If the side and/or rear yards abut a residential or A-R zoning district, the setbacks shall be increased five feet for every one foot of building height over 40 feet. 
c.  The required minimum acreage shall be increased based on building height per the table below: 

 
(8)  Lot coverage limit, including structures and parking area: 70 percent of total lot area. 
(9)  Outside storage and refuse area requirements. The following requirements shall apply to outside storage and refuse areas. Where this section contradicts any other requirement, the most restrictive shall apply. 
a.  Outside storage of merchandise, equipment, parts, and business vehicles shall be allowed in side or rear yards only, subject to screening, setback and buffer requirements. 
b.  All refuse areas shall be allowed in side or rear yards only, shall be screened, and comply with the required buffers and setbacks. 
(Code 1992, § 20-6-26; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 4, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2013-05, 7-25-2013) 
Secs. 110-151—110-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONDITIONAL USES, NONCONFORMANCES, TRANSPORTATION CORRIDOR OVERLAY ZONE, AND COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 110-169. - Conditional use approval. 
Conditional uses include certain uses which are allowed in a particular zoning district, provided that all conditions specified under this chapter are met. The zoning administrator shall issue a conditional use permit for each use listed below upon compliance with all specified conditions and approvals by the appropriate county officials. 
(1)  Special regulations. Prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit and/or building permit, a site plan, as applicable to demonstrate compliance shall be submitted to the zoning administrator and approved by the applicable departments. This requirement shall apply to all conditional uses allowed within the various zoning districts except for: farm outbuildings, home occupations, single-family residences, and temporary meetings and/or events which are conducted no longer than 14 calendar days per year. 
(2)  Conditional uses allowed. 
a.  Adult day care facility. Allowed in the C-C, C-H, and O-I zoning districts and church or other place of worship (see article V of this chapter). 
1.  The facility shall comply with all applicable licensing requirements of the state. 
2.  The hours of operation shall be limited to: 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
b.  Aircraft landing area. Allowed in the A-R, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts. The intent of these rules and regulations is to provide a safer environment for the operation of aircraft. 
1.  FAA air space clearance approval for visual flying flight operations and landing areas shall be required, where applicable. 
2.  For any newly developed landing area for fixed wing aircraft, a 1,000-foot clear zone as defined by the FAA extending from the end of all runways shall be maintained through ownership or easement, and in no case, shall the end of a runway be closer than 200 feet from the property line. 
3.  Any newly developed landing area for fixed wing aircraft shall be located at least 300 feet, as measured from the centerline of the runway, from all property lines. 
4.  Any on-site roofed structure shall be set back at least 200 feet from the nearest point on the centerline of the runway. 
5.  Heliport. These regulations shall not apply to a hospital which maintains a heliport for medical purposes. 
(i)  FAA air space clearance approval for visual flying flight operations and landing areas shall be required, where applicable. 
(ii)  A site plan, prepared by a registered surveyor, indicating the heliport landing area and center point on the lot and setbacks shall be required. The center point of the heliport landing area shall be indicated on the lot. 
(iii)  A heliport shall be a minimum of 300 feet from all property lines as measured from the center point of the heliport landing area. 
6.  Aircraft hangar. Allowed in the A-R, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
(i)  An aircraft hangar shall comply with all of the criteria of subsection (2)b.1 through 5 of this section. 
(ii)  Use of an aircraft hangar shall be limited to storage and maintenance of aircraft. Outdoor storage of aircraft parts is prohibited. An aircraft hangar shall not include any living quarters or be used for residential purposes. 
(iii)  In the A-R zoning district, on lots of less than ten acres in size, there shall be a maximum of one detached hangar allowed. 
7.  In the A-R zoning district, no trade or business of any kind shall be conducted from an aircraft hangar. 
8.  In the A-R zoning district, a detached aircraft hangar shall be subject to the following: 
(i)  A detached hangar is an accessory structure which shall require a building permit, and shall comply with minimum building setbacks. 
(ii)  A detached hangar shall not be constructed prior to construction of the single-family dwelling. 
(iii)  A detached hangar shall be located to the side or rear of the principal dwelling. 
(iv)  A detached hangar shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in size including workshop, restroom, and storage areas. 
c.  Amphitheater. Allowed C-H and M-1 zoning districts. 
1.  Hours of operation shall be limited to between the hours of 12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m. weekdays and 10:00 p.m. weekends. 
2.  The outdoor amphitheater shall not be located closer than 300 feet from any A-R or residential zoning districts. 
3.  Such use shall only be permitted on a lot which fronts on a major thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. All access is limited to the major thoroughfare only unless such use is within a nonresidential development which has access to a major thoroughfare. 
d.  Animal hospital, kennel, and/or veterinary clinic. Allowed in A-R, C-C, C-H, and M-1 zoning districts. All structures, pens, runs, or enclosures shall not be located closer than 300 feet from any A-R or residential zoning district. 
e.  Animal hospital and/or veterinary clinic. Excludes commercial and noncommercial kennel. Allowed in O-I zoning district. All structures shall not be located closer than 55 feet (30-foot buffer and 25-foot setback) from any A-R or residential zoning district. No outside activity (runs, pens, or enclosures) or boarding is allowed except during the convalescent period. 
f.  A-R bed and breakfast inn. Allowed in the A-R zoning district. 
1.  Minimum lot size: ten (10) acres. 
2.  The bed and breakfast inn shall be limited to no more than five guestrooms and no more than 10 occupants. Maximum permitted capacity shall be set by the Fayette County Health Department and/or Fayette County Fire Marshal, as applicable. 
3.  Ownership. 
i.  If the A-R bed and breakfast inn is not owned by a corporation or partnership, the A-R bed and breakfast inn operator shall be the owner/occupant of the property. 
ii.  If the property and the A-R bed and breakfast inn business are owned by a corporation or partnership, the operator/occupant shall be an officer of the corporation or a partner in the case of a partnership. 
4.  These facilities shall not be permitted on a lot which accesses a road designated as an internal local road by the county thoroughfare plan and/or the county engineer. 
5.  These facilities shall meet the requirements of the County Code, Chapter 8, Article VI, Tourist Accommodations. 
6.  Adequate off-street parking shall be required. A prepared surface is not required for the parking areas. Parking areas shall be exempt from Nonresidential Development Landscape Requirements of the Fayette County Development Regulations. 
g.  A-R wedding/event facility. The facility shall be utilized for private and public weddings and events by a third party who provides some form of consideration to the owner or his/her agent. The facility shall not be utilized for concerts, sporting events, or vehicle racing. A horse show, rodeo, carnival, community fair, and/or religious tent meeting shall also be allowed as regulated in this article and this section and the most restrictive conditions shall apply. Allowed in the A-R zoning district. 
1.  Minimum lot size: fifteen acres. 
2.  These facilities shall not be permitted on a lot which accesses a road designated as an internal local road by the county thoroughfare plan and/or the county engineer. 
3.  Facilities which access an unpaved county-maintained road are limited to 12 weddings/events per calendar year. A wedding/event permit from the planning and zoning department is required prior to holding the wedding/event. 
4.  A minimum 100 foot setback shall separate all buildings and areas utilized for weddings and events from any abutting residential zoning district. Otherwise all buildings and areas utilized for weddings and events shall meet the minimum A-R setbacks. 
5.  Adequate off-street parking shall be required and a 50-foot setback shall separate parking areas from any abutting residential zoning district. A prepared surface is not required for the parking areas. However, any parking area with a prepared surface shall comply with article VIII. Off-street parking and service requirements of the development regulations and must be depicted on a sketch, drawn to scale on a survey of the lot. Grassed and gravel parking areas shall be exempt from nonresidential development landscape requirements of the county development regulations. The following is required for gravel parking areas: 
(i)  Exterior and interior parking aisles shall be terminated at both ends by a landscape island. 
(ii)  Landscape islands shall be provided for each 150 feet of continuous parking length. 
(iii)  One canopy tree, six feet high at planting, is required per landscape island. 
Paved parking areas shall meet the nonresidential development landscape requirements of the county development regulations. 
6.  Hours of operation for weddings and events shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on weekends. These hours of operation shall not limit the setup and cleanup time before and after the wedding or event. 
7.  All structures utilized for weddings and events shall meet all applicable building and fire codes. 
8.  Sanitation facilities shall be approved by the environmental health department. 
9.  Food service shall meet all state and local requirements. 
10.  Tourist accommodations shall not be allowed in conjunction with an A-R wedding and event facility. 
11.  Tents shall require county fire marshal approval, as applicable. 
12.  A site plan meeting the full requirements of the county development regulations is not required. A sketch, drawn to scale on a survey of the lot depicting all existing buildings and specific areas utilized for weddings and events shall be required. The survey shall also depict FEMA and MNGWPD floodplain and elevations, and watershed protection buffers and setbacks as applicable. In the event that 5,000 or more square feet of impervious surface is added in conjunction with a wedding and event facility, a site plan compliant with stormwater requirements of the county development regulations shall be required. The site will be exempt from the nonresidential development landscape requirements and tree retention, protection, and replacement of the county development regulations. A site located on a state route shall comply with the applicable transportation corridor overlay zone (Sec. 110-173) with the exception of the architectural standards. 
h.  Automobile, truck, farm equipment, or motorcycle sales and incidental repairs. Allowed in C-H zoning district. 
1.  All automobile, truck, farm equipment, or motorcycle sales facilities shall comply with the following conditions: 
(i)  All activities except sales shall be conducted indoors. 
(ii)  No outside storage of equipment or parts shall be permitted. 
(iii)  No external loudspeakers allowed. 
2.  A full range of repairs shall be allowed incidental to a sales use and those repairs that are not listed as a permitted use in the C-H zoning district, shall comply with the following: 
(i)  All repair activities shall be conducted indoors. 
(ii)  No outside storage of equipment or parts shall be permitted. 
(iii)  All overhead doors shall face the side and/or rear yard or be screened from view from the street per article III of this chapter or utilizing vegetative materials, 
(iv)  All wrecked vehicles stored for repair shall be screened in accordance with article III of this chapter. 
(v)  Facilities located adjacent to a residentially zoned area shall not operate between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(vi)  No external loudspeakers allowed. 
i.  Automobile service station, including gasoline sales and/or inside or outside emission testing, in conjunction with a convenience store. Allowed in C-C and C-H zoning districts. 
1.  Service areas, facilities, and gasoline pump islands shall not be located closer than 75 feet from a residential or A-R zoning district. 
2.  Underground storage tanks shall be set back no closer than 20 feet from all property lines. 
3.  A dynamometer shall not be utilized in conjunction with outside emission testing. 
J.  Bed and breakfast inn. Allowed in the C-H and O-J zoning districts. 
1.  The bed and breakfast inn shall be limited to no more than ten guestrooms. Maximum permitted capacity shall be set by the Fayette County Health Department and/or Fayette County Fire Marshal, as applicable. 
2.  The operator of the bed and breakfast inn shall be a full-time resident of the structure in which the bed and breakfast inn is housed. 
3.  These facilities shall meet the requirements of the County Code, Chapter 8, Article VI, Tourist Accommodations. 
k.  Campground facilities. Allowed in the C-H zoning district. 
1.  Campsites shall be utilized by recreational vehicles (as defined herein) and by tents (normally associated with outdoor camping), but not by manufactured housing (as defined herein). 
2.  Each campsite shall be utilized for short-term occupancy not to exceed 15 calendar days; provided, however, that the property owner or resident manager may permanently occupy one single-family dwelling. 
3.  Campground facilities shall be permitted only on a lot which fronts on a major thoroughfare (as designated by the county thoroughfare plan). All access is limited to the major thoroughfare only. 
4.  The lot area shall be at least ten acres. 
5.  The maximum density shall not exceed four campsites per gross acre. 
6.  A minimum 50-foot planted buffer plus all required setbacks shall be established around the perimeter of the entire development. Buffer areas shall be continuous except for approved access, utility casements, and signs (see chapter 108). 
7.  Minimum setbacks for structures and use areas (including campsites) as measured from required buffers: 
(i)  Front yard: 75 feet. 
(ii)  Side yard: 25 feet. 
(iii)  Rear yard: 25 feet. 
8.  At least ten percent of the gross acreage shall be reserved for recreational areas. 
9.  Accessory uses shall be allowed provided that the following requirements are met: 
(i)  Such uses and structures shall be restricted to the use of occupants of the park and their guests. 
(ii)  All structures and use areas shall meet the minimum buffer and setback requirements found in subsections (2)h.6 and 7 of this section. 
(iii)  Such uses and structures shall be limited to the following: rental offices; shower and restroom facilities; coin-operated laundry facilities; convenience stores; and snack bars. 
(iv)  Total floor area for all structures listed in subsection (2)h.9(iii) of this section shall not exceed 3,000 square feet. 
(v)  The sale of alcoholic beverages and/or automotive gasoline shall be prohibited. 
10.  The site plan for the proposed campground (including all accessory structures) shall be approved by the county environmental health department. 
l.  Care home, convalescent center and/or nursing home. Allowed in the C-C, C-H, and O-I zoning districts. 
1.  Minimum lot size: three acres. 
2.  Such use shall only be permitted on a lot which fronts on a major thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. All access is limited to the major thoroughfare only unless such use is within a nonresidential development which has access to a major thoroughfare. 
3.  A minimum 50-foot buffer plus the required setbacks shall separate all buildings from any residential or A-R zoning district. The setback shall be measured from the buffer. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: 
(i)  Front yard: 100 feet. 
(ii)  Side yard: 50 feet. 
(iii)  Rear yard: 50 feet. 
5.  The facility shall comply with all licensing requirements of the state. 
6.  Rooms and/or suites may be designed for housekeeping purposes; however, a central kitchen, central dining facilities to accommodate a minimum of 50 percent of the residential capacity at one seating, and central recreational facilities shall be provided. 
7.  Twenty-four-hour staff shall be required. 
8.  All rooms and/or suites shall be connected to the aforementioned central facilities through internal passageways (i.e., hallways, corridors, etc.). 
m.  Cemetery, human or pet. Allowed in A-R and C-H zoning districts. A human cemetery is also allowed in conjunction with a church or other place of worship. 
1.  Human cemetery. 
(i)  The facility shall comply with all requirements of the state. 
(ii)  Minimum lot area shall be ten acres. 
(iii)  A crematorium or mausoleum shall be allowed only in conjunction with a cemetery. 
(iv)  A crematorium shall be set back 300 feet from all property lines. 
(v)  Grave sites shall meet the setbacks and buffers applicable to the underlying zoning district. A buffer shall not be required along the common boundary where the side or rear yard abuts property developed for the following Conditional uses in a residential or A-R zoning district as regulated in sec. 110-169: cemetery, human or pet; child care facility; church and/or other place of worship; college and/or university; hospital; private school; or recreation centers owned by nonprofit organizations as so registered with the secretary of state office. 
(vi)  Landscape areas shall be required and planted in accordance with chapter 104. 
(vii)  Graves for pets shall meet the requirements of subsection (2)j.2(ii), (iii) and (iv) of this section. 
2.  Pet cemetery. 
(i)  Minimum lot area shall be five acres. 
(ii)  The remains of only one pet shall be buried in a single grave site and shall not be stacked one above another. 
(iii)  The remains shall be a minimum of three feet below the grade. 
(iv)  Cemetery plots shall be of sufficient size to provide for a minimum one foot undisturbed area between graves. 
(v)  The owner/operator shall maintain and post a copy of the cemetery rules and regulations and a current burial plot diagram at all times. 
(vi)  A pet cemetery shall be maintained in perpetuity via deed restrictions. 
(vii)  Grave sites shall meet the setbacks and buffers applicable to the underlying zoning district. A buffer shall not be required along the common boundary where the side or rear yard abuts property developed for the following Conditional uses in a residential or A-R zoning district as regulated in sec. 110-169: cemetery, human or pet; child care facility; church and/or other place of worship; college and/or university; hospital; private school; or recreation centers owned by nonprofit organizations as so registered with the secretary of state office. 
(viii)  Landscape areas shall be required and planted in accordance with chapter 104. 
n.  Charter motor coach service. Allowed in C-H zoning district. 
1.  All motor coaches shall be parked to the rear of the principal structure. 
2.  All motor coaches shall be screened in accordance with article III of this chapter. 
3.  Overhead bay doors shall not be open to the street. 
4.  The following uses shall be allowed: administrative office, passenger pickup, and storage of motor coaches. 
5.  On-site maintenance/repairs are prohibited. 
o.  Child care facility. Allowed in C-C, C-H, O-I, A-R, and MHP zoning districts, and church and/or other place of worship. 
1.  The facility shall comply with all applicable licensing requirements of the state. 
2.  Outdoor play areas shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building. 
3.  At least 100 square feet of outdoor play area shall be provided for each child during the period of maximum attendance. 
4.  A fence measuring at least four feet in height shall enclose the entire play area. 
5.  If the side or rear yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum 50-foot buffer shall be provided adjacent to the lot line. The side yard setback shall be 50 feet. The rear yard setback shall be 75 feet. The setback shall be measured from the buffer. Said requirements shall apply to all structures and outdoor play areas. A buffer shall not be required along the common boundary where the side or rear yard abuts property developed for the following Conditional uses in a residential or A-R zoning district as regulated in sec. 110-169: cemetery, human or pet; child care facility; church and/or other place of worship; college and/or university; hospital; private school; or recreation centers owned by nonprofit organizations as so registered with the secretary of state office. 
6.  If adjoining a residential or A-R zoning district, the hours of operation shall be limited to: Monday through Saturday from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., except that all exterior activities shall only occur from 9:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
7.  A convenient vehicle drop-off area shall be provided which fully covers the vehicle when doors are open on both sides of the vehicle, permitting vehicles to re-enter the public street in a forward manner. 
8.  Such use shall only be permitted on a lot which fronts on a major thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. All access is limited to the major thoroughfare only unless such use is within a nonresidential development which has access to a major thoroughfare. 
p.  Church and/or other place of worship. Allowed in O-I, C-C, C-H, A-R, R-85, R-80, R-78, R-75, R-72, R-70, R-55, R-50, R-45, R-40, R-20, and DR-15 zoning districts. 
1.  The lot area shall be at least five acres, and the lot width at the building line shall be at least 400 feet. 
2.  Such uses shall be permitted only on a lot which fronts on a major thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. All access is limited to the major thoroughfare only. 
3.  A minimum 50-foot buffer plus the required setbacks listed below shall separate all buildings and use areas from any residential or A-R zoning district. The setback shall be measured from the buffer. However, off-street parking areas and an unlit tot lot with a maximum size of 2,400 square feet may be located within the setback areas. A walking/running path or track may be located in the front yard setback. A buffer shall not be required along the common boundary where the side or rear yard abuts property developed for the following Conditional uses in a residential or A-R zoning district as regulated in sec. 110-169: cemetery, human or pet; child care facility; church and/or other place of worship; college and/or university; hospital; private school; or recreation centers owned by nonprofit organizations as so registered with the secretary of state office. 
4.  Minimum setbacks for structures and use areas (excluding parking areas and tot lots as defined herein). 
(i)  Front yard: 100 feet. 
(ii)  Side yard: 50 feet. 
(iii)  Rear yard: 75 feet. 
5.  Uses and/or structures incidental to a church shall be limited to: a private school, parsonage, gymnasium, pool, playground, tot lot, outdoor athletic facility, child care facility, adult day care facility, administration, human cemetery (provided that all requirements for a cemetery herein are met), broadcast facility, including a tower (see article III of this chapter, general provisions), and seasonal sales (see this article, seasonal sales as outdoor displays) shall be allowed provided all buildings and use areas meet the minimum setback and buffer requirements. 
6.  Only portable temporary lighting for athletic facilities shall be permitted and the athletic facility shall not be lighted or used after 10:00 p.m. 
7.  Child care facilities shall be allowed provided that all requirements for child care facilities herein are met (see this article, child care facility). 
8.  Adult day care facilities shall be allowed provided that all requirements for adult day care facilities herein are met (see this article, adult day care facility). 
9.  Landscape areas shall be required in accordance with chapter 104. 
10.  All buildings, other than storage buildings, shall maintain a decorative facing on those portions of the building which face public streets and any property zoned residential or agricultural-residential. The decorative facing shall consist of brick, stone, stucco, wood, or similar building materials compatible with the area. 
11.  Accessory structures such as a storage building, detached garage, pavilion, and/or pool shall comply with the buffer and/or setback requirements and shall be located to the side/rear of the main sanctuary building. 
12.  The construction of one open air pavilion utilized for picnics/social gatherings only is allowed under the following conditions: 
(i)  The pavilion shall be constructed following the construction of the main sanctuary building; 
(ii)  The floor area shall not exceed 40 percent of the square footage of the main sanctuary building; and 
(iii)  The pavilion shall not be lighted or used after 10:00 p.m. 
If the open air pavilion is built in conjunction with lighted restrooms and/or an attached storage building, the overall square footage shall not exceed 40 percent of the main sanctuary building square footage. 
13.  Use of existing structure. When property containing legal structures (conforming or nonconforming), under the current zoning, is utilized as a church and/or place of worship under this section, the setback requirements only shall be reduced to the extent of, but only at the location of, any encroachment by the structures and said structures shall be considered legally nonconforming structures. The use of these structures shall be limited to administration, parsonage/residence, storage building, or detached garage. 
q.  College and/or university, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, housing, athletic facility, gymnasium, and/or stadium. Allowed in the A-R, BTP, G-B, O-I, C-C, and C-H zoning districts. 
1.  The lot area shall be at least ten acres. 
2.  Such use shall only be permitted on a lot which fronts on a major thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. All access is limited to the major thoroughfare only unless such use is within a nonresidential development which has access to a major thoroughfare. 
3.  If the side or rear yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum 50-foot buffer shall be provided adjacent to the lot line. A buffer shall not be required along the common boundary where the side or rear yard abuts property developed for the following Conditional uses in a residential or A-R zoning district as regulated in sec. 110-169: cemetery, human or pet; child care facility; church and/or other place of worship; college and/or university; hospital; private school; or recreation centers owned by nonprofit organizations as so registered with the secretary of state office. 
4.  Minimum setbacks for structures and use areas (excluding parking areas) are as follows and shall be measured from the buffer, if applicable: 
(i)  Front yard: 100 feet. 
(ii)  Side yard: 50 feet. 
(iii)  Rear yard: 75 feet. 
5.  Uses and/or structures incidental to colleges and universities, such as a gymnasium, dormitory, fraternity, sorority, and/or outdoor athletic facility shall be allowed, provided all buildings and use areas meet the minimum setback and buffer requirements specified above. 
6.  All buildings, other than storage buildings, shall maintain a decorative facing on those portions of the building which face public streets and any property zoned residential or agricultural-residential. The decorative facing shall consist of brick, stone, stucco, wood, or similar building materials compatible with the area. 
7.  Accessory structures such as a storage building, detached garage, pavilion, and/or pool shall comply with the buffer and/or setback requirements and shall be located to the side/rear of the main building. 
r.  Commercial driving range and related accessories. Related accessories limited to: putting green, chipping green, sand traps, artificial/natural surface, bunkers, pro shop, and snack bar. Allowed in C-C, C-H, and A-R zoning districts. 
1.  All structures, greens, fairways, and parking areas shall be set back at least 100 feet from any A-R or residential zoning district. 
2.  All greens, fairways, and driving areas shall be set back at least 50 feet from any nonresidential zoning district. 
3.  Said facilities shall be for daytime use only, except that lighting may be provided for facilities which are located more than 350 feet from a single-family or multifamily residence, provided that lighting is not directly visible from said residence. 
4.  No outside loudspeaker system shall be utilized. 
s.  Convenience commercial establishment. Allowed in the L-C-2 zoning district. 
1.  Maximum floor area: 3.500 square feet. 
2.  Accessory structures, including service area canopies used in conjunction with the sale of gasoline, shall maintain the same architectural character of the principal structure including the pitched roof, and shall be constructed of the same materials or materials which simulate same. An elevation drawing denoting compliance with this requirement shall be submitted as part of the site plan. Properties within an Overlay Zone shall comply with the applicable Architectural Standards of the Overlay Zone. 
3.  Motor vehicle vacuum cleaners shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure. 
4.  Underground storage tanks shall he set back at least 20 feet from all property lines. 
5.  The number of gasoline pumps shall be limited to no more than six with a total of 12 pumping stations. 
t.  Deer processing facility. The facility shall only be utilized for deer processing. The facility shall not be utilized for the processing of livestock or other wild game. Allowed in the A-R zoning district. 
1.  Minimum lot size: five acres; 
2.  These facilities shall not be permitted on a lot which accesses a road designated as an internal local road by the county thoroughfare plan and/or the county engineer. Sale of the processed venison to the general public shall be prohibited. This provision shall not prohibit the processing of meat in conjunction with the department of natural resources' "Hunters for the Hungry" program; 
3.  All deer processing, including the storage of processing waste, shall take place within an enclosed structure. Said structure shall he at least 100 feet from all property lines and to the side or rear of the principal structure, as applicable. The deer processing facility shall comply with regulations for auxiliary structures (see sec. 110-169(u)); 
4.  The deer processing facility shall have a current Wildlife Storage Permit from the state department of natural resources, wildlife resources division; 
5.  The deer processing facility shall have a NPDES permit, as applicable, from the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources and said permit shall be filed with the department of environmental management; 
6.  All deer processing waste, not being routed to a rendering plant or other venders, shall be disposed of in compliance with the guidance document Disposal of Deer Processing Waste from the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. Deer processing waste shall be treated as "commercial solid waste" and shall only be disposed of in municipal solid waste landfills (MSWL). The burial of any deer processing waste is prohibited; 
7.  A vehicle drop-off area shall be provided with a circulation pattern permitting vehicles to re-enter the public street in a forward manner. The parking area shall comply with article VIII. Off-street parking and service requirements of the development regulations. Graveled parking areas shall be exempt from nonresidential development landscape requirements of the county development regulations, but shall provide the following: 
(i)  Exterior and interior parking aisles shall be terminated at both ends by a landscape island. 
(ii)  Landscape islands shall be provided for each 150 feet of continuous parking length. 
(iii)  One (1) canopy tree, six (6) feet high at planting, is required per landscape island. 
Paved parking areas shall meet the nonresidential development landscape requirements of the county development regulations. 
8.  A site plan meeting the full requirements of the county development regulations is not required. A sketch, drawn to scale, on a survey of the lot depicting all buildings utilized for the processing facility, parking area, drop-off area/circulation pattern and any waste containment facilities/structures shall be required. The survey shall also depict FEMA and MNGWPD floodplain and elevations, and watershed protection buffers and setbacks, as applicable. In the event that 5,000 or more square feet of impervious surface is added in conjunction with a deer processing facility, a site plan compliant with stormwater requirements of the county development regulations shall be required. The site will be exempt from the nonresidential development landscape requirements and tree retention, protection, and replacement of the county development regulations. A site located on a state route shall comply with the applicable transportation corridor overlay zone (sec. 110-173) with the exception of the architectural standards. 
u.  Developed residential recreational/amenity areas. Allowed in subdivisions in the A-R, EST, R-85, R-80, R-78, R-75, R-72, R-70, R-55, R-50, R-45, R-40, R-20. DR-15, and C-S zoning districts, with final plat or minor subdivision plat approval. 
1.  Lot area: Per zoning district. 
2.  Said area shall be shown on the preliminary plat and final plat or minor subdivision plat and labeled as follows: "Not a residential building lot, for recreational purposes only." 
3.  Landscape areas shall be required and planted in accordance with chapter 104. 
4.  In addition to the required landscape areas, a six-foot landscape area shall be required along the rear property line where adjacent to an A-R or residential zoning district and planted in accordance with side yard requirements in chapter 104. 
5.  Paved parking area is required per chapter 104. 
6.  No activity and lighting permitted after 10:00 p.m. 
7.  The construction of one open air pavilion up to 900 square feet utilized for picnics and social gatherings shall be allowed. 
v.  Dry cleaning plant. Allowed in the C-C and C-H zoning districts. 
1.  Dry cleaning plants using cleaning systems which make use of solvents rated at above 40 by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., standard of classification known as Class I systems shall be prohibited; 
2.  Dry cleaning plants which use cleaning systems which make use of solvents rated at more than five but not less than 40 according to the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., standard classification, known as Class II and Class III systems, shall meet all requirements of the National Fire Safety Association Code; 
3.  The building for a dry cleaning plant shall not contain more than 4,000 square feet of floor area inclusive of dry cleaning pickup facility within the building; 
4.  Fuel for operation of the equipment shall be smokeless fuel; and 
5.  Central water and central sanitary sewage systems are required. This shall not apply to recyclable hydrocarbon or silicone dry cleaning machinery that does not discharge water into the central sanitary sewage system. 
w.  Experimental labs. Allowed in the C-H, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts. 
1.  Minimum lot area: three acres if use is hazardous as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
2.  Said use shall comply with all applicable state and/or federal licensing requirements. 
x.  Farm outbuildings, including horse stables, auxiliary structures, and greenhouses. Allowed in the A-R zoning district. 
1.  Farm outbuilding. All structures permitted in this category shall be structures related to a bona fide farming operation and shall be utilized as a barn for livestock, storing farm equipment, and any other agricultural purposes. Farm outbuildings shall be exempt from architectural standards (see article III of this chapter). 
2.  Greenhouses. All structures permitted in this category shall be structures related to a bona fide cultivation or production of landscape planting materials. Greenhouses shall be exempt from architectural standards (see article III of this chapter). 
3.  Horse stables. All structures permitted in this category shall be related to the bona fide shelter and/or boarding of horses. Riding lessons and boarding only shall be permitted; however, a site plan shall be required for these uses. Horse stables are exempt from architectural standards (see article III of this chapter). 
4.  Auxiliary structures. All structures permitted in this category shall comply with the following: 
(i)  Auxiliary structures shall be utilized for personal use only by the residents of the principal structure. 
(ii)  Auxiliary structures may be utilized as a noncommercial indoor training facility and/or artist studio. 
(iii)  For those uses that have the potential of generating noise levels audible to the adjacent properties acoustical treatment (soundproofing) shall be required to mitigate the volume of sound. 
(iv)  Commercial/retail activity shall not be permitted. 
(v)  An auxiliary structure shall not be utilized in conjunction with a home occupation. 
(vi)  Auxiliary structures are exempt from architectural standards (see article III of this chapter). 
5.  Lot size over ten acres, no restriction of size or number of farm outbuildings, horse stables, auxiliary structures, and greenhouses. 
6.  Lot size five to ten acres, one detached farm outbuilding, auxiliary structure, greenhouse, or horse stable consisting of a maximum of 3,600 square feet in size. Farm outbuildings, auxiliary structures, horse stables and greenhouses may have plumbing and electricity, but shall not be used for residential purposes. Farm outbuildings, auxiliary structures, horses tables and greenhouses shall not be located within 100 feet of the principal residential structure or connected to any structures on site. Farm outbuildings, horse stables, and/or greenhouses may be constructed prior to the principal residential structure. 
y.  Feed lot and/or commercial barn. Barns and feed lots shall be located at least 100 feet from all property lines. Allowed in the M-1 zoning district. 
z.  Golf course (minimum 18-hole regulation) and related accessories. Related accessories are limited to: putting green, chipping green, sand trap, artificial/natural surface, bunker, clubhouse, pro shop, and snack bar. Allowed in the C-C, C-H, and A-R zoning districts. 
1.  Said facilities shall be for daytime use only. 
2.  All structures, greens, and fairways shall be set back at least 100 feet from any property line. 
3.  No outside loudspeaker systems shall be utilized. 
aa.  Heavy manufacturing, packaging, processing or handling of materials. (Allowed in the M-2 zoning district) Any uses such as the manufacturing of corrosive acids, bone distillation, drop forge industry, fat rendering, fertilizer manufacturing, organic material reduction, meat processing plants, and similar operations which produce noise, odors, dust, fumes, fire hazards, or other nuisance features shall be set back no less than 500 feet from any property line. 
bb.  Home occupation. Allowed in A-R, EST, C-S, R-85, R-80, R-78, R-75, R-72, R-70, R-55, R-50, R-45, R-40, R-20, DR-15, RMF, MHP, PUD-PRD, PUD-PRL, PUD-PEF, O-I, C-C, C-H, L-C, G-B, M-1, M-2, and BTP zoning districts. The intent of these rules and regulations is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and ensure that home occupations are regulated in a manner so they do not adversely impact surrounding residential properties, as residential areas and uses are normally separated from nonresidential areas and uses. 
1.  Residents. Only residents of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation within the dwelling. All nonresident individuals, including employees, contractors, or part owners, associated with the home occupation shall not be engaged in the home occupation within the dwelling or on the premises. 
2.  Incidental use. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the building. 
3.  Display, sale. No display of products shall be visible from the street, and only products produced on the premises may be sold on the premises. The on-premises sale of products produced off the premises shall be prohibited. 
4.  Clients/customers/students. The number of clients/customers/students on premises shall not exceed more than two at a time nor more than a total of eight clients in any one day and all services rendered shall take place only within the dwelling. The hours of operation, in the context of clients/customers/students shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
5.  Area. Use of the dwelling, for the purpose of the home occupation, shall not exceed a total of 25 percent of the dwelling. 
6.  Number. No more than four home occupations may be issued per dwelling and the cumulative area devoted to the home occupations shall not exceed 25 percent of the dwelling. 
7.  Alterations. No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. 
8.  Accessory buildings. No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used, except as otherwise provided herein. 
9.  Instructions and/or tutoring. Instruction and/or tutoring including, but not limited to: music, art, crafts, dance, academic, computer, martial arts, and speech. 
10.  Day care, child/adult. Daycare shall be limited to no more than three children or three adults at any time. 
11.  Vehicles. Only customary passenger vehicles, vans and pick-up trucks shall be permitted to remain on the premises in association with a home occupation. Said vehicles cannot exceed two axles, 22 feet in length, ten feet in height, and/or 8,000 pounds (curb weight). No tow and/or rollback trucks shall be allowed to remain on the premises. A trailer used in association with the home occupation shall be permitted to remain on the premises. The aforementioned vehicles or trailer used in association with the home occupation may be stored in a detached garage. 
12.  In-home beauty salon or barbershop. An in-home beauty salon or barbershop shall be limited to one chair and shall be subject to the department of environmental health's approval. It shall also comply with 4 above, in regards to the number of customers. 
13.  Uses. The following and similar uses shall not be considered home occupations: automobile service station; automobile and related vehicular sales lot on-premises; on-premises automobile, motorcycle, and/or farm/heavy construction equipment repair or service/maintenance; ambulance service; rescue squad; on-premises amusement or recreational activities (commercial); animal hospital; commercial kennel, veterinarian clinic with or without animal boarding place; pawn shops; acid storage and manufacturing; heavy manufacturing; fortune teller; palm reader; taxidermy, on-premises welding; on-premises pet grooming; on-premises medical/dental facilities; on-premises repair service (bicycle, lawn mower, small engine, and appliance); tire sales and storage; tanning salon; funeral services; tattooing; and on-premises massage therapy. 
cc.  Horse quarters in residential zoning districts. Allowed in EST, R-85, R-80, R-78, R-75, R-72, R-70, R-55, R-50, R-45, R-40, R-20, C-S, and PUD-PRD zoning districts. 
1.  Minimum lot size: ten acres. 
2.  Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet. 
3.  Minimum rear yard setback: 75 feet. 
4.  Horse quarters shall not be located within 100 feet of the principal residential structure or connected to any structures on site; however, horse quarters may be constructed prior to the principal residential structure. 
5.  Horse quarters shall not exceed the square footage of the principal dwelling or 2,400 square feet, whichever is less. 
6.  Only one horse quarter structure shall be permitted and shall not be counted as an accessory structure. 
7.  Riding lessons and boarding are prohibited. 
8.  Number of horses (see article III of this chapter). 
dd.  Horse show, rodeo, carnival, and/or community fair. Allowed in the A-R and C-H zoning districts. 
1.  Said horse show, rodeo, carnival, and/or community fair shall not be operated longer than 14 calendar days per year. 
2.  Tents shall require the approval of the county fire marshal. 
3.  Off-street parking shall be required. 
4.  Outdoor lighting for activities shall not be permitted after 10:00 p.m. 
ee.  Hospital. Allowed in the C-C, C-H, O-I, and A-R zoning districts. 
1.  Minimum lot size: ten acres. 
2.  Such use shall only be permitted on a lot which fronts on a major arterial as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. All access is limited to the major arterial only unless such use is within a nonresidential development which has access to a major arterial. 
3.  A minimum 50-foot buffer plus the required setbacks shall separate all buildings from any residential or A-R zoning district. A buffer shall not be required along the common boundary where the side or rear yard abuts property developed for the following Conditional uses in a residential or A-R zoning district as regulated in sec. 110-169: cemetery, human or pet; child care facility; church and/or other place of worship; college and/or university; hospital; private school; or recreation centers owned by nonprofit organizations as so registered with the secretary of state office. 
4.  Minimum setbacks: 
(i)  Front yard: 100 feet. 
(ii)  Side yard: 50 feet. 
(iii)  Rear yard: 50 feet. 
5.  Support services, such as pharmacies, public cafeterias, and gift shops are allowed, provided such services are in conjunction with and accessory to, the hospital structure. Such businesses shall be conducted within the primary use structure and shall not exceed ten percent of the primary structure floor area. No outside advertising is allowed. 
6.  Heliport. 
ff.  Junkyard and/or auto graveyard. Allowed in the M-2 zoning district. 
1.  Minimum lot size: ten acres. 
2.  Maximum site area: 25 acres. 
3.  A minimum 100-foot buffer shall be provided along every property line, including public rights-of-way, so that junk is not visible from a public street or adjoining properties. 
4.  All structures and storage areas shall be set back at least 200 feet from a public street and/or adjoining residential or A-R zoning districts. 
ff.  Kennel. See animal hospital, kennel (commercial or noncommercial) and/or veterinary clinic. 
hh.  Landfill. Allowed in the M-2 zoning district. 
1.  Minimum lot size: 20 acres. 
2.  A minimum 100-foot buffer shall be provided around the entire site so that landfill operation activities are not visible from adjoining properties or any public street. Said buffer shall provide 100 percent screening from adjoining residences prior to commencing operations. 
3.  Landfill operations shall be set back at least 200 feet from a major thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. 
4.  The landfill shall comply with all of the state and federal requirements. 
5.  Such uses shall be permitted only on a lot which fronts on a major thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. All access is limited to the major thoroughfare only. 
ii.  Laundromat, self-service or otherwise. Allowed in the C-C and C-H zoning districts. Central water and central sanitary sewage systems are required. 
jj.  Mining and/or quarrying. Allowed in the M-2 zoning district. 
1.  Ingress and egress to and from the facility shall be limited to an arterial as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. 
2.  A minimum 100-foot buffer shall be required adjacent to residential or A-R zoning districts. 
3.  No activity involving blasting or the operating of machinery shall occur within 500 feet of a residential or A-R zoning district. 
4.  All activity involving blasting or the operating of machinery shall be limited to daylight hours. 
5.  The operation shall comply fully with all of the state and federal requirements. 
kk.  Non-emergency medical transport service. Allowed in the O-I zoning district. 
1.  The service shall comply with all licensing requirements of the state. 
2.  Parking of all medical transport vehicles is allowed in the side and/or rear yard only in designated parking spaces. Medical transport vehicles shall be screened from the street via a fence or wall. The fence or wall shall be located between the designated parking spaces and the street. Said fence or wall shall be limited to wood, brick, stone, or concrete/concrete block with architectural treatment, or other architecturally engineered facades which match these materials and shall be a minimum height of eight feet. 
3.  No on-site vehicle maintenance or fueling facilities are allowed. 
ll.  Outdoor amusement facilities, rides, structures over 35 feet in height, including, but not limited to bungee and parachute jumping. Allowed in the C-H and M-1 zoning districts. 
1.  Where applicable, all state codes, rules, and regulations shall apply. Verification that state requirements are met shall accompany the application for a conditional use permit. 
2.  All structural and support parts shall not be located closer than 300 feet from any A-R or residential zoning district. 
3.  Any structure, ride, etc., erected in connection with an outdoor amusement activity, over 35 feet in height, shall be dismantled upon the closing of the business or activity in question. 
4.  Any structure, ride, etc. over 35 feet in height, or with elements over 35 feet in height, shall be surrounded by a six-foot-high fence with a locked gate when the facility is not in use. A four-inch sphere shall not be able to pass through any section of the fence or gate. 
5.  The structure shall be designed to fall entirely within the boundaries of the site should structural failure occur. 
mm.  Private school, including, but not limited to: classrooms, administration, playground, housing, athletic facility, gymnasium, and/or stadium. Allowed in A-R, R-85, R-80, R-78, R-75, R-72, R-70, R-55, R-50, R-45, R-40, R-20, DR-15, O-I, C-C, G-B, and C-H zoning districts. 
1.  Minimum lot size: five acres. 
2.  Such use shall only be permitted on a lot which fronts on a major thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. All access is limited to the major thoroughfare only unless such use is within a nonresidential development which has access to a major thoroughfare. 
3.  If the side or rear yard abuts a residential or A-R zoning district, a minimum 50-foot buffer shall be provided adjacent to the lot line. The side yard setback shall be 50 feet. The rear yard setback shall be 75 feet. The setback shall be measured from the buffer. Said requirements shall apply to all structures, outdoor playground areas, and/or athletic facilities. 
4.  Lighting for outdoor athletic facilities shall not be permitted after 10:00 p.m. 
5.  Student drop-off and vehicular turn-around facilities shall be provided on the site. 
6.  All buildings, other than storage buildings, shall maintain a decorative facing on those portions of the building which face public streets and any property zoned residential or agricultural-residential. The decorative facing shall consist of brick, stone, stucco, wood, or similar building materials compatible with the area. 
7.  Accessory structures such as a storage building, detached garage, pavilion, and/or pool shall comply with the buffer and/or setback requirements and shall be located to the side/rear of the main building. 
8.  The construction of one open air pavilion utilized for picnics/social gatherings only is allowed under the following conditions: 
(i)  The pavilion shall be constructed following the construction of the main school building; 
(ii)  The floor area cannot exceed 40 percent of the square footage of the main school building; and 
(iii)  The pavilion may not be lighted or used after 10:00 p.m. If the open air pavilion is built in conjunction with an attached storage building, the overall square footage shall not exceed 40 percent of the main school building square footage. 
nn.  Processing, packaging or handling of perishable agricultural products grown on premises (i.e., fruits and vegetables). Allowed in the A-R zoning district. 
1.  Minimum lot area: five acres. 
2.  All structures shall be set back at least 100 feet from any property line. 
3.  No structure shall exceed 5,000 square feet of floor area (interior measurements). 
4.  There shall be no outside storage of packaging materials, pallets, and all other items involved in the processing and packaging of said agricultural products. 
oo.  Recreation centers owned by nonprofit organizations as so registered with the Georgia Secretary of State Office. Allowed in the A-R zoning district. 
1.  The lot area shall be at least five acres, and the lot width at the building line shall be at least 400 feet. 
2.  Such uses shall be permitted only on a lot which fronts on a major thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. All access is limited to the major thoroughfare only. 
3.  A minimum 50-foot buffer plus the required setbacks listed below shall separate all buildings from any residential or A-R zoning district. The setback shall be measured from the buffer. A buffer shall not be required along the common boundary where the side or rear yard abuts property developed for the following conditional uses in a residential or A-R zoning district as regulated in sec. 110-169: Cemetery, human or pet; child care facility; church and/or other place of worship; college and/or university; hospital; private school; or recreation centers owned by nonprofit organizations as so registered with the secretary of state office. 
4.  Minimum setbacks for structures and use areas: 
(i)  Front yard: 100 feet. 
(ii)  Side yard: 50 feet. 
(iii)  Rear yard: 75 feet. 
5.  All buildings, other than storage buildings, shall maintain a decorative facing on those portions of the building which face public streets and any property zoned residential or agricultural-residential. The decorative facing shall consist of brick, stone, stucco, wood, or similar building materials compatible with the area. 
6.  Accessory structures such as a storage building, detached garage, pavilion, and/or pool shall comply with the buffer and/or setback requirements and shall be located to the side/rear of the main building. 
7.  The construction of one open air pavilion shall not exceed 1,800 square feet, shall be utilized for picnics/social gatherings and shall not be lighted or utilized after 10:00 p.m. 
pp.  Religious tent meeting. Allowed in A-R, C-C, C-H, and O-I zoning districts. 
1.  Said meetings shall not exceed 14 days per year at the same site. 
2.  Tents shall require the approval of the county fire marshal. 
3.  Off-street parking areas shall be required. 
4.  All activities shall cease by 10:00 p.m. 
qq.  Recycling facility. Allowed in the M-1 zoning district. 
1.  All separation and processing (baling, compacting, grinding, or shredding) shall occur entirely within an enclosed building. 
2.  A convenient paved drop-off area shall be provided, permitting vehicles to re-enter the public street in a forward manner. Traffic circulation patterns shall be indicated on the site plan. 
3.  All outside storage of recyclable materials shall be on a paved surface within fully enclosed bins with hinged lids or other access points which can be closed. 
4.  All outside storage areas shall be totally screened according to chapter 104. Storage bins cannot be a greater height than the screening. 
rr.  Seasonal sales, outdoor. Allowed in C-C and C-H zoning districts and church and/or other place of worship (see this article). 
1.  Seasonal sales shall be limited to: October 1 to January 31; limited to properties zoned C-C and C-H; and on-site church or other places of worship. The A-R zoning district, which has a bona fide farming operation, is exempt from seasonal sales requirements; 
2.  Location of seasonal sales and outdoor display, as well as, the temporary stand or tent, shall be exempt from article III of this chapter, except as provided herein; 
3.  Location of seasonal sales as outdoor displays, as well as, structures (temporary stand or tent), shall comply with zoning requirements for setbacks; 
4.  Outdoor sales of seasonal agricultural products shall be limited to: natural Christmas trees, natural wreaths, pumpkins and gourds, hay, straw, fruits, vegetables, nuts, and natural plants; 
5.  Outdoor lighting for activities shall not be permitted before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.; 
6.  Off-street parking shall be required; 
7.  Along with the completed application, a sketch or diagram of the proposed site showing dimensions of the area utilized, the proximity to buildings, parking lots, right-of-way, setbacks, and any proposed structure (temporary stand or tent) and temporary signage as regulated by chapter 108 shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department; and 
8.  Location of seasonal sales and outdoor display, as well as, the temporary stand or tent, shall be removed and cleared within 48 hours of the end of operation as indicated on the conditional use permit. 
ss.  Self-storage facility. Allowed in M-1 and C-H zoning districts. 
1.  The maximum size of a storage bay shall be 550 square feet. 
2.  All buildings shall maintain a decorative facing on those portions of the building which face public streets and any property zoned residential or agricultural-residential. The decorative facing shall consist of brick, stone, stucco, or similar building materials compatible with the area. The transportation corridor overlay zone shall apply when applicable. 
3.  Aisleways adjacent to storage bays shall be used both for circulation and temporary customer parking while using storage bays. The minimum width of these aisleways shall be 25 feet as measured from the closest part of the structure including any overhang. 
4.  Storage of vehicles, boats, and trailers, shall be located in the rear yard only and be screened from view from adjacent residential areas and public roads with any combination of privacy fence and/or berm, and vegetation. Covered vehicle storage up to 850 square feet per parking space, shall be allowed provided it does not exceed 25 percent of the overall gross square footage of all buildings. All covered storage shall have a peaked roof, be closed on any side that is visible from a residential or A-R zoning district or from any street, and shall be built of materials consistent with the main structure. Aisles adjacent to boat and RV parking shall be a minimum of 50 feet wide unless it is angled parking. 
5.  The accessory use of truck rental parking may be allowed within the front yard provided the landscaping along the front property line includes a two-foot berm with double the minimum planting requirements. 
6.  All outdoor lighting shall be shielded away from adjacent residential uses. 
7.  No exterior loudspeakers or paging equipment shall be permitted on the site. 
tt.  Shooting range, indoor. Allowed in C-H and M-1 zoning districts. 
1.  The indoor shooting range shall meet all applicable standards established in the NRA Range Source Book. Documentation indicating compliance with the aforementioned standards shall be submitted with the site plan. 
2.  The indoor shooting range shall meet all applicable state and federal regulations including, but not limited to: the state department of natural resources, Environmental Protection Agency and Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Documentation indicating compliance with the aforementioned regulations shall be submitted with the site plan. 
3.  The indoor shooting range shall meet the requirements of chapter 16, article II. 
uu.  Shooting range, outdoor. Allowed in A-R and M-1 zoning districts. 
1.  The outdoor shooting range shall meet all applicable standards established in the NRA Range Source Book. Documentation indicating compliance with the aforementioned standards shall be submitted with the site plan. 
2.  The outdoor shooting range shall meet all applicable state and federal regulations including, but not limited to: the state department of natural resources, Environmental Protection Agency and Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Documentation indicating compliance with the aforementioned regulations shall be submitted with the site plan. 
3.  The outdoor shooting range shall meet the requirements of section 16-4 and chapter 16, article II. 
vv.  Single-family residence and accessory structures and/or uses. See article III of this chapter. Allowed in the C-C, C-H, L-C, M-1, M-2, O-I, G-B, and BTP zoning districts. 
1.  Said residence shall be a single-family detached residence. 
2.  Said residence shall not be less than 1,200 square feet, and said residence shall not be allowed in subdivision developments as defined in chapter 104, article XV. 
ww.  Stadium, athletic. Allowed in the C-H and M-1 zoning districts. The athletic stadium shall not be located closer than 300 feet from any A-R or residentially zoned property. 
xx.  Temporary tent sales. Allowed in the C-C and C-H zoning districts. 
1.  Said tent sales shall not be operated longer than 28 calendar days per year; 
2.  Tents shall require the approval of the county fire marshal; 
3.  Off-street parking shall be required; 
4.  Outdoor lighting for activities shall not be permitted before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.; 
5.  Location of outdoor sales, as well as a temporary tent: 
(i)  Shall comply with zoning requirements for setbacks. 
(ii)  Shall be exempt from screening (see article III of this chapter), except where provided herein. 
(iii)  Shall be removed and cleared within 48 hours of the end of operation as indicated on the permit. 
yy.  Transfer station for household/commercial garbage and/or recyclable materials (including processing and handling). Allowed in the M-2 zoning district. 
1.  Minimum lot size: ten acres. 
2.  Transfer station operations shall be set back at least 200 feet from an arterial as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. 
3.  The transfer station shall comply with all licensing requirements of the state. 
4.  Such uses shall be permitted only on a lot which fronts on a major thoroughfare as designated by the county thoroughfare plan. All access is limited to the major thoroughfare only. 
zz.  Wind farm. Allowed in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. The setbacks shall be equal to the height of the wind turbine, including the blades, or the applicable zoning district setbacks, whichever are greater. 
(Code 1992, § 20-7-1; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 5, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 5, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 6, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 4, 4-25-2013; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 1, 7-25-2013; Ord. No. 2014-19, § 8, 12-11-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 3, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2015-12, § 1, 10-22-2015; Ord. No. 2015-13, §§ 1—7, 12-10-2015; Ord. No. 2016-12, §§ 4, 5, 7-28-2015; Ord. No. 2016-15, § 4, 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-04, § 7, 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 110-170. - Nonconformances. 
(a)  Nonconforming lots. A legally existing lot of record which fails to comply with the provisions herein, as of November 13, 1980, or as the result of subsequent amendments, or due to the acquisition of property for a public purpose, a rezoning, or a variance, shall be considered a legal nonconforming lot and may be utilized for the establishment of uses or the placement of structures and improvements, as long as, all applicable regulations can be met. Where the dimensional requirements of the zoning district cannot be met in terms of the placement of structures and improvements, a variance authorized by the zoning board of appeals shall be required. Any reduction in the land area of a legal nonconforming lot other than an acquisition for a public purpose which serves to make the lot more nonconforming shall result in a loss of the legal nonconforming lot status. However, any addition of property to a legal nonconforming lot which serves to make the lot more conforming shall not result in the loss of the legal nonconforming lot status. 
(b)  Landlocked property. In the event property is landlocked, as of the effective date of November 13, 1980, the property owner shall be entitled to building permits, provided the property owner has acquired a 20-foot easement to a public street, and said easement has been duly recorded and made a part of the property deed. In the event said property is divided into two or more lots, no further building permits shall be issued until each lot complies with the requirements of street frontage for access. 
(c)  Creation of a legal nonconforming lot for enhancements to a development. Said lot shall not be utilized for the permitted or conditional uses of the zoning district in which the lot is located and the lot is not required to meet the applicable minimum lot size, lot width, or road frontage requirements. Said enhancements shall include stormwater facilities, tot lots, decorative features (such as landscaping, arbors, fences/walls, fountains, sculptures, benches, arches, etc.), signs and the preservation of historic and agricultural structures for ornamentation (see nonconforming structures). A tot lot shall only be equipped with playground equipment (swing set, slide, teeter totter, monkey bars, sandbox, etc.) intended for small children. A minimum 15-foot setback shall be maintained for any playground equipment or any historic or agricultural structures utilized for ornamentation. The lot must be labeled "Not a Building Lot" on the preliminary plat and/or the final plat or minor subdivision plat, as applicable. The lot shall be under the ownership of the homeowners' association, property owners' association, or developer/property management entity, as applicable. 
(d)  Creation of a legal nonconforming lot for a legal nonconforming cemetery or burial ground. The creation of a lot intended for the sole purpose of containing a legal nonconforming cemetery or burial ground is allowed. Said lot is not required to meet the applicable minimum lot size, lot width, or road frontage requirements. The boundary of the lot shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the location of any grave. A legal nonconforming cemetery or burial ground shall be indicated on a preliminary plat, final plat, minor subdivision plat, and/or site plan, as applicable. A minimum 20-foot public access to a legal nonconforming cemetery or burial ground shall be maintained either through fee simple ownership or an easement. 
(e)  Minimum requirements. Individual lots, parcels, or tracts affected by proposed rezonings which are initiated by a party other than the board of commissioners of the county, shall meet the minimum lot size, lot width, and road frontage requirements of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein. Combination or division of lots to achieve compliance with said requirements shall be accomplished as a condition of rezoning approval. 
(f)  Consideration for the rezoning of legal nonconforming lots. Any legal nonconforming lot may be considered for rezoning to another zoning district where the lot would be made nonconforming by said rezoning. Factors of consideration, in addition to those enumerated in article IX of this chapter, would include the following: 
(1)  The degree of increase or reduction of the nonconformity of existing structures located on the subject property; and 
(2)  The current zoning and land use designations of adjoining lots as indicated on the land use plan. Where the dimensional requirements of the zoning district cannot be met in terms of the placement of new structures, a variance authorized by the zoning board of appeals shall be required. 
(g)  Nonconforming uses; nonconforming open uses of land. Any legally existing open uses of land which fails to comply with the provisions herein, as of November 13, 1980, or as the result of subsequent amendments, or due to the acquisition of property for a public purpose, a county initiated rezoning, or a variance, shall be considered a legal nonconforming open use of land. Said uses consist of storage yards, vehicle and trailer sales lots, auto wrecking, junkyards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, and similar open uses where the only buildings on the lot are incidental and accessory to the open use of the lot, and where such use of the land is not permitted to be established herein, shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to other requirements herein. 
(1)  When a legal nonconforming open use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use. 
(2)  Legal nonconforming open uses of land shall not be changed to any use but conforming uses. 
(3)  A legal nonconforming open use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land. 
(4)  When any legal nonconforming open use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that zoning district under the provisions herein. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
(h)  Nonconforming use of a structure. Any legally existing use of a structure which fails to comply with the provisions herein, as of November 13, 1980, or as the result of subsequent amendments, or due to the acquisition of property for a public purpose, a county initiated rezoning, or a variance, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use of a structure. Said uses shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
(1)  A legal nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use upon a finding by the zoning board of appeals that the proposed nonconforming use is similar in its operation and effect on surrounding properties. 
(2)  A legal nonconforming use of a structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use that generates more automobile or truck traffic; creates more noise, vibration, smoke, dust or fumes; is a more intensive use of the structure than the existing nonconforming use; or is in any way a greater nuisance to the adjoining properties than the existing nonconforming use. 
(3)  A legal nonconforming use of a structure shall not be extended or enlarged except into portions of the structure which, at the time the use became nonconforming, were already erected and arranged for, or designed for, such nonconforming use, except as provided herein. No alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use. 
(4)  When any legal nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of six months, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that zoning district, except as otherwise provided for herein. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
(i)  Request for change of the legal nonconforming use of a structure. The zoning board of appeals may authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, a change in the legal nonconforming use of a structure in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(j)  Request for extension or enlargement of the legal nonconforming use of a structure. The zoning board of appeals may authorize upon appeal in specific cases an extension or enlargement of an existing legal nonconforming use which the board is specifically authorized to consider under the terms herein. Said extensions may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the board that: 
(1)  The use is a legal nonconforming use as defined in these regulations; 
(2)  The legal nonconforming use is in full compliance with all requirements of these regulations applicable to nonconformances; and 
(3)  The extension of said legal nonconforming use will not further injure a permitted use on adjacent property. 
(k)  Continuance of a legal nonconforming use. The zoning board of appeals may allow a legal nonconforming use to be re-established after discontinuance for six consecutive months where it is deemed by the zoning board of appeals that: 
(1)  The design, construction, and character of the land, building, or structure is not suitable for uses permitted in the zoning district in which the legal nonconforming use is situated; 
(2)  Undue hardship to the property owner would result in not allowing the continuance of a legal nonconforming use; 
(3)  Adjacent property would not be unduly damaged by such continuance; and 
(4)  The use is to be identical to the prior legal nonconforming use. 
(l)  Nonconforming structures; nonconforming structures. Any legally existing structure, which fails to comply with the provisions herein, as of November 13, 1980, or as the result of subsequent amendments, or due to the acquisition of property for a public purpose, a rezoning, or a variance, shall be considered a legal nonconforming structure and shall be allowed to remain. The enlargement, expansion, or extension of a legal nonconforming structure which serves to increase the nonconformance, either vertical and/or horizontal, shall only be made with the authorization of the zoning board of appeals. Where the zoning board of appeals is required to determine whether a nonconforming structure may be enlarged, expanded, or extended, the provisions of a request for a variance (article IX of this chapter) shall be considered. 
(m)  Restoration and re-use of nonconforming historic structures. Nonconforming historic structures previously used for purposes not permitted in the zoning district in which they are located shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
(1)  The structure and previous use shall be identified in the architectural survey of the county. The re-use of the historic structure will be subject to the regulations of the nonconforming use of a structure (article V of this chapter). 
(2)  The structure itself shall be the subject of restoration. Any extension, enlargement, or alteration of the structure that does not comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter is subject to approval of the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  Areas of consideration for approval of such a request include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Restriction of allowable uses; 
b.  Parking requirements; and 
c.  Buffer and landscaping requirements. 
(n)  Use of historic residential structures and agricultural structures in residential subdivisions. The preservation of historic residential structures listed in the architectural survey of the county and agricultural structures are allowed in residential subdivisions to preserve the character of the county as these structures can be used as residences, community facilities, or as ornamentation for the subdivision. Existing structures used for a community facility shall meet all applicable building and safety codes and will be regulated as a conditional use under developed residential recreational/amenity areas. The use of these structures will be subject to the approval of the zoning board of appeals in terms of any nonconformance with the applicable zoning district. 
(o)  Reconstruction of legal nonconforming structures. When a legal nonconforming structure is damaged by fire, flood, wind or act of God, such structure may be reconstructed as a legal nonconforming structure only if the cost of reconstruction totals less than 75 percent of the current fair market value of the structure for tax purposes. Reconstruction costs shall include labor, materials, appliances, devices, and fixtures required for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (per applicable International Residential Code and International Building Code). The "value of the structure" shall not include the value of any accessory building, well, septic tank, or utility in determining the extent of the damage. 
(p)  Maintenance or repair of legal nonconforming structures. 
(1)  The normal maintenance and repair of a legal nonconforming structure, as is required to keep it in a safe and sound condition, may be made. However, if the structure falls into a state of disrepair where the cost of the maintenance and/or repair is 75 percent or greater of the current fair market value of the structure for tax purposes, the structure must be removed and/or brought into compliance. Reconstruction costs shall include labor, materials, appliances, devices, and fixtures required for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (per applicable International Residential Code and International Building Code). 
(2)  A property that is improved with a legally existing structure, which would become nonconforming in terms of the setbacks only within the zoning district for which a rezoning is being sought, may be considered for rezoning, except as otherwise provided in article VI of this chapter, O-I, and article VII of this chapter, transportation corridor overlay zone. Upon approval of the rezoning request, a variance authorized by the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary for the structure to remain within the setback (see article VII of this chapter). Any enlargement, expansion, or extension of said structure which serves to increase nonconformance, either vertical and/or horizontal, shall only be made with the authorization of the zoning board of appeals. Any new structure shall comply with the dimensional minimum requirements herein. 
(q)  Legally existing structures. A property that is improved with a legally existing structure, which would become nonconforming in terms of the architectural requirements within this chapter, may be considered for rezoning. Upon approval of the rezoning request, said structure shall be considered as a legal nonconforming structure in terms of architectural requirements and be allowed to remain in its architectural character, except as is required in a transportation corridor overlay zone regarding enlargement of an existing nonconforming structure. 
(1)  A property that is improved with a legally existing structure, which would become nonconforming in terms of the maximum height limits within this chapter, may be considered for rezoning. Upon approval of the rezoning request, said structure shall be considered as a legal nonconforming structure in terms of height limits and be allowed to remain at said height. 
(2)  A property that is improved with a legally existing residential structure, which would become nonconforming in terms of the minimum square footage requirements within the zoning district for which a rezoning is being sought, may be considered for rezoning. Any actions necessary to achieve compliance will be handled through conditions of rezoning approval. 
(3)  A property that is improved with legally existing accessory structures, which would become nonconforming in terms of the accessory structure requirements within this chapter, may be considered for rezoning. Any actions necessary to achieve compliance will be handled through conditions of rezoning approval, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(r)  Illegal nonconforming uses. Notwithstanding any other provisions herein to the contrary, as to nonconforming uses, which were illegal when they were commenced, or which became illegal thereafter, prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendment hereto, this section shall be deemed to impose additional regulations only. It shall not be held or construed to be permissive of such illegal use, nor as recognizing any right to the continuance of an illegal use, except in those instances where the illegal use was rendered conforming by the inclusion of the land, whereon such use was conducted within a zoning district, wherein such use is permitted, as shown upon the official zoning map of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 20-7-2; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 5, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 5, 4-25-2013) 
Sec. 110-171. - Changes in zoning. 
Any nonconformances produced by a change in zoning district boundaries initiated by the county or ordinance regulations after the date of adoption on November 13, 1980, shall also be governed by the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 20-7-3; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 5, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-172. - Illegal nonconforming uses. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions herein to the contrary, as to nonconforming uses which were illegal when they were commenced, or which became illegal thereafter prior to the date of November 13, 1980, or amendment hereto, this section shall be deemed to impose additional regulations only. It shall not be held or construed to be permissive of such illegal use, nor as recognizing any right to the continuance of an illegal use, except in those instances where the illegal use was rendered conforming by the inclusion of the land, whereon such use was conducted within a zoning district, wherein such use is permitted, as shown upon the official zoning map of the county. 
(Code 1992, § 20-7-4; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 5, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 110-173. - Transportation corridor overlay zone. 
For the purposes of this section, a development shall be defined as the land where the construction of improvements to support nonresidential uses is proposed, including: a petition to rezone the land, the subdivision of property through a preliminary, final, and/or minor subdivision plat, and/or the submittal of a site plan. 
(1)  SR 54 West Overlay Zone. All property and/or development which have road frontage and/or access on SR 54 West with nonresidential use or zoning shall be subject to the following regulations, in addition to the zoning district requirements, and other development regulations which apply. The intent of the overlay is to set standards specifically to Hwy 54 from Fayetteville to Peachtree City. 
a.  The purpose of the SR 54 West Overlay Zone is to achieve the following: 
1.  To promote and maintain orderly development and an efficient traffic flow in highway corridors; 
2.  To maintain a non-urban separation between Fayetteville and Peachtree City along SR 54 West; and 
3.  To protect the aesthetics for existing and future residential areas in this highway corridor. 
b.  Access to each nonresidential property and/or development shall be from SR 54 West or an adjacent street designated as an arterial or collector on the county thoroughfare plan. All access points shall be required to comply with chapter 104. 
c.  Dimensional requirements. 
1.  All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any state route right-of-way. 
2.  Front yard setbacks on SR 54 West for all structures, including gasoline canopies, shall be 100 feet. 
3.  Berms for nonresidential zoning districts: Berms when required as a condition of zoning, shall be a minimum of four feet in height, and shall be placed to the inside of the applicable buffer. 
4.  If the side yard abuts a nonresidential zoning district, all impervious surfaces, other than approved access, shall be located a minimum of ten feet from the side property line. 
d.  Architectural standards. Structures shall maintain a residential character. Elevation drawings denoting compliance with the following requirements shall be submitted as part of the site plan: 
1.  A pitched peaked (gable or hip) roof with a minimum pitch of 4.5 inches in one foot, including gasoline canopies and accessory structures and shall be of a type and construction complimentary to the facade. A pitched mansard roof facade with a minimum pitch of 4.5 inches in one foot, and a minimum height of eight feet around the entire perimeter of the structure can be used if the structure is two stories or more or the use of a pitched peaked roof would cause the structure to not meet the applicable height limit requirements. The mansard roof facade shall be of a residential character with the appearance of shingles, slate or terra cotta; 
2.  Gasoline canopy. Gasoline canopies shall also comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  Gasoline canopies, in conjunction with a convenience store, may reduce the pitch to a minimum of three inches to 12 inches to permit the height of the peak of the roof to be equal to or no more than five feet above the peak of the roof of the convenience store. 
(ii)  The vertical clearance under the gasoline canopy shall not exceed a maximum of 18 feet in height. 
(iii)  The support columns for the gasoline canopies shall match the facade of the convenience store. 
(iv)  The gasoline canopy roof shall match the architectural character, materials, and color of the convenience store. 
3.  All buildings shall be constructed in a residential character of fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), wood siding, wood textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or stucco (including synthetic stucco); 
4.  Framed doors and windows of a residential character. To maintain a residential character, large display windows shall give the appearance of smaller individual panes and framing consistent with the standard residential grid pattern for doors and windows. This does not apply to stained glass windows for a church or other place of worship. Large display or storefront windows shall have a minimum two foot high knee wall consisting of fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), wood siding, wood textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or stucco (including synthetic stucco); and 
5.  The design of accessory/out lot buildings shall be consistent with and coordinate with the architectural style inherent in the primary structure on the property; 
6.  When an existing nonconforming structure is enlarged by 50 percent or less, the enlargement does not have to meet the aforementioned architectural standards, but does have to match the architectural design of the existing nonconforming structure. This exemption shall only apply to the first occurrence of any enlargement after the effective date of January 24, 2008. Only one structure per lot shall be entitled to the exemption. When an existing nonconforming structure is enlarged by more than 50 percent the entire nonconforming structure shall be brought into compliance with the aforementioned. 
(i)  Architectural standards. This exemption shall expire January 24, 2015, seven years from the effective date of January 24, 2008. After the expiration date, the entire nonconforming structure shall be brought into compliance with the aforementioned architectural Standards when any enlargement is made. 
(ii)  Note: These architectural standards shall exclude the areas of the Hospital District which includes that area north of SR 54 West, east of Tyrone Road, and west of Sandy Creek Road. 
e.  Architectural option. An owner/developer may exercise an architectural option for structures within the overlay zone on lots adjacent to a municipality where a nonresidential architectural character has been established in the area. The purpose of this option is to achieve compatibility with surrounding areas, consistency throughout the development and greater creativity. A photographic architectural character inventory of the buildings within the area shall be submitted. Full color architectural elevation drawings of the proposed nonresidential architectural style for all building facades shall be submitted. Multiple buildings within a development shall have comparable architectural characteristics consisting of similar architectural design and elements, building materials and colors. Elevations shall be reviewed and approved by the board of commissioners and shall follow the procedure established in article IX of this chapter. Any change to the approved architectural elevation drawings shall follow the aforementioned procedure. 
f.  Landscape requirements. In addition to the standard requirements of the landscape ordinance, the following landscape requirements shall apply to the overlay zone: 
1.  Street frontage. Landscape area: 50 feet along the right-of-way of SR 54 West. The first 25 feet as measured from the right-of-way is for required landscape planting only. The remaining 25 feet may be used for septic system placement; underground stormwater detention systems; and the following stormwater management facilities/structures if designed in full accordance with the specifications provided in the most current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; vegetated channels, overland flow filtration/groundwater recharge zone, enhanced swales, filter strips, and grass channels. Septic systems and stormwater structures shall be exclusive of each other and the minimum distance of separation between wastewater and stormwater structures shall be established by the environmental health department and the county engineer. Utilities (including underground stormwater piping) and multi-use path connections may be located anywhere within the landscape area. 
2.  Side yard landscape area. Ten feet in depth along side property lines unless adjacent to a residential district where buffer requirements will apply. 
g.  Use of existing structure: When property containing legally conforming structures, under the current zoning, is rezoned to O-I the dimensional requirements shall be reduced to the extent of, but only at the location of, any encroachment by the structures and said structures shall be considered legal nonconforming structures. 
h.  Lighting and shielding standards. Lighting shall be placed in a manner to direct light away from any adjacent roadways or nearby residential areas. 
i.  Special locational and spatial requirements. 
1.  No more than 50 percent of the required parking can be located in the front yard along the state route as established by the front building line of any structure located on the site. 
2.  No outside storage allowed. 
3.  All roof-top heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment and satellite/communications equipment shall be visually screened from adjacent roads and property zoned residential or A-R. The screen shall extend to the full height of the objects being screened. 
4.  For all new construction, garage doors and bays associated with any use within the district shall be located on the side or rear of the principal building, and not facing SR 54. 
(2)  SR 85 North Overlay Zone. All property and/or development within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of SR 85 North with nonresidential use or zoning shall be subject to the requirements of the SR 85 North Overlay Zone. The intent of the overlay is to set standards specific to SR 85 North from the city limits of the City of Fayetteville north to the Fayette-Clayton county line. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the SR 85 North Overlay Zone is to achieve the following: 
1.  To establish and maintain a scenic gateway into the county, which projects an image of our quality lifestyle. 
2.  To promote and maintain orderly development and the efficient movement of traffic on SR 85 North. 
3.  To protect the aesthetics for existing and future development in this highway corridor. 
b.  Access. Access to each nonresidential property and/or development shall be from SR 85 North or an adjacent street designated as an arterial or collector on the county thoroughfare plan. All access points shall be required to comply with chapter 104. 
c.  Dimensional requirements. 
1.  All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any state route right-of-way. 
2.  Setbacks will be as follows: 
(i)  Front yard setback on State Route 85 North: 100 feet. 
(ii)  Gasoline canopy: Front yard setback on State Route 85 North: 85 feet. 
3.  Berms for nonresidential zoning districts: Berms when required as a condition of zoning shall be a minimum of four feet in height and shall be placed to the inside of the applicable buffer. 
d.  Architectural standards. 
1.  All buildings of which any portion of said building is constructed within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of SR 85 North shall be constructed of brick/brick veneer, fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), rock, stone, cast-stone, split-face concrete masonry unit (rough textured face concrete block), stucco (including synthetic stucco), and/or wood siding. 
2.  The design of accessory/out lot buildings shall be consistent with and coordinate with the architectural style inherent in the primary structure on the property. 
3.  When an existing nonconforming structure is enlarged by 50 percent or less, the enlargement does not have to meet the aforementioned architectural standards, but does have to match the architectural design of the existing nonconforming structure. This exemption shall only apply to the first occurrence of any enlargement after the effective date of January 24, 2008. Only one structure per lot shall be entitled to the exemption. When an existing nonconforming structure is enlarged by more than 50 percent, the entire nonconforming structure shall be brought into compliance with the aforementioned architectural Standards. This exemption shall expire on January 24, 2015, seven years from the effective date of January 24, 2008. After the expiration date, the entire nonconforming structure shall be brought into compliance with the aforementioned architectural standards when any enlargement is made. 
e.  Landscape requirements. In addition to the standard requirements of the landscape ordinance, the following landscape requirements shall apply to the overlay zone: 
1.  Street frontage landscape area. Fifty feet along the right-of-way of SR 85 North. The first 25 feet as measured from the right-of-way is for required landscape planting only. The remaining 25 feet may be used for septic system placement; underground stormwater detention systems; and the following stormwater management facilities/structures, if designed in full accordance with the specifications provided in the most current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; vegetated channels, overland flow filtration/groundwater recharge zone, enhanced swales, filter strips, and grass channels. Septic systems and stormwater structures shall be exclusive of each other and the minimum distance of separation between wastewater and stormwater structures shall be established by the environmental health department and the county engineer. Utilities (including underground stormwater piping) and multiuse path connections may be located anywhere within the landscape area. 
2.  Side yard landscape area. Ten feet in depth along side property lines unless adjacent to a residential district where buffer requirements will apply. 
f.  Use of existing structure. When property containing legally conforming structures, under the current zoning, is rezoned to O-I the dimensional requirements shall be reduced to the extent of, but only at the location of, any encroachment by the structures and said structures shall be considered legal nonconforming structures. 
g.  Lighting and shielding standards. Light shall be placed in a manner to direct light away from any adjacent roadways or nearby residential areas. 
h.  Special locational and spatial requirements. 
1.  Outside storage of merchandise or equipment and parts shall be allowed in the rear yards only, subject to minimum screening, setback and buffer requirements. Outside storage shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of all structures per lot. 
2.  All roof-top heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment and satellite/communications equipment shall be visually screened from adjacent roads and property zoned residential or A-R. The screen shall extend to the full height of the objects being screened. 
3.  For all new construction, garage doors and bays associated with any use within the district shall be located on the side or rear of the principal building, and not facing SR 85. 
(3)  General state route overlay zone. All property and/or development which have road frontage and/or access on State routes with nonresidential use or zoning shall be subject to the following regulations, in addition to the zoning district requirements and other development regulations which apply. This overlay zone specifically excludes SR 54 West, SR 85 North, and SR 74 North for which other overlay zones have been established herein. The architectural standards of this overlay zone specifically excludes the L-C zoning district, for which other architectural standards have been established. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the general state route overlay zone is to achieve the following: 
1.  To promote and maintain orderly development and an efficient traffic flow in highway corridors; 
2.  To protect existing and future residential areas near highway corridors; and 
3.  To protect the aesthetics for existing and future residential areas in this highway corridor. 
b.  Access. Access to each nonresidential property and/or development shall be from a state route or an adjacent street designated as an arterial or collector on the county thoroughfare plan. All access points shall be required to comply with chapter 104. 
c.  Dimensional requirements. 
1.  All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any state route right-of-way. 
2.  Front yard setbacks on all other state routes for all structures, including gasoline canopies, shall be 100 feet. 
3.  Berms for nonresidential zoning districts: Berms when required as a condition of zoning shall be a minimum of four feet in height, and shall be placed to the inside of the applicable buffer. 
d.  Architectural standards. Structures shall maintain a residential character. Elevation drawings denoting compliance with the following shall be submitted as part of the site plan. 
1.  A pitched peaked (gable or hip) roof with a minimum pitch of 4.5 inches in one foot including gasoline canopies and accessory structures and shall be of a type and construction complimentary to the facade. A pitched mansard roof facade with a minimum pitch of 4.5 inches in one foot and a minimum height of eight feet around the entire perimeter of the structure can be used if the structure is two stories or more or the use of a pitched peaked roof would cause the structure to not meet the applicable height limit requirements. The mansard roof facade shall be of a residential character with the appearance of shingles, slate or terra cotta. 
2.  Gasoline canopy. Gasoline canopies shall also comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  Gasoline canopies, in conjunction with a convenience store, may reduce the pitch to a minimum of three inches to 12 inches to permit the height of the peak of the roof to be equal to or no more than five feet above the peak of the roof of the convenience store. 
(ii)  The vertical clearance under the gasoline canopy shall not exceed a maximum of 18 feet in height. 
(iii)  The support columns for the gasoline canopies shall match the facade of the convenience store. 
(iv)  The gasoline canopy roof shall match the architectural character, materials, and color of the convenience store. 
3.  All buildings shall be constructed in a residential character of fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), wood siding, wood textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or stucco (including synthetic stucco) on those portions of the building facing front and side yards and/or any property zoned agricultural-residential or residential. 
4.  Framed doors and windows of a residential character. To maintain a residential character, large display windows shall give the appearance of smaller individual panes and framing consistent with the standard residential grid pattern for doors and windows. This does not apply to stained glass windows for a church or place of worship. Large display or storefront windows shall have a minimum two-foot-high knee wall consisting of fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), wood siding, wood textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or stucco (including synthetic stucco). 
5.  The design of accessory/out lot buildings shall reflect and coordinate with the general architectural style inherent in the primary structure on the property. 
6.  When an existing nonconforming structure is enlarged by 50 percent or less, the enlargement does not have to meet the aforementioned architectural standards, but does have to match the architectural design of the existing nonconforming structure. This exemption shall only apply to the first occurrence of any enlargement after the effective date of January 24, 2008. Only one structure per lot shall be entitled to the exemption. When an existing nonconforming structure is enlarged by more than 50 percent, the entire nonconforming structure shall be brought into compliance with the aforementioned architectural standards. This exemption shall expire on January 24, 2015, seven years from the effective date of January 24, 2008. After the expiration date, the entire nonconforming structure shall be brought into compliance with the aforementioned architectural standards when any enlargement is made. 
e.  Architectural option. An owner/developer may exercise an architectural option for structures within the overlay zone on lots adjacent to a municipality where a nonresidential architectural character has been established in the area. The purpose of this option is to achieve compatibility with surrounding areas, consistency throughout the development and greater creativity. A photographic architectural character inventory of the buildings within the area shall be submitted. Full color architectural elevation drawings of the proposed nonresidential architectural style for all building facades shall be submitted. Multiple buildings within a development shall have comparable architectural characteristics consisting of similar architectural design and elements, building materials and colors. Elevations shall be reviewed and approved by the board of commissioners and shall follow the procedure established in article IX of this chapter. Any change to the approved architectural elevation drawings shall follow the aforementioned procedure. 
f.  Landscape requirements. In addition to the standard requirements of the landscape ordinance, the following landscape requirements shall apply to the overlay zone: 
1.  Street frontage landscape area. Fifty feet in depth along state route frontage. The first 25 feet as measured from the right-of-way are for required landscape planting only. The remaining 25 feet may be used for septic system placement; underground stormwater detention systems; and the following stormwater management facilities/structures if designed in full accordance with the specifications provided in the most current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; vegetated channels, overland flow filtration/groundwater recharge zone, enhanced swales, filter strips, and grass channels. Septic systems and stormwater structures shall be exclusive of each other and the minimum distance of separation between wastewater and stormwater structures shall be established by the environmental health department and the county engineer. Utilities (including underground stormwater piping) and multi-use path connections may be located anywhere within the landscape area. 
2.  Side yard landscape area. Ten feet in depth along side property lines unless adjacent to a residential district where buffer requirements will apply. 
g.  Use of existing structure. When property containing legally conforming structures, under the current zoning, is rezoned to O-I the dimensional requirements shall be reduced to the extent of, but only at the location of, any encroachment by the structures and said structures shall be considered legal nonconforming structures. 
h.  Lighting and shielding standards. Lighting shall be placed in a manner to direct light away from any adjacent roadways or nearby residential areas. 
i.  Special locational and spatial requirements. 
1.  No more than 50 percent of the required parking can be located in the front yard along the state route as established by the front building line of any structure located on the site. 
2.  Outside storage of merchandise or equipment and parts shall be allowed in the rear yards only, subject to minimum screening, setback and buffer requirements. Outside storage shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of all structures per lot. 
3.  All roof-top heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment and satellite/communications equipment shall be visually screened from adjacent roads and property zoned residential or A-R. The screen shall extend to the full height of the objects being screened. 
4.  For all new construction, garage doors and bays associated with any use within the district shall be located on the side or rear of the principal building, and not facing a state route. 
j.  SR 74 South Corridor Sidewalk Requirements. In order to provide for the connection of the sidewalk system installed by GDOT when SR 74 South was widened from two lanes to four lanes, sidewalks are required as an integral component of nonresidential development in this area as identified in the SR 74 South Overlay District in the Fayette County Comprehensive Plan Land Use Element. Said sidewalks shall connect to the existing sidewalks. In the cases where a required sidewalk is to be located on abutting parcels, an alignment shall be established and the sidewalk shall be developed so as to provide for connection at the property line. 
(4)  SR 74 North Overlay Zone. All property and/or development which have frontage on and/or access to SR 74 North with nonresidential use or zoning shall be subject to the requirements of the SR 74 North Overlay Zone. The intent of the overlay is to set standards specific to SR 74 North from Sandy Creek Road to the Fulton county line to achieve the goals of the SR 74 North Overlay District contained in the county comprehensive plan. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the SR 74 North Overlay Zone is to achieve the following: 
1.  To maintain the efficient traffic flow of SR 74 North as the county's main connection to Interstate 85; 
2.  To enhance and maintain the aesthetic qualities of the corridor, as it is the gateway into the county; and 
3.  To protect existing and future residential areas in the SR 74 North corridor. 
b.  Access. 
1.  West Side of SR 74 North access and internal roadways. An internal collector road connecting all three of the large tracts identified in the county comprehensive plan, in the SR 74 North overlay district properties will be required, from the existing median break at Thompson Road south to Kirkley Road. The remaining large tract in the unincorporated county will be limited to one right in/right out curb cut on SR 74 North for the construction of a street to provide internal access in the tract. Lots created in conjunction with the development of these tracts will not be allowed individual curb cuts on SR 74 North or Kirkley Road. The design of the collector road will require left turn lanes at the intersections of SR 74 North and Kirkley Road as well as all intersections internal to developments. Final design approval of these intersections will be made by the county engineer. 
2.  East Side of SR 74 North access and internal roadways. To maintain efficient and safe operations on SR 74 North it is required that a parallel service drive be developed approximately 400 feet east of SR 74 North. This service drive shall be constructed when improvements are made to the portion of the property. The service drive will connect to the service drive being developed in Fairburn from Milam Road southwards to the county line. Within the county this service drive will extend from the Fulton county line into the property just north of the golf recreation facility. In addition, all residential properties proposed to be accessed through non-residentially-zoned properties along SR 74 shall be accessed via a public road built to county standards and dedicated to the county. Those affected properties are identified and addressed in the county comprehensive plan. 
3.  West Side of SR 74 North multi-use path system. In order to provide for alternative modes of transportation (including accommodation of golf cart, bicycle and pedestrian traffic), a multi-use path system is required as an integral component of site development. The multi-use path system will connect all three of the large tracts identified in the county comprehensive plan, in the SR 74 North overlay district, and will be constructed in conjunction with the roads. Said multi-use path system shall connect to any existing or proposed external multi-use paths. In the cases where a planned future multi-use path is to be located on abutting parcels, an alignment shall be established and the internal facilities shall be developed so as to provide for connection at the property line. On roadways with a planned multi-use path system the public right-of-way will be used for location of the path system components. The path will consist of a ten-foot-wide paved surface and stabilized shoulders that extend two feet beyond the paved surface. Path construction will consist of a minimum of four inches of gravel base with two inches of asphalt. Final design approval of the multi-use path design and construction in the right-of-way will be made by the division of public works. 
c.  Dimensional requirements. 
1.  All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any state route right-of-way. 
2.  Front yard setback on SR 74 North: 100 feet. 
3.  Berms for nonresidential zoning districts: Berms, when required as a condition of zoning, shall be a minimum of four feet in height. 
d.  Architectural standards. 
1.  West Side of SR 74 North architectural standards. 
(i)  All buildings shall be constructed of brick/brick veneer, wood, fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), rock, stone, cast-stone, split-face concrete masonry unit (rough textured face concrete block), architectural precast concrete wall panels, stucco (including synthetic stucco) or any architecturally engineered facades which simulate these materials. 
(ii)  The design of accessory structures shall be consistent with and coordinate with the architectural style inherent in the primary structure on the property. 
(iii)  No horizontal length of a roofline shall exceed 50 linear feet without a variation in elevation. Said variation in elevation shall not be less than two feet. 
(iv)  No blank or unarticulated horizontal length of a building facade shall exceed 25 linear feet without a variation in architectural elements, including but not limited to, building materials, colors, textures, offsets, or changes in planes. 
2.  East Side of SR 74 North architectural standards. 
(i)  A pitched peaked (gable or hip) roof with a minimum pitch of 4.5 inches in one foot. A pitched mansard roof facade with a minimum pitch of 4.5 inches in one foot and a minimum height of eight feet around the entire perimeter of the structure can be used if the structure is two stories or more or the use of a pitched peaked roof would cause the structure to not meet the applicable height limit requirements. The mansard roof facade shall be of a residential character with the appearance of shingles, slate or terra cotta: 
(ii)  All buildings shall be constructed in a residential character of fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), wood siding, wood textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or stucco (including synthetic stucco); 
(iii)  Framed doors and windows of a residential character. To maintain a residential character, large display windows shall give the appearance of smaller individual panes and framing consistent with the standard residential grid pattern for doors and windows. This does not apply to stained glass windows for a church or place of worship. Large display or storefront windows shall have a minimum two foot high knee wall consisting of fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), wood siding, wood textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or stucco (including synthetic stucco); 
(iv)  The design of accessory structures shall reflect and coordinate with the general architectural style inherent in the primary structure on the property including the roof pitch. 
e.  Landscape requirements: In addition to the standard requirements of the landscape ordinance, the following landscape requirements shall apply to the overlay zone: 
1.  Street frontage SR 74 (major arterial) landscape area. Fifty feet along the right-of-way of SR 74 North. The first 25 feet as measured from the right-of-way is for required landscape planting only. The remaining 25 feet may be used for septic system placement; underground stormwater detention systems; and the following stormwater management facilities/structures, if designed in full accordance with the specifications provided in the most current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual: vegetated channels, overland flow filtration/groundwater recharge zone, enhanced swales, filter strips, and grass channels. Septic systems and stormwater structures shall be exclusive of each other and the minimum distance of separation between wastewater and stormwater structures shall be established by the environmental health department and the county engineer. Utilities (including underground stormwater piping) and multi-use path connections may be located anywhere within the landscape area. 
2.  Side yard landscape area. Ten feet in depth along side property lines, unless adjacent to a residential district where buffer requirements will apply. 
f.  Lighting. 
1.  Shielding standards. Lighting shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any adjacent roadways for nearby residential areas. 
2.  Fixture height standards. Lighting fixtures shall be a maximum of 35 feet in height within the parking lot and shall be a maximum of ten feet in height within non-vehicular pedestrian areas. 
g.  Additional requirements. 
1.  All refuse areas and equipment shall be allowed in the side or rear yards only and shall be screened. 
2.  All roof-top heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment and satellite/communications equipment shall be visually screened from adjacent roads and property zoned residential or A-R. The screen shall extend to the full height of the objects being screened. 
3.  Bay doors shall not be allowed to directly face SR 74 North. 
4.  All utilities shall be underground. 
h.  Use of existing structure. When property containing legally conforming structures, under the current zoning, is rezoned to O-I, the dimensional requirements shall be reduced to the extent of but only at the location of, any encroachment by the structures and said structures shall be considered legal nonconforming structures. 
(5)  SR 138 and North SR 314 overlay zone. All property and/or development which have frontage on and/or access to SR 138 and S.R 314 north of Highland Drive with nonresidential use or zoning shall be subject to the requirements of the SR 138 and North SR 314 overlay zone. The intent of the overlay is to set standards specific to SR 138 and North SR 314 as described above. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the SR 138 and North SR 314 overlay zone is to achieve the following: 
1.  To maintain the efficient traffic flow on these highways as thoroughfares for Fayette and Clayton Counties; 
2.  To enhance and maintain the aesthetic qualities of the corridor; and 
3.  To protect existing and future residential areas. 
b.  Access standards. Access to each nonresidential property and/or development shall be from a state route or an adjacent street designated as an arterial or collector on the county thoroughfare plan. All access points and interparcel access shall be required to comply with chapter 104, development regulations. A concept plan, submitted with a rezoning application, and/or a site plan shall illustrate compliance with these requirements. 
c.  Dimensional requirements. 
1.  All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any state route right-of-way. 
2.  Front yard setback on SR 138: 100 feet. 
3.  Berms for nonresidential zoning districts: Berms, when required as a condition of zoning, shall be a minimum of four feet in height. 
d.  Architectural standards. Structures shall maintain a residential character. Elevation drawings denoting compliance with the following shall be submitted as part of the site plan. 
1.  A pitched peaked (gable or hip) roof with a minimum pitch of 4.5 inches in one foot including gasoline canopies and accessory structures and shall be of a type and construction complimentary to the facade. A pitched mansard roof facade with a minimum pitch of 4.5 inches in one foot and a minimum height of eight feet around the entire perimeter of the structure can be used if the structure is two stories or more or the use of a pitched peaked roof would cause the structure to not meet the applicable height limit requirements. The mansard roof facade shall be of a residential character with the appearance of shingles, slate or terra cotta. 
2.  Gasoline canopy. Gasoline canopies shall also comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  Gasoline canopies, in conjunction with a convenience store, may reduce the pitch to a minimum of three inches to 12 inches to permit the height of the peak of the roof to be equal to or no more than five feet above the peak of the roof of the convenience store. 
(ii)  The vertical clearance under the gasoline canopy shall not exceed a maximum of 18 feet in height. 
(iii)  The support columns for the gasoline canopies shall match the facade of the convenience store. 
(iv)  The gasoline canopy roof shall match the architectural character, materials, and color of the convenience store. 
3.  All buildings shall be constructed in a residential character of fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), wood siding, wood textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or stucco (including synthetic stucco) on those portions of the building facing front and side yards and/or any property zoned agricultural-residential or residential. 
4.  Framed doors and windows of a residential character. To maintain a residential character, large display windows shall give the appearance of smaller individual panes and framing consistent with the standard residential grid pattern for doors and windows. This does not apply to stained glass windows for a church or place of worship. Large display or storefront windows shall have a minimum two foot high knee wall consisting of fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), wood siding, wood textured vinyl siding, brick/brick veneer, rock, stone, cast-stone, or stucco (including synthetic stucco). 
5.  Structures of 35,000 square feet or greater with a minimum dimension of 150 feet may utilize the following architectural standards, in lieu of subsections (5)d.1, 3 and 4 of this section. 
(i)  At least 50 percent of all exterior wall finishes shall be comprised of at least two of the following facade types: brick/brick veneer, wood, fiber-cement siding (i.e., Hardiplank), rock, stone, cast-stone, split-face concrete masonry unit (rough textured face concrete block), architectural precast concrete wall panels, stucco (including synthetic stucco) or any architecturally engineered facades which simulate these materials. Any metal facades used on the remaining portions of the exterior walls shall establish a horizontal seam pattern. 
(ii)  No horizontal length of a roofline shall exceed 50 linear feet without a variation in elevation. Said variation in elevation shall not be less than two feet. 
(iii)  No blank or unarticulated horizontal length of a building facade shall exceed 25 linear feet without a variation in architectural elements, including but not limited to, building materials, colors, textures, offsets, or changes in planes. 
6.  The design of accessory/out lot buildings shall reflect and coordinate with the general architectural style inherent in the primary structure on the property. 
7.  When an existing nonconforming structure is enlarged by 50 percent or less, the enlargement does not have to meet the aforementioned architectural Standards, but does have to match the architectural design of the existing nonconforming structure. This exemption shall only apply to the first occurrence of any enlargement after the effective date of January 24, 2008. Only one structure per lot shall be entitled to the exemption. When an existing nonconforming structure is enlarged by more than 50 percent, the entire nonconforming structure shall be brought into compliance with the aforementioned architectural Standards. This exemption shall expire on January 24, 2015, seven years from the effective date of January 24, 2008. After the expiration date, the entire nonconforming structure shall be brought into compliance with the aforementioned architectural Standards when any enlargement is made. 
e.  Landscape requirements. In addition to the standard requirements of the landscape ordinance, the following landscape requirements shall apply to the overlay zone: 
1.  Street frontage SR 138 and SR 314 (major arterial) landscape area. Fifty feet along the right-of-way of SR 138 and SR 314. The first 25 feet as measured from the right-of-way is for required landscape planting only. The remaining 25 feet may be used for septic system placement; underground stormwater detention systems; and the following stormwater management facilities/structures, if designed in full accordance with the specifications provided in the most current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual: vegetated channels, overland flow filtration/groundwater recharge zone, enhanced swales, filter strips, and grass channels. Septic systems and stormwater structures shall be exclusive of each other and the minimum distance of separation between wastewater and stormwater structures shall be established by the environmental health department and the county engineer. Utilities (including underground stormwater piping) and multi-use path connections may be located anywhere within the landscape area. 
2.  Side yard landscape area. Ten feet in depth along side property lines, unless adjacent to a residential district where buffer requirements will apply. 
f.  Lighting. 
1.  Shielding standards. Lighting shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any adjacent roadways for nearby residential areas. 
2.  Fixture height standards. Lighting fixtures shall be a maximum of 35 feet in height within the parking lot and shall be a maximum of ten feet in height within non-vehicular pedestrian areas. 
g.  Additional requirements. 
1.  All refuse areas and equipment shall be allowed in the side or rear yards only and shall be screened. 
2.  All roof-top heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment and satellite/communications equipment shall be visually screened from adjacent roads and property zoned residential or A-R. The screen shall extend to the full height of the objects being screened. 
3.  Bay doors shall not be allowed to directly face SR 138 or SR 314. 
4.  All utilities shall be underground. 
h.  Use of existing structure. When property containing legally conforming structures, under the current zoning, is rezoned to O-I, the dimensional requirements shall be reduced to the extent of, but only at the location of, any encroachment by the structures and said structures shall be considered legal nonconforming structures. 
(Code 1992, § 20-7-5; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 5, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2012-14, § 7, 12-13-2012; Ord. No. 2014-10, § 1, 6-26-2014) 
Sec. 110-174. - Historic district overlay zone. 
Starr's Mill Historic District Overlay Zone at the SR 74, SR 85, & Padgett Road Intersection. All property and/or development located at this intersection with nonresidential use or zoning as depicted on the Future Land Use Map shall be subject to the following regulations, in addition to the zoning district requirements, and other development regulations as applicable. The General State Route Overlay Zone shall not apply to this area. 
(1)  The purpose of the Starr's Mill Historic Overlay Zone at the SR 74, SR 85, and Padgett Road Intersection is to achieve the following: 
a.  To maintain the historic character of the area; 
b.  To control the intensity and aesthetic quality of development at the intersection as it is the southern gateway into Fayette County; 
c.  To promote and maintain orderly development for an efficient traffic flow in highway corridors; and 
d.  To protect existing and future residential areas outside of the intersection. 
(2)  Access. Access to each nonresidential property and/or development shall be from SR 74, SR 85, or Padgett Road. All access points shall be required to comply with Georgia Department of Transportation regulations and/or Fayette County Development Regulations, as applicable. 
(3)  Dimensional Requirements. 
a.  All parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from SR 74, SR 85, or Padgett Road right-of-way. 
b.  Front yard setbacks on SR 74, SR 85, and Padgett Road for all structures, including gasoline canopies, shall be 100 feet. 
c.  Berms for nonresidential zoning districts: Berms when required as a condition of zoning, shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height, and shall be placed to the inside of the applicable buffer. 
d.  If the side yard abuts a nonresidential zoning district, all non-structural improvements, other than approved access, shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the side property line. 
(4)  Architectural Forms and Standards. All new structures shall maintain the historical and aesthetic character of the area. Starr's Mill was built in the late 1800s and is a significant historic resource in Fayette County. Starr's Mill is indicative of turn of the century architectural character common in rural areas and is a building of influence in this area. Other architectural styles such as One-Part Commercial Block and Two-Part Commercial Block associated with this period are acceptable for this overlay zone. Architectural examples are on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. 
Architectural Review. An owner/developer may obtain an administrative staff approval for structures by submitting elevation drawings denoting compliance with these architectural forms and standards. Staff review and approval will take place as part of the site plan approval process. An owner/developer may exercise an architectural review option for structures within the overlay zone. The purpose of this option is to allow the owner/developer to present a creative interpretation of the architectural intent of the overlay zone. Elevation drawings, submitted as part of the site plan approval process, shall be reviewed and considered by the Board of Commissioners in a public meeting with a recommendation from the Planning Commission and Staff. 
a.  Starr's Mill: Starr's Mill is a two-story structure with a gable roof. The roof is corrugated metal. The façade is wood clapboard siding and runs in a horizontal pattern. The structure sits on a stacked stone foundation and stacked stone pillars. Windows are wood-framed with a grid muntin pattern. Doors are also wood-framed. The structure has a covered porch with stairs and a wood picket rail banister. The building is red, the stairs, porch framing and banisters are white, the stair landings and porch decking are grey and the roof and porch covering is a grey corrugated metal. 
1.  Roof: Gable roof with a minimum pitch of 4 ½)inches in one foot. Roofing material shall be grey corrugated metal. 
2.  Façade Material: Clapboard siding running in a horizontal pattern on all walls. Acceptable sidings include wood and fiber-cement siding (e.g., Hardiplank). The foundation shall have the appearance of stacked stone. Façade colors shall match with the color palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. 
3.  Doors and Windows: Doors and windows shall have a frame and grid muntin pattern as established by Starr's Mill. Door and window frames shall be white with a minimum width of four inches. Large display windows and glass doors shall give the appearance of grid pattern muntins and framing consistent with Starr's Mill. Grid pattern muntins shall be white. Large display or storefront windows shall have a minimum two-foot high bulkhead consistent with the Façade Materials above. 
4.  Covered Entrance: Covered entrances shall be in character with the Starr's Mill porch consisting of a grey corrugated metal matching the roof of the main structure. A white wood picket rail banister with a minimum height of three feet shall extend the full length of the covered entrance with a maximum entrance space of three feet. All support structures shall be white. 
b.  One-Part Commercial Block: A popular commercial design from the mid-19th to the early 20th century. The one-part commercial block is a simple, one-story box with a flat or shed roof. Common façade materials consist of brick with decorative block, stone, and concrete accents. The focal point of the front façade is the entrance and windows, consisting of a recessed doorway and display windows with a transom resting on a bulkhead (the lower panels on which the windows rest) framed by pilasters. Architectural features include a cornice, belt course and parapet wall. 
1.  Façade Material: Brick/brick veneer shall be utilized on all walls as the primary façade material comprising a minimum of 65 percent of the wall, excluding doors, windows and associated framing. The brick color shall match with one of the colors in the brick palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. Painted brick shall not be allowed. The remaining 35 percent of the wall may have the appearance of a contrasting brick color, rough face decorative block, stone, and/or concrete accents and the colors shall match with the color palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. 
2.  Entrance Doors and Windows: The entrance door and window component shall consist of entrance door(s), display windows, door and window transoms, and bulkhead. Door and window frames may be constructed with wood, metal, or vinyl. An anodized silver finish shall not be allowed for door and window frames and all colors shall match with the color palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. Transoms shall be a minimum of two feet high and shall be separated from the windows and door by a mullion width of four inches. A minimum two-foot high bulkhead consistent with the Façade Materials above shall be required. 
3.  Architectural Features: A cornice is required. The cornice shall be a minimum of one foot in height with a minimum projection of four inches from the main façade. The projection may be gradual. A parapet wall is required along the front and side walls of the structure and shall be a minimum of two feet in height. Colors shall match with the color palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. 
c.  Two-Part Commercial Block: A popular commercial design from the mid-19th to the early 20th century. These buildings have two primary components — first floor storefronts (similar in design to a One-Part Commercial Block) and upper floors which historically were used for residential or office space. The focal point of the first floor is the entrance and windows, consisting of a recessed doorway and display windows with a transom resting on a bulkhead (the lower panels on which the windows rest) framed by pilasters. Upper floors have one or more floors of smaller symmetrically-positioned windows. Architectural features include a cornice, belt course and parapet wall. Common façade materials consist of brick with decorative block, stone, and concrete accents. 
1.  Façade Materials: Brick/brick veneer shall be utilized on all walls as the primary façade material comprising a minimum of 65 percent of the wall, excluding doors, windows and associated framing. The brick color shall match with one of the colors in the brick palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. Painted brick shall not be allowed. The remaining 35 percent of the wall may have the appearance of a contrasting brick color, rough face decorative block, stone, and/or concrete accents and the colors shall match with the color palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. 
2.  Entrance Doors and Windows (first floor storefronts): The entrance door and window component shall consist of entrance door(s), display windows, door and window transoms, and bulkhead. Door and window frames may be constructed with wood, metal, or vinyl, An anodized silver finish shall not be allowed for door and window frames and all colors shall match with the color palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. Transoms shall be a minimum of two feet high and shall be separated from the windows and door by a mullion with a minimum width of four inches. A minimum two-foot high bulkhead consistent with the Façade Materials above shall be required. 
3.  Upper Floor Windows: Upper floor windows shall be symmetrically positioned. All window frames shall match with the color palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. 
4.  Architectural Features: A cornice is required. The cornice shall be a minimum of one foot in height with a minimum projection of four inches from the main façade. The projection may be gradual. A belt course with a minimum projection of one inch from the main façade shall be required between the first floor and the second floor. A parapet wall is required and shall be a minimum of two feet in height. Colors shall match with the color palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department. 
d.  Lighting: 
1.  All wall lighting shall consist of period lantern or goose neck pendant lighting. These restrictions shall not apply to wall lighting required by the Fire Marshal. 
2.  All pole lighting shall consist of period post top globe, lantern, or pendant luminaries with rapid-ship posts. 
e.  Within the 50-foot front landscape area, a wall or fence is required to run along a minimum of forty (40%) percent of the frontage. If a wall, the wall shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height with the appearance of stacked stone. If a fence, the fence shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height with the appearance of wrought iron, picket, split rail or horse rail fence. Fence materials are limited to metal, vinyl/plastic, pre-cast concrete and masonry for columns. 
f.  Color Palette: Only those colors indicated on the color palette on file in the Planning and Zoning Department shall be allowed for structures. Any changes to the color of structures in this overlay must be submitted to Staff for approval. 
g.  The design of ancillary buildings and sign structures shall be consistent with the architectural style and color inherent in the principal structure on the property. 
(5)  Landscape requirements. In addition to the standard requirements of the landscape ordinance, the following landscape requirements shall apply to the Overlay Zone: 
a.  Street Frontage: Landscape area: Fifty (50) feet along the right-of-way of SR 74, SR 85, and Padgett Road. The first 25 feet as measured from the right-of-way is for required landscape planting only. The remaining 25 feet may he used for septic system placement; underground stormwater detention systems; and the following stormwater management facilities/structures if designed in full accordance with the specifications provided in the most current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; vegetated channels, overland flow filtration/groundwater recharge zone, enhanced swales, filter strips, and grass channels, Septic systems and stormwater structures shall be exclusive of each other and the minimum distance of separation between wastewater and stormwater structures shall be established by the Environmental Health Department and the Environmental Management Department. Utilities (including underground stormwater piping) and multi-use path connections may be located anywhere within the landscape area. 
b.  Side Yard Landscape Area: Ten feet in depth along the side property lines unless adjacent to a residential district where buffer requirements will apply. 
(6)  Use of existing structure. When property containing legal conforming or legal nonconforming structures, under the current zoning, is rezoned to a nonresidential zoning district the dimensional requirements shall be reduced to the extent of, but only at the location of, any encroachment by the structures and said structures shall be considered legal nonconforming structures. 
(7)  Lighting and shielding standards. Lighting shall be placed in a manner to direct light away from any adjacent roadways or nearby residential areas. 
(8)  Special locational and spatial requirements. 
a.  No more than 50 percent of the required parking can be located in the front yard along a State Route as established by the front building line of any structure located on the site. Sites with existing parking are exempt. 
b.  No outside storage allowed. 
c.  All rooftop heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment and satellite/communications equipment shall be visually screened from adjacent roads and property zoned residential or A-R. The screen shall extend to the full height of the objects being screened. 
(Code 1992, § 20-7-6; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 5, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2016-15, § 5, 7-28-2016) 
Secs. 110-175—110-201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES 

Sec. 110-202. - Zoning administrator. 
An administrative official designated as the zoning administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions herein. 
(Code 1992, § 20-8-1; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-9-2010) 
Sec. 110-203. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of any provision herein, the zoning administrator, or any other appropriate authority, may, in addition to other remedies provided by law and after due notice to the person in violation, issue a citation for the violation of this chapter. The citation for the alleged violation shall be heard in the state court of the county. The court shall give the person a full opportunity to be heard and, if the defendant is adjudged to be guilty, the court shall determine the extent and nature of the violation and the appropriate penalty. Where a violation has been determined to exist with respect to a building, structure or premises, the court may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, require that public utility service be withheld there from until such time as the building, structure or premises are no longer in violation. 
(Code 1992, § 20-8-2; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-9-2010) 
Sec. 110-204. - Stop work order. 
Whenever the zoning administrator or his designee determines that any building or structure is being constructed, altered, or modified, or any land is being used in violation of the terms herein, and in the zoning administrator's judgment, immediate cessation of such construction, alteration, or modification of buildings or structures or use of land is required to prevent harm to any person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, or to preserve the status quo, the zoning administrator may issue a stop work order to those responsible. Appeals from the decision of the zoning administrator with regard to interpretation, administration, and enforcement shall be made to the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the provisions of article IX of this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 20-8-3; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-9-2010) 
Sec. 110-205. - Penalties. 
See section 1-7 for penalties for violation of Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1992, § 20-8-4; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-9-2010) 
Sec. 110-206. - Permits and licenses void when issued in conflict. 
Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Code 1992, § 20-8-5; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-9-2010) 
Sec. 110-207. - Appeals. 
Appeals from the decision of the zoning administrator with regard to interpretation, administration, and enforcement shall be made to the zoning board of appeals. 
(Code 1992, § 20-8-6; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-9-2010) 
Secs. 110-208—110-237. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, adopted March 26, 2015, repealed the former art. VII, §§ 110-238—110-242, and enacted a new art. VII as set out herein. The former art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1992, §§ 20-9-1—20-9-5; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 5, 5-24-2012; Ord. No. 2013-13, § 1, 9-26-2013. 

Sec. 110-238. - Membership. 
(a)  Membership and appointments. The zoning board of appeals shall consist of five members residing within the county and shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. None of the board members shall hold any other public office, except that one member may also be a member of the planning commission. The zoning board of appeals members shall be removed by the board of commissioners for cause, upon written charges, and after public hearing. Any member of the zoning board of appeals shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the zoning board of appeals with respect to property in which the member has an interest. It may be deemed cause for removal should any zoning board of appeals member fail, without proper reason, to attend three consecutive meetings. 
(b)  Term of office. The term of office for each member of the zoning board of appeals shall be for three years and the member shall remain on the board until reappointed or a successor is appointed. It is the intent of this section that their terms be staggered with no term limitation. 
(c)  Compensation. The zoning board of appeals members shall receive compensation for their service as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-239. - Rules and procedures. 
The zoning board of appeals shall elect one of its members as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson, each serving for one year, or until re-elected, or a successor is elected. The vice-chairperson shall have the authority to act as chairperson in the chairperson's absence. The zoning board of appeals shall appoint a secretary who shall be an employee of the county. The zoning board of appeals shall have authority to adopt rules of procedure. Meetings of the zoning board of appeals may be held at the call of the chairperson. The chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The zoning board of appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the planning and zoning department and shall be public record. The decisions of the zoning board of appeals shall contain a statement of the subject matter being considered by the zoning board of appeals, and the grounds for its decision reduced to written form. The full text shall be sent to the appellant/petitioner. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-240. - Administrative assistance. 
The planning and zoning department shall provide such technical, administrative, clerical assistance, and office space as is required by the zoning board of appeals to carry out its function under the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-241. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Place, time, and date. The public hearings shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Place: the county administrative complex. 
(2)  Time and Date: Fourth Monday, at the time designated for its regular meetings. 
Any changes from the standard schedule for public hearings will be published in the newspaper which carries legal advertisements for the county in compliance with the requirements for public notification as provided herein. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. Public hearings shall be conducted with 20 minutes provided for the appellant/petitioner and proponents and 20 minutes provided for the opponents of an appeal/petition. An appellant/petitioner may reserve part of the allotted time for rebuttal. 
(c)  Notice of hearing shall be given. Before making its decision on an appeal, a request for a variance, or any other matter within the zoning board of appeals' purview, the zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing thereon. A notice of the date, time and place of such hearing shall be sent to the appellant/petitioner by certified U.S. mail to the appellant/petitioner's last known address. 
(d)  Public notice in newspaper. The zoning board of appeals shall cause public notice of the hearing to be published in the legal organ of the county, at least 15 calendar days but not more than 45 calendar days, prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(e)  Posting of signs. 
(1)  A sign shall be posted on property. One sign is required for each street frontage of said property. The sign shall be posted consistent with the requirements for newspaper notification. 
(2)  Signs used for posting property shall be a minimum of 18 inches by 18 inches and shall indicate the appeal/petition number, the time, date, and place of the hearing. 
(3)  A refundable sign deposit shall be required for each sign at the time of filing the appeal/petition. 
(f)  Who may appear. Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or attorney. 
(g)  Zoning board of appeals' decision. The zoning board of appeals shall approve, deny, or table each appeal/petition by a public vote. An action to table shall include justification of such action and a specific meeting date at which the appeal/petition is to be reconsidered. If there is not a full zoning board of appeals board present at the public hearing, the appellant/petitioner may request to table the appeal/petition to the next zoning board of appeals public hearing, provided the appellant/petitioner requests to table the agenda item prior to the presentation. A new legal advertisement will be required with an announcement to a specific meeting date if an appeal/petition is tabled. The property shall be reposted with new signage indicating the new public hearing dates. 
(h)  Time limit on zoning board of appeals decision. The zoning board of appeals shall reach a decision following a public hearing within 45 calendar days or the appeal/petition shall be deemed approved. 
(i)  "Writ of certiorari" (appeal ). An appellant/petitioner has 30 calendar days from the date of the zoning board of appeals' decision to seek a "writ of certiorari" (appeal) with the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-11, § 1, 6-22-2017) 
Sec. 110-242. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Appeals from actions of the zoning administrator. The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide upon appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of these regulations. 
(1)  Who may appeal. Appeals to the zoning board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision of the zoning administrator. Such appeals, specifying the grounds thereof shall be filed with the planning and zoning department no later than 30 calendar days after the date of notification of the zoning administrator's decision. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the zoning board of appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(2)  Legal proceedings stayed. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the zoning board of appeals that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the zoning administrator's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  Extent of the zoning board of appeals' power. The zoning board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of these regulations, reverse or affirm the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator. The zoning board of appeals may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to carry out the decisions of the zoning board of appeals. 
(b)  Request for a variance . The zoning board of appeals may authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, a variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. However, no lot is eligible for a variance for reduction in lot size, lot width, or road frontage, unless the variance request is for an improved illegal lot. A variance shall not be granted for any requirements of a conditional use with the exception of a legal nonconforming conditional use (see article V of this chapter), or a use of land, building, or structure that is prohibited in the zoning district at issue, except as otherwise provided herein. In exercising the powers described in this subsection, the zoning board of appeals shall not consider any nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district, and no permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other zoning districts as grounds for the issuance of a variance. A variance may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the zoning board of appeals that all of the following criteria exist: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; and 
(2)  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of these regulations; provided, however, no variance may be granted for a use of land, building, or structure that is prohibited herein; and 
(5)  A literal interpretation of this chapter would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same zoning district are allowed. 
In addition to the above factors, if the variance being sought is for an improved lot which is smaller than the minimum lot size for its zoning district, more narrow than the minimum lot width required for its zoning district, or has less road frontage than is required for its zoning district and the lot is an illegal lot as opposed to a nonconforming lot, the zoning board of appeals may consider such a lot for a variance. Should the appellant/petitioner be successful in obtaining a variance, the resulting lot would, for the purposes of this chapter, be deemed to be a nonconforming lot. If the appellant/petitioner successfully passes the above enumerated factors, the zoning board of appeals shall also employ the following factors for an illegal lot seeking to be deemed a nonconforming lot: 
(1)  The transaction giving the appellant/petitioner ownership in the subject property was more than five years from the date of the appeal/petition or if the period of ownership is less than five years the subject property was made illegal more than ten years from the date of the appeal/petition; 
(2)  The appellant/petitioner is not the person, or an immediate family member of the person, who caused the subject property to be an illegal lot. For purposes of these procedures, "immediate family" is defined as the spouse, child, sibling, parent, step-child, step-sibling, step-parent, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle, niece or nephew of the person who caused the subject property to be an illegal lot; and 
(3)  No adjacent property is available to add to the subject property to allow the subject property to meet the minimum requirements for its zoning district. In determining whether adjacent property is available, if adding any adjacent property to the subject property would no longer allow the adjacent property to meet the minimum requirements of the adjacent property's zoning district, then the adjacent property is not available. Additionally, any adjacent property which is part of an illegal lot shall not be deemed available for purposes of these variance procedures, unless the adjacent illegal lot is unimproved and the entirety of the adjacent illegal lot is combined with the subject property. If adjacent property is available, the cost of acquiring the adjacent property shall not be a factor in determining the availability of the adjacent property. 
(c)  Compliance with standards. Where an appeal/petition to the board is initiated due to an existing violation of this chapter and said appeal/petition is denied, the violation shall be required to be corrected within 30 calendar days of such denial, or as specified by the board, if a greater time period is necessary. The maximum extension of the time shall not exceed 60 calendar days. 
(d)  Forms. Appeals, requests for variances, or any other matter within the zoning board of appeals' purview shall be made on forms, as applicable, provided by the planning and zoning department; and all information requested on the forms shall be provided by the appellant/petitioner. Forms shall be filed with the planning and zoning department along with the necessary fees. No form shall be accepted by the planning and zoning department unless it contains all pertinent information and is accompanied by the required fee. 
(e)  Request for change of the legal nonconforming use of a structure. The zoning board of appeals may authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, a change in the legal nonconforming use of a structure in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(f)  Request for extension or enlargement of the legal nonconforming use of a structure. The zoning board of appeals may authorize upon appeal in specific cases an extension or enlargement of an existing legal nonconforming use which the board is specifically authorized to consider under the terms herein. Said extensions may be granted in an individual case upon a finding by the board that all of the following criteria are present: 
(1)  The use is a legal nonconforming use as defined in these regulations; and 
(2)  The legal nonconforming use is in full compliance with all requirements of these regulations applicable to nonconformances; and 
(3)  The extension of said legal nonconforming use will not further injure a permitted use on adjacent property. 
(g)  Continuance of a legal nonconforming use. The zoning board of appeals may allow a legal nonconforming use to be re-established after discontinuance for six consecutive months where it is deemed by the zoning board of appeals that all of the following criteria are present: 
(1)  The design, construction, and character of the land, building, or structure is not suitable for uses permitted in the zoning district in which the legal nonconforming use is situated; and 
(2)  Undue hardship to the property owner would result in not allowing the continuance of a legal nonconforming use; and 
(3)  Adjacent property would not be unduly damaged by such continuance; and 
(4)  The use is to be identical to the prior legal nonconforming use. 
(h)  Conditions on approval. The zoning board of appeals may impose or require conditions, as may be necessary, to protect the health and safety of workers and residents in the community; to protect the value and use of property in the general neighborhoods: and provided that wherever the board shall find, in the case of any approval, that any of the conditions upon which such approval was granted are not being complied with, said zoning board of appeals shall rescind and revoke such approval after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a hearing. 
(i)  Limitation on re-applying. If the decision of the zoning board of appeals is to deny, an application which seeks the same relief in regard to the same property shall not be accepted for a period of 180 calendar days following the date of the decision from the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 5-12-2016; Ord. No. 2017-11, §§ 2, 3, 6-22-2017) 
Secs. 110-243—110-262. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SCHEDULE OF FEES 

Sec. 110-263. - Fees. 
A schedule of fees shall be established from time to time by the board of commissioners. The schedule shall be maintained in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be available to the public. All fees required by this article shall be in addition to any other fees and charges required under other ordinances as enacted by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1992, § 20-10-1; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-9-2010) 
Secs. 110-264—110-289. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - POLICIES, PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS GOVERNING AMENDMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, adopted March 26, 2015, repealed the former art. IX, §§ 110-290—110-303, and enacted a new art. IX as set out herein. The former art. IX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1992, §§ 20-11-1—20-11-14; Ord. No. 2012-09, § 6, 5-24-2012. 

Sec. 110-290. - Intent. 
The purpose of this article is to describe and establish procedures for making changes to the official zoning map (i.e., rezoning of properties) and amending the text of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. Such actions require legislative approval by the board of commissioners in order to be enacted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-291. - Technical evaluation and qualification of properties. 
(a)  Every petition for a legislative change shall be subject to a technical evaluation. The evaluation shall be conducted by the planning and zoning department which shall coordinate a review of the proposal with all appropriate county departments and public agencies. Following the evaluation, a report shall be prepared by the planning and zoning department containing recommendations to be presented to the planning commission and the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The planning and zoning department shall distribute copies of applications for amendment to the planning commission and the board of commissioners. In addition, the appropriate county departments and public agencies shall be supplied with copies of each application. Each department head or his/her designee shall return his/her comments, in writing, to the planning and zoning department per the deadline established by the planning and zoning department. 
(c)  Any lots affected by proposed rezonings which are initiated by a party other than the board of commissioners shall each be of sufficient size and shape to meet all requirements of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in article V of this chapter. Combination or division of lots, in accordance with county regulations, shall be accomplished as a condition of approval prior to the approval of any permits or applications. 
(d)  A property improved with existing structures which would become nonconforming within the zoning district for which the rezoning is sought may be considered for rezoning (see article V of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-11, § 4, 6-22-2017) 
Sec. 110-292. - Public hearings. 
(a)  Place, time, and date. The public hearings shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Place: the county administrative complex. 
(2)  Time and date: 
a.  Planning commission: First Thursday, at the time designated for its regular meetings. 
b.  Board of commissioners: Second and fourth Thursdays, at the time designated for its regular meetings. 
Any changes from the standard schedule for public hearings will be published in the newspaper which carries legal advertisements for the county in compliance with the requirements for public notification as provided herein. 
(b)  Conduct of hearing. Public hearings on amendments shall be conducted with the opportunity for the applicant and proponents and the opponents of an amendment to speak. An applicant shall be given the opportunity for rebuttal. The board of commissioners and planning commission may establish time limits through their individual adopted rules of procedure and such time limit shall not be less than ten minutes. 
(1)  Decisions . Recommendations of the planning commission and decisions of the board of commissioners on applications for rezonings shall be made subsequent to the public hearings. 
(2)  Minutes . The minutes of any public hearing shall be maintained with the zoning decision entered thereon. The minutes shall be kept as public records. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-11, §§ 5, 6, 6-22-2017) 
Sec. 110-293. - Initiation of amendments. 
Applications to amend the text of this chapter may be initiated by the planning commission, the board of commissioners, staff, or by a member of the general public. The planning commission, the board of commissioners, a property owner, or the authorized agent of a property owner may initiate an application to amend the official zoning map (rezone property). When an agent is authorized to act on behalf of an owner, such certificate of authorization shall be notarized on the rezoning application. All information and required fees shall be received by the planning and zoning department by the deadline date for filing. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-294. - Limitation on re-applying and withdrawal. 
If the zoning decision of the board of commissioners is to deny a rezoning of property, then an application for the same property may not be re-submitted for rezoning until the expiration of at least 180 calendar days immediately following the date of denial. An application for a map amendment shall not be withdrawn by the applicant after the legal advertising as required herein, except as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-11, § 7, 6-22-2017) 
Sec. 110-295. - Appeal. 
An applicant has 30 calendar days from the date of the board of commissioners rezoning decision to file an appeal with the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-296. - Application for amendment. 
Any citizen filing an application to amend the text or the official zoning map may obtain an application from the planning and zoning department, applications to amend the text or the official zoning map shall be submitted on forms, as applicable, provided by the planning and zoning department. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-297. - Planning commission recommendation. 
(a)  The planning commission shall make a recommendation of approval, denial, table, or withdrawal without prejudice on each application. 
(1)  An action to table shall include a justification of such action and a specific public hearing date at which the application is to be reconsidered. 
(2)  If there is not a full board present at the public hearing, the petitioner may request to table the petition to the next planning commission public hearing, provided the petitioner requests to table the agenda item prior to the presentation. Only one such request may be made. 
(3)  When an application is tabled, a new legal advertisement will be required stating the new public hearing dates and the property shall be reposted with new signage indicating the new public hearing dates. 
(4)  The planning commission may recommend amendments to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area of a rezoning petition (where possible with a legal description only), or change the zoning district requested to one which is less intense, and recommend conditions which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this ordinance will be served and the public health, safety, and welfare secured. 
(b)  A resolution of the planning commission's recommendation shall be submitted to the board of commissioners. The resolution shall contain the recommendation of the planning commission, all grounds therefor, and shall be signed and approved by the chairperson or vice-chairperson of the planning commission. 
(c)  If the planning commission fails to submit a report within 100 calendar days from the date of the acceptance of the completed amendment application, the application shall be forwarded to the board of commissioners with a positive recommendation. Actions of the planning commission which contribute to the delay, such as the lack of a quorum or a tabling of the petition initiated by the planning commission, shall count toward the 100 calendar days. Actions by the petitioner, such as a request to table or a request to table where there is less than a full board present, shall not count toward the 100 calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-298. - Public hearing before the board of commissioners. 
(a)  After receipt of the planning commission's resolution and recommendation on the proposed amendment, the board of commissioners shall hold a public hearing. The board of commissioners may approve, deny, table an application or allow an application to be withdrawn without prejudice with regards to the waiting period required by a denial. 
(1)  An action to table shall include a justification of such action and a specific public hearing date at which the application is to be reconsidered. 
(2)  If there is not a full board present at the public hearing, the petitioner may request to table the petition to the next board of commissioners' public hearing, provided the petitioner requests to table the agenda item prior to the presentation. Only one such request may be made. 
(3)  When an application is tabled, a new legal advertisement will be required stating the new public hearing dates and the property shall be reposted with new signage indicating the new public hearing dates. 
(4)  The board of commissioners may approve an amendment to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area of a rezoning petition (where possible with a legal description only), or change the zoning district requested to one which is less intense, and recommend conditions which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this ordinance will be served and the public health, safety, and welfare secured. 
(b)  The decision of the board of commissioners shall be contained in a resolution. The resolution shall contain the decision of the board of commissioners, all grounds therefor, and shall be signed and approved by the chairperson or vice-chairperson of the board of commissioners. The clerk shall provide a copy of the resolution to the planning and zoning department, which copy shall become a part of the application file, and shall send one copy to the applicant by certified mail. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-299. - Conditional approval. 
Any application for an amendment may be approved subject to conditions which relate to the property contained in the petition. Conditions imposed on the property may only be more restrictive than the requirements of any zoning district and other applicable parts of this chapter as may apply to the property. The following policies shall apply: 
(1)  Consent not required . Approval of applications subject to conditions may occur with or without the consent of the applicant. 
(2)  Conditions shall be permanent . All conditions imposed by action of the board of commissioners shall remain on the subject property regardless of changes in ownership. 
(3)  Changes to conditions . Conditions shall be changed only through the amendment process by which they were established. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-11, § 8, 6-22-2017) 
Sec. 110-300. - Standards for map amendment (rezoning) evaluation. 
All proposed map amendments shall be evaluated with special emphasis being placed on the relationship of the proposal to the land use plan and related development policies of the county The following factors shall be considered by the planning and zoning department, the planning commission and the board of commissioners when reviewing a request for rezoning: 
(1)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the land use plan and policies contained therein; 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(3)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing or planned streets, utilities, or schools; 
(4)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-301. - Public notification. 
(a)  Newspaper. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation within the county in which are carried the legal advertisements of the county. 
(1)  The notice shall be published at least seven days prior to the public hearing before the planning commission, but not more than 45 calendar days, nor less than 15 calendar days prior to the public hearing before the board of commissioners. In the event that the time-frames above cannot be met with one advertisement, the notice shall be published twice. 
(2)  The notice shall contain the dates of the public hearings before the planning commission and the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Public notification shall include at a minimum the time, date, place, purpose of the hearing, location, boundary description, area of the property, and the current and requested zoning classifications. 
(b)  Posting of signs. 
(1)  A sign shall be posted on property for which the rezoning is sought. One sign is required for each street frontage of said property. The sign shall be posted consistent with the requirements for newspaper notification. 
(2)  Signs used for posting property shall be a minimum of 18 inches by 18 inches and shall indicate the application number, the time, date, place, purpose of the hearings, and the current and requested zoning classifications. 
(3)  A refundable sign deposit shall be required for each sign at the time of application for rezoning. 
(c)  Applicant notification. 
(1)  Upon certification by the planning and zoning department that an application is complete, a notice giving the date, time, and place of the public hearings shall be provided by certified mail to the applicant. 
(2)  The clerk to the board of commissioners shall notify the applicant by mail of any action (including tabling of action) taken by the board of commissioners. All actions of the board of commissioners shall be deemed to be effective as of the date of the action. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-302. - Zoning reversion. 
Within three years of the date of rezoning, rezoned property shall be utilized for uses allowed in the new zoning district or substantial development shall be demonstrated toward such utilization. Failure to so utilize or demonstrate substantial development may subject the property to consideration for reversion to the previous zoning classification. In such event, public hearings shall follow the established procedures for rezoning petitions herein and a final decision shall be rendered by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015) 
Sec. 110-303. - Responsibilities of the planning and zoning department. 
The planning and zoning department shall have the following responsibilities associated with receiving and processing all amendment applications: 
(1)  Receive all applications and supporting information and collect all fees at the time of initial filing; 
(2)  Maintain a log of all applications; 
(3)  Return incomplete applications and all supporting information to the applicant upon determination that an application is incomplete with reasons for the determination; 
(4)  If the application is complete, issue a notice that lists the dates, times, and places of all hearings that are scheduled for the application; 
(5)  Establish and maintain a file for each application which shall contain: 
a.  Copies of all materials submitted by the applicant; 
b.  Correspondence, records, reports, and exhibits produced during processing; 
c.  Minutes and all actions taken by the planning commission and the board of commissioners on an application; and 
d.  All follow-up activities, if any, including re-filing of additional requests, copies of citations or violations and any other significant materials. 
(6)  Prepare a map for all map changes (rezoning), which shall show the location and dimensions of the subject property of the petition, all properties within at least 1,000 feet of the subject property, and the zoning districts thereon; 
(7)  Transmit to the appropriate departments within five working days after the deadline for submissions, all materials to be evaluated; 
(8)  Schedule and provide notice for all public hearings, including the posting of the property, as required herein; 
(9)  Transmit the recommendation of the staff and planning commission to the board of commissioners per the agenda request procedure established by the board of commissioners; and 
(10)  Update the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-26-2015; Ord. No. 2017-11, § 9, 6-22-2017) 
Secs. 110-304—110-324. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 110-325. - Planning commission. 
The planning commission consists of that body of members appointed by the board of commissioners to carry out the directives of this and other ordinances and to carry out any other duties which may from time to time be assigned to the planning commission by the board of commissioners. 
(1)  Membership and appointments. The planning commission shall consist of five members residing within the county and shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of the county. None of the planning commission members shall hold any other public office, except that one member may also be a member of the zoning board of appeals. The planning commission members shall be removed by the board of commissioners for cause, upon written charges, and after public hearing. Any member of the planning commission shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the planning commission with respect to property in which the member has an interest. It may be deemed cause for removal should any planning commission member fail, without proper reason, to attend three consecutive meetings. 
(2)  Term of office . The term of office for each member of the planning commission shall be three years and the member shall remain on the board until reappointed or a successor is appointed. It is the intent of this section that the terms be staggered with no term limitation. 
(3)  Officers; rules and procedures; minutes. 
a.  The planning commission shall elect one of its members as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson, each serving for one year or until re-elected or a successor is elected. The vice-chairperson shall act as chairperson in the chairperson's absence. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who shall be an employee of the county. 
b.  The planning commission shall have the authority to adopt rules of procedure. 
c.  Meetings of the planning commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson and as scheduled. 
d.  The planning commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if they are absent or fail to vote, indicating such fact. The planning commission shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions all of which shall be immediately filed in the planning and zoning department and shall be public record. 
(4)  Conflict of interest. Any member of the planning commission shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the planning commission with respect to property in which the member has an interest. 
(5)  Attendance. It may be deemed cause for removal should any member of the planning commission fail, without proper reason, to attend three consecutive meetings. 
(Code 1992, § 20-12-1; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 12-1, 12-9-2010; Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1, 10-24-2013; Ord. No. 2017-11, §§ 10, 11, 6-22-2017) 
Secs. 110-326—110-353. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - CONSTITUTIONALITY 

Sec. 110-354. - Constitutionality. 
If any section or sections of this chapter are hereafter adjudged unconstitutional, it is the intent of the board of commissioners of the county that the remainder hereof shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Code 1992, § 20-13-2; Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, 12-9-2010) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES IN 1983 CODE 
This table gives the location within the 1983 Code of those ordinances that were included therein. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1983 CODE to 1992 CODE 
This table gives the location within the 1992 Code of those sections of the 1983 Code that were included in such Code. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1983 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1983 Code that are included in the Code. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES IN 1992 CODE 
This table gives the location within the 1992 Code of those ordinances not included in the 1983 Code that were included therein. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1992 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1992 Code, as amended through January 14, 2014, that are included therein. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances which are included herein. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Special Acts and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 