THE CODE OF THE CITY OF DOERUN, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

DOERUN OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Vacant 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mike Blair 
Judy Coleman 
Randy Dalton 
Suprina Greene 
Chad Kimbrell 
City Council 
____________ 
Tommy Coleman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kevin Branch 
City Manager/Utility Supervisor 
____________ 
John Walters 
Code Enforcement Officer 
____________ 
Frank Pierce 
Chief of Police 
____________ 
Sharon Walters 
Clerk of Court/Assistant City Clerk 
____________ 
Merisha Carelock 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Doerun, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2000 Code, as supplemented through June 3, 2002 and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2000 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Paige Granfield, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Merisha Carelock, City Clerk, and Mr. Kevin Branch, Utilities Director, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Doerun, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and indexes. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Doerun, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Doerun, Georgia. 2017. 
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To provide a new charter for the City of Doerun; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, vacancies, compensation, expenses, qualifications, prohibitions, conflicts of interest, and suspension and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for oaths, organization, meetings, quorum, voting, rules, and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for a mayor and mayor pro tempore and certain duties, powers, and other matters relative thereto; to provide for administrative affairs and responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, and other personnel and matters relating thereto; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof and other matters relative to those judges; to provide for the court's jurisdiction, powers, practices, and procedures; to provide for the right of certiorari; to provide for elections; to provide for taxation, licenses, and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for auditing, accounting, budgeting, and appropriations; to provide for city contracts and purchasing; to provide for the conveyance of property and interests therein; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for prior ordinances and rules, pending matters, and existing personnel; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act; to provide for effective dates; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city Charter (2000 Ga. Laws (Act No. 595), page 4138), as adopted by the General Assembly on March 15, 2000, signed by the governor on April 19, 2000, and effective on July 1, 2000. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes have been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
The City of Doerun, in Colquitt County, Georgia, is reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and is constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Doerun, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the earliest effective date in 2000 of the adoption of this charter, with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Doerun, Georgia." Photographic, typed or other copies of such map or description certified by the City of Doerun shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by O.C.G.A. title 48 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in O.C.G.A. title 22 or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to [the] health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to [the] powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; provided, however, that the sale or disposition of any public utility shall be subject to the approval of a two-thirds majority of the qualified electors of the city voting in a referendum thereon; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, public grounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment [facilities], waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, other public utilities, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under O.C.G.A. title 22 or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawnshops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors, and the use of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers, unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The city council established in this charter shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the city governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City councilmembers; terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. The term of office of each member of the city council shall begin on the first day of January immediately following the election of such member, unless general law authorizes or requires the term to begin at the first organizational meeting in January or upon some other date. No person shall be eligible to serve as councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election of members of the city council; each shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon such person's failing or ceasing to reside in the city or upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution, O.C.G.A. title 45, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the mayor pro tempore if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election as provided for in Section 5.14 of this charter and in accordance with O.C.G.A. titles 21 and 45, or other such laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. A vacancy in the office of councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election as provided for in Section 5.14 of this charter and O.C.G.A. titles 21 and 45, or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(c)  Suspension. Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Except as authorized by law, no councilmember nor the mayor shall hold any other city office or city employment during the term for which that person was elected. 
(c)  No councilmember nor the mayor shall vote upon, sign, or veto any ordinance, resolution, contract, or other matter in which that person is financially interested. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
Sec. 2.17. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the date of the first meeting in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.18. - Meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible as provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.19. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for [the] keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.20. - Quorum; voting. 
Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any councilmember shall have the right to request a roll-call vote, and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. The mayor shall vote only in the event of a tie. 
Sec. 2.21. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Doerun…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 2.23 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall, as soon as possible, distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Editor's note— An ordinance of June 6, 2000, enacted new provisions which allow for the adoption of ordinances with one reading and dispenses with the second and third readings. 
Sec. 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.23. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money, except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers or the mayor and two councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.21 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.25 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.25. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full, in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose, all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Doerun, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.26. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four years and until the mayor's successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of this city for 12 months immediately preceding the mayor's election. The term of office of the mayor shall begin on the first day of January immediately following the election of the mayor, unless general law authorizes or requires the term to begin at the first organizational meeting in January or upon some other date. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of the mayor's service. The mayor shall forfeit that office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Sec. 2.27. - Chief executive officer; delegation of powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive and administrative power granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter. 
Sec. 2.28. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Appoint and remove all officers, department heads, and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided in this charter; 
(3)  Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the councilmembers a recommended operating budget and capital budget; 
(5)  Submit to the councilmembers at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city and from time to time such other information as the councilmembers may request; 
(6)  Recommend to the councilmembers such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants, as the mayor may deem expedient; 
(7)  Call special meetings of the councilmembers as provided for in subsection (b) of Section 2.18 of this charter; 
(8)  Approve or disapprove ordinances as provided in Section 2.29 of this charter; 
(9)  Provide for an annual audit of all accounts of the city; 
(10)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever the mayor deems it expedient; 
(11)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this charter, or ordinance; 
(12)  Preside at all meetings of the city council, participate in the discussion of all matters brought before the councilmembers, and vote in the event of a tie vote of the councilmembers; and 
(13)  Sign as a matter of course all written contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
Sec. 2.29. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the councilmembers shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor after its adoption. 
(b)  The mayor, within ten calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the city clerk with or without the mayor's approval or with the mayor's disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 noon on the tenth calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the councilmembers through the city clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The city clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the city clerk to the councilmembers at their next meeting. If the councilmembers then or at their next meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of four members, it shall become law. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law, unless subsequently passed by the councilmembers over the mayor's veto as provided in this section. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the councilmembers as though disapproved and shall not become law, unless overridden by the councilmembers as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
Sec. 2.30. - Mayor pro tempore; selection; duties. 
(a)  By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore. In the mayor's absence, the mayor pro tempore shall preside at meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's physical or mental disability or absence. The mayor pro tempore shall not vote as a member of the council after assuming the duties and powers of mayor or while presiding in the mayor's absence. 
(b)  Following the organizational meeting as provided in Section 2.17, the council, by a majority vote of all the members thereof, shall elect one of their number to be mayor pro tempore who shall serve for a term of one year and until a successor is elected and qualified. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all executive offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the mayor, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)  All appointed officers and directors under the supervision of the mayor shall be nominated by the mayor with confirmation of appointment by the city council. All appointed officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the mayor, unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall, by ordinance, establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office; such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All members of boards, commissions, or authorities of the city serve at will and may be removed at any time by the city council, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the councilmembers, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be [the] custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The mayor shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position, except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Doerun. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.19 of this charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00, or imprisonment for 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and, if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be, on order of the judge, declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Colquitt County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers who are in office on the effective date of this Act shall serve until the expiration of the term of office to which they were elected and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  For the purpose of electing members of the council, the City of Doerun shall consist of one election district with five numbered posts. Each person seeking election shall designate the post for which he or she seeks election. 
(c)  On the Tuesday following the first Monday in November, 2000, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected a mayor and councilmembers for Posts 1 and 2. Then, on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November, 2002, and on that day quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected councilmembers for Posts 3, 4, and 5. It is the purpose of this section to provide a rotation system for the office of mayor and councilmembers. The terms of the offices shall begin as specified in this charter. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices, and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by majority vote. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected by a majority vote of the votes cast for each position. 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.12 of this charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., the "Georgia Election Code." 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  A councilmember, the mayor, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in O.C.G.A. title 45 or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Colquitt County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Colquitt County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Doerun. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business in this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years, and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide, by ordinance, for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.24. - Budget ordinance. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. The city council shall also comply with the budgeting and auditing provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6.25. - Operating budget. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget provided for in Section 6.29 of this charter, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The councilmembers may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the beginning date of each fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by said date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then-current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity, as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.27. - Levy of taxes. 
The city council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital improvements. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.23 of this charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the beginning date of each fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.30. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.31. - Procurement and property management. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council, and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.19 of this charter. 
Sec. 6.32. - Purchasing. 
The city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale and lease of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to sell and convey said cut off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force, until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of this city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 180 days before or during which time the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue, and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.14. - Construction and definitions. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not [to] be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(d)  Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, the term: 
(1)  "City council" means the members of the city council and the mayor. 
(2)  "Councilmember" means a member of the city council other than the mayor. 
Sec. 7.15. - Specific repealer. 
An Act to provide a new charter for the City of Doerun, approved April 28, 1975 (1975 Ga. Laws, page 4690), as amended, is repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 7.16. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective on July 1, 2000. 
Sec. 7.17. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from 2000 Ga. Laws (Act No. 595), page 4138. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
This table shows the location of ordinances to the Charter. 

 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - REFUNDING BONDS[1] 
A Resolution to propose to the qualified voters of Georgia an amendment to Article 7, Section 7, Paragraph 1, of the Constitution of Georgia, so as to authorize the City of Doerun, in Colquitt County, Georgia, to refund its present or any future bonded indebtedness legally incurred that may be or become unpaid, provided that the funds raised from the refunding bonds shall be used exclusively for the retirement of the said existing bonded indebtedness, and to authorize the governing authorities of the City of Doerun, without a vote of the people, to authorize the issuance of said refunding bonds, and to provide for the submission of this amendment for ratification by the voters of Georgia and for other purposes. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 26), page 73, which amendment to Ga. Const. (1877), art. VII, § 7, ¶ I was carried forward by 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 103) page 3717. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines have been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - [Constitution amended.] 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same that, Article 7, Section 7, Paragraph 1, of the Constitution of Georgia, which has heretofore been amended, shall be further amended by adding at the end thereof a new paragraph in the following words, to wit: 
"And except that the City of Doerun, in Colquitt County, Georgia, for its present or any future bonded indebtedness that is not paid at maturity may issue serial refunding bonds not in excess of the unpaid outstanding bonded indebtedness, including principal and interest, for the purpose of refunding and retiring said bonded indebtedness of said City of Doerun and may provide for the assessment and collection of an annual tax sufficient in amount to pay the principal and interest of said refunding bonds as they shall fall due, the proceeds of such refunding bonds as may be issued as herein provided to be used exclusively for the purpose of paying and retiring said bonded indebtedness that is due or that may become due and unpaid, and said refunding bonds may be issued when authorized by a vote of the governing body of the City of Doerun, now the City Council, and they shall be validated as is provided by law." 
Sec. 2. - [Referendum.] 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that when said amendment shall be agreed to by two-thirds vote of the members of each House, with the "ayes" and "nays" thereon, the Governor is hereby directed to have this proposal published in one or more newspapers in each Congressional District in this State for two months previous to the time for holding the next general election, at which proposed amendments to the Constitution of this State may be voted on, and shall at said general election be submitted to the people for ratification. All persons voting at said election in favor of adopting the said proposed amendment to the Constitution shall have written or printed on their ballots the words, "For ratification of amendment of Article 7, Section 7, Paragraph 1, of the Constitution, authorizing the City of Doerun to issue refunding bonds," and all persons opposed to the adopting of said amendment shall have written or printed on their ballots the words, "Against ratification of amendment of Article 7, Section 7, Paragraph 1, of the Constitution, authorizing the City of Doerun to issue refunding bonds." And if a majority of the electors qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly, voting thereon, shall vote for ratification thereof as provided by law, the result shall be consolidated as now required by law in elections for members of the General Assembly, and the said amendment shall become a part of Article 7, Section 7, Paragraph 1, of the Constitution of the State, and the Governor shall make a proclamation therefor as provided by law. 
Sec. 3. - [Repealer.] 
Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that all laws or parts of laws in conflict herewith be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Approval Date: Approved March 26, 1941. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of related laws in this publication. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Doerun, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Doerun Code." 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-1; Code 2000, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the city, as it exists on the effective date of this Code, or as it may be amended in the future. 
City. The terms "the city" and "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Doerun" followed them. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is referred to without further qualification, it means The Code of the City of Doerun, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted. If the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Council, city council. The terms "council" and "city council" means the city council of the City of Doerun, Georgia. 
County. The terms "the county" and "this county" means the County of Colquitt. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" means and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Limits. The term "limits" means the corporate limits (legal boundary) of the city. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and any others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that meaning. 
Number. The singular and plural number each include the other, unless the other is expressly excluded. 
Oath, affirmation. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officers, agencies, etc. Whenever the title of an officer, employee, department, board, commission other agency is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Doerun" followed it. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to any individual, company, society, association, firm, partnership, body politic or corporate or group of individuals, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any place including, but not limited to, buildings or conveyances to which the public has, or is permitted to have, access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel dining rooms, lobbies and corridors of hotels, and any highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a railway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The terms "the state" and "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, that building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, numerals or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-2; Code 2000, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of those sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of the Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-3; Code 2000, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
(Code 2000, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Editor's notes and references. 
The editor's notes, Charter references, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
(Code 2000, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain actions and ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in the Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done; or any penalty or forfeiture incurred; or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution of the city promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city; or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any rights or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city to any person, firm or corporation; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(5)  Any appropriation of the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance or resolution consistent with this Code levying or imposing charges, fees or taxes; 
(7)  Any zoning ordinance of the city or amendments thereto or any ordinance rezoning property or amending a zoning map; 
(8)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision or regulating subdivisions; 
(9)  Any ordinance pertaining to salaries of elected or appointed officers or employees; 
(10)  Any ordinance pertaining to water restrictions; 
(11)  Any temporary or special ordinance; 
and all such actions and ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 2000, § 1-6; Ord. of 10-4-1982, § 3) 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code, or its application to any persons or circumstances, shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code or their application, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 180 days, or work on the public streets or public works of the city for a term not exceeding 180 days, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's Charter or this Code. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous, with respect to time, are a public nuisance. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-5; Code 2000, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from such Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make them a part this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated into this Code, so that a reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "Section ____________ of The Code of the City of Doerun, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…(set out new provisions in full)." 
(c)  When the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not then existing in the Code, which the city council desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: "Section ____________ . It is the intention of the city council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of The Code of the City of Doerun, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1982, § 1-1-6; Code 2000, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 2000, § 1-1) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Use of personal property belonging to city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use city equipment or other personal property belonging to the city on private property; provided, however, that the city may use such equipment or property on private property upon the receipt of an easement from the private property owner and if the work to be done is for a public purpose. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-7; Code 2000, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-2. - Records retention. 
(a)  Those local government records retention schedules as promulgated by the office of the Secretary of the State of Georgia, as amended from time to time, and found on http://sos.georgia.archives.org/records/retention_schedules are hereby approved and adopted as records retention schedules for the city. 
(b)  The city clerk is responsible for records management activities and is charged with the responsibility of directing and coordinating all records management matters. 
(c)  No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with approved retention schedules. 
(d)  Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the city clerk which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 16-0606-3, §§ 1—4, 6-6-2016) 
State Law reference— Records management, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq. 
Secs. 2-3—2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-23. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the council are held at the city hall or at such other place as may be designated, on the first Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-11; Code 2000, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-24. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the council or if for any reason any meeting shall fail to complete transaction of the business before the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting agreed upon by a majority of the members present. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-12; Code 2000, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-25. - Order of business. 
(a)  The order of business at all regular meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Correction and approval of minutes of last meeting; 
(2)  Correction and approval of invoices; 
(3)  Reports of committees; 
(4)  Unfinished business; 
(5)  Reading by the clerk of any communications; and 
(6)  New business. 
(b)  If the council directs any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. 
(c)  No proposition shall be entertained by the council until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any member, be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-13; Code 2000, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-26. - Previous questions. 
The previous questions may be called at any time by a majority of the members present. The ayes and nays may be called for by any member. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-15; Code 2000, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-27. - Motions having precedence. 
(a)  When a question is under consideration, no motion shall be received, except as follows: 
(1)  To lay on the table; 
(2)  To postpone to a time certain; 
(3)  To postpone indefinitely; 
(4)  To refer to a committee; 
(5)  To amend; 
(6)  To strike out or insert; or 
(7)  To divide. 
(b)  Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-16; Code 2000, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-28. - Motion to adjourn. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-27, a motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1-17; Code 2000, § 2-38) 
Secs. 2-29—2-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-60. - Oaths. 
All appointed city officers and employees shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe, before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths, the oaths described in O.C.G.A. title 45, ch. 3, art. 1(O.C.G.A. § 45-3-1 et seq.) and any other applicable law. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-5; Code 2000, § 2-74) 
Sec. 2-61. - Bonds. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, the council may require any department head, city official or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the council. Such bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of such duties and to secure against corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations or unlawful expenditures in office. Such surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in the state and approved by the council. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-6; Code 2000, § 2-75) 
Sec. 2-62. - Department heads. 
Each department head, subject to the approval of the mayor, shall have the authority to employ the necessary personnel, as authorized by council action, to perform the duties of his department. It shall be the responsibility of each such department head to determine whether the applicant has the necessary qualifications for the particular position applied for. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-11; Code 2000, § 62-1) 
Sec. 2-63. - Adoption of policies. 
The city council shall adopt personnel policies governing the relationship between the city and its employees. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-12; Code 2000, § 62-2) 
State Law reference— Official bonds, O.C.G.A. § 45-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-64. - Retirement plan. 
An ordinance approved on December 2, 1985 establishing a retirement plan for the city employees, as now or hereafter amended, is adopted as a part of this section as if set out at length in this section. 
(Code 2000, § 62-3) 
Secs. 2-65—2-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-87. - Established. 
The following city departments are established: 
(1)  Administrative department; 
(2)  Police department; and 
(3)  Utilities department. 
(Code 1982, § 2-4-4; Code 2000, § 2-111) 
Secs. 2-88—2-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-118—2-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-148. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on January 1 and end on December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-1; Code 2000, § 2-171) 
Sec. 2-149. - Annual budget; appropriations. 
An annual budget and an appropriations ordinance shall be adopted by the council prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day of the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 45 days subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the budget and the appropriations ordinance are not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, this section automatically authorizes the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the city. The budget, as adopted, shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues (including appropriated unencumbered surplus) equal to appropriated expenditures. All funds within the budget shall also be balanced. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-2; Code 2000, § 2-172) 
State Law reference— Local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-150. - Purchasing. 
The utilities director shall be the purchasing agent of the city and shall: 
(1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies and contractual services for the city, and sell or otherwise dispose of all surplus city equipment and supplies; and 
(2)  Maintain an inventory of all materials, supplies or equipment owned by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-3; Code 2000, § 2-173) 
Sec. 2-151. - Use of city credit cards. 
The city has adopted a policy regarding government credit card and/or purchasing card usage. Any employee or official who uses or possesses a government credit card should abide by the terms of this policy when using the government credit card for purchases. 
(Ord. No. 2015-1207, § 1(2-174), 12-7-2015) 
Chapter 4 - ADVERTISING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— False advertising, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-420 et seq.; misrepresenting ownership in advertising liquidation, auction or going out of business sale prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-425. 

Sec. 4-1. - Posting or displaying without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge or upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person, any bills, signs or advertisements, without the consent, in writing, of the owner. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-5; Code 2000, § 6-1) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local licensing of malt beverage sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local licensing of wine sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, etc., jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs, etc., O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bar means any premises at which a retailer, licensed pursuant to this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages, derives 75 percent or more total annual gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Conviction means an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of bond by a person charged with a crime. 
Disciplinary action means any citation or arrest arising out of the violation of any law, rule, regulation, resolution, or ordinance of a governmental entity relating to the manufacture, distribution, sale, or possession of alcoholic beverages against a licensee, an employee of a licensee, or any person holding a financial interest in the license of a licensee on the premises or place of business of any licensee. 
Distance shall be measured by the most direct route traveled on the ground. 
Governmental entity means the United States government, any state government, any local government, and any department, agency, or instrumentality thereof. 
License means the authorization by the city council to engage in the sale of malt beverages and/or wine. 
Licensee means any person issued a license pursuant to this chapter by a governmental entity to operate a bar. 
Malt beverages and wine mean those beverages defined as such by O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Minor means any person to whom the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
On-premises consumption means the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by the drink on the premises where the drink is purchased. 
Premises means the definite, closed or partitioned-in locality, whether a room, shop, or building, wherein malt beverages and/or wine are sold and any and all surrounding and adjacent areas, whether enclosed or not, which are owned by or under the control of the person to whom the license is issued. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale any malt beverage and/or wine to any member of the public. 
School or college means such state, county, city, church or other school that teaches the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of the state, to include licensed preschool and/or kindergarten facilities, and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects, such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations, and other special subjects are taught. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.1); Ord. No. 2016-0606-4, § 4, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 6-2. - Public possession or consumption. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic beverage upon city property or upon any open premises adjacent to any public business in the city, whether or not such person is located in a vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his hand any open container used, or which has been used, for alcoholic beverages upon city property or upon any open premises adjacent to any public business in the city. 
(c)  This section shall not be applicable to the parking lot or other premises of a duly licensed business selling alcoholic beverages where curb service is regularly provided by employees of such a business; however, this section is expressly applicable to such businesses where customers service themselves, which is to say, where the customer makes his purchase and returns to a vehicle or the outside premises of such business. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.2)) 
Sec. 6-3. - Minors on premises. 
It shall be unlawful to allow any minor on the premises of any business or establishment when 30 percent or more of the gross receipts of the business during the prior license year were from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.3)) 
State Law reference— Alcohol and underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 et seq. 
Sec. 6-4. - General operational regulations. 
(a)  No holder of a license authorizing the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in the city, or any agent or employee of the licensee, shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct or breach of peace. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for establishments to permit the sale or consumption of any alcoholic beverage upon the premises without obtaining the appropriate license permitting such sale or consumption. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.4); Ord. No. 2016-0606-4, § 2, 6-6-2016) 
Sec. 6-5. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Retail and wholesale dealers of malt beverages and wine shall not engage in the sale of such beverages except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:30 a.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays; between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 2:30 a.m. on Thursdays and Fridays; between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Saturdays; and on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. No licensee under this chapter shall permit such person's place of business to be open for the sale of alcoholic beverages on days during which or upon which the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by law. 
(b)  Establishments having an on-premises consumption license issued pursuant to section 6-34(d) and realizing 50 percent or greater of their business, as measured by gross receipts, from the sale of food, may be permitted to be opened for any reason on Sundays, Christmas Day, or any other days on which the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by state law. Provided, however, no alcoholic beverages may be sold. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.5); Ord. of 7-6-2015, § 1) 
State Law reference— Restrictions of days of sale of alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-6. - Use of licensed wholesalers. 
Alcoholic beverages shall be received at or delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by no other means than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the state and a license from the city to make deliveries in the city. Transportation of such beverages by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of the retail license or wholesale license. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.6)) 
Sec. 6-7. - Penalties. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.8)) 
Secs. 6-8—6-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-33. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Doerun Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.11)) 
Sec. 6-34. - General provisions. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be legal in the city, subject to the following terms, conditions, and restrictions, and upon full compliance by all persons engaged in business under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The license granted hereunder shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on a business during the term of the license, subject to all the terms and conditions imposed herein and by related laws located in the applicable provisions of state law and other city ordinances relating to business licenses. 
(c)  Licenses may be granted for the purpose of package sales of malt beverages and/or wine. 
(d)  Licenses may be granted for the purpose of the sale of malt beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold if the establishment seeking the license, during the 12 months immediately preceding the granting of the annual license, or such portion thereof as it shall have been in operation, realized 50 percent or more of its gross income from the sale of food. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.12)) 
Sec. 6-35. - Excise tax—Malt beverages. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the city a specific excise tax in the amount of $0.05 per 12-ounce container, or any portion thereof, so as to graduate the tax on bottles, cans, and containers of various sizes of malt beverages sold by each wholesale dealer within the city, and an excise tax on tap or draft beer in the amount of $6.00 for each container sold, as hereinafter specified, containing not more than 15½ gallons, and at a like rate for fractional parts, where the beverage is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, such beverage being commonly known as tap or draft beer. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.13)) 
State Law reference— Local excise tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq. 
Sec. 6-36. - Same—Wine. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of wine, excluding fortified wine, an excise tax in the sum of $0.22 per wine liter and in similar proportion for bottles and containers of various sizes. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The wine excise tax shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in wine in the city. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The wine excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of wine sold for the preceding calendar month by the size of the container. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.14)) 
State Law reference— Local excise tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq. 
Secs. 6-37—6-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-61. - Application fee. 
There shall be a nonrefundable fee of $75.00 which must be submitted simultaneously with an application for any license covered under this chapter. No such application shall be processed and considered by the city council until such fee has been paid. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.20)) 
Sec. 6-62. - Licensee qualifications. 
(a)  All applicants shall be investigated by the city police or by such other person or entity as may be designated by the city council. The report of such investigation shall be presented to the city council for consideration with the application. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverage license required by this chapter shall be issued to the following persons or for the following locations: 
(1)  To any person who is not a resident of the city, unless such person designates a resident of the city who shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. 
(2)  To a person who, in the opinion and judgment of the city council, is not of good moral character and reputation in the community in which such person resides. 
(3)  To a person found by the city council to have been guilty of the violation of any federal, state, or local law or regulation respecting the manufacture, possession, or sale of any alcoholic beverage within the last five years, or who has forfeited a bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation within the last five years. 
(4)  To any person who is the previous holder of an alcoholic beverage license and is, in the judgment and discretion of the city council, an unfit person to have a license because of the manner in which such person conducted business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection, in order to prevent the violation of any laws or regulations relating to such business. 
(5)  For a location not suitable in the judgment and discretion of the city council because of traffic congestion, the general character of the neighborhood, or by reason of the effect which such establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding properties. 
(6)  For a location within an area where, in the judgment of the governing body, the number of alcoholic beverage licenses already granted makes it contrary to the public interest and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(7)  For a location at which a previous alcoholic beverage license has been denied, revoked, or suspended, and where, in the judgment of the city council, the problems which have arisen from the operation of an alcoholic beverage license at such location indicate that it is not in the best interest of public health, safety, welfare, or morals that the sale of alcoholic beverages be permitted at such location. 
(8)  To any person who has made any false statement on an application for a license under this chapter or any previous application for a license under this chapter. 
(9)  To any person who has been convicted of a felony or a violation of the laws or regulations of any state or political subdivision relating to the use or sale of drugs or alcoholic beverages, or who has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving the use of firearms, theft, violence, or a crime of moral turpitude. The forfeiture of bond or collateral, a plea of nolo contendere, or a plea of guilty shall be considered a conviction for the purpose of this section. 
(10)  To a person who is related within the first degree of consanguinity and affinity, as computed according to the Cannon law, to any person who has been previously denied a license or had a license revoked or suspended, if such previous applicant or holder of a license has any ownership interest in the applicant's business. 
(11)  To a person who has had a license revoked within the last five years. 
(12)  For a location for the sale of malt beverages and wine within 100 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus. 
(13)  For a location which does not have adequate off-street facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(14)  To any corporation, unless all directors, officers and stock holders are residents of the city and unless such corporation designates a resident of the city who shall be responsible for any matter relating to the license. 
(15)  To any employee or elected official of the city, including the mayor and city council. 
(16)  To anyone making a statement on an application for a license that is found to be false. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.21)) 
Sec. 6-63. - Malt beverages—License required. 
Each brewer, wholesale dealer, and retail dealer of malt beverages, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-2 and 3-5-1, who does business within the city shall be required to obtain an annual license from the city clerk. Each brewer, wholesale dealer, and retail dealer shall make application in the manner prescribed by the city clerk prior to January 1 of each year. Each application shall be considered by the city council no later than the first regularly scheduled meeting in January. No new applicant for an alcohol license may engage in the sale of alcohol without approval by the city council. Applicants for renewal may continue the sale of alcoholic beverages until the license application is denied by the council. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.22)) 
Sec. 6-64. - Same—Fees. 
The annual license fee for malt beverage brewers, retail dealers, and wholesale dealers shall be $400.00. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.23)) 
Sec. 6-65. - Wine—License required. 
Each retail or wholesale dealer of wine, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-2 and 3-5-1, who does business within the city shall be required to obtain an annual license from the city clerk. Each such dealer shall make application in the manner prescribed by the city clerk prior to January 1 of each year. Each application shall be considered by the city council no later than the first regularly scheduled meeting in January. No new applicant for an alcohol license may engage in the sale of alcohol without approval by the city council. Applicants for renewal may continue the sale of alcoholic beverages until the license application is denied by the council. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.24)) 
Sec. 6-66. - Same—Fees. 
The annual license fee for each place of retail wine distribution in the city shall be $400.00. The annual license fee for each wholesale dealer of wine shall be $400.00. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.25)) 
Sec. 6-67. - On-premises consumption. 
(a)  On-premises consumption of malt beverages and wines is permitted, subject to the payment of the license fees only on the premises of an establishment which, during the 12 months immediately preceding the granting of each annual license, or such portion thereof as it shall have been in operation, realized 50 percent or more of its gross income from the sale of food. 
(b)  License fees for on-premises consumption of malt beverages shall be $400.00 for each premises. License fees for on-premises consumption of wines shall be $400.00 for each premises. The foregoing license fees for the consumption on the premises shall be in addition to all other fees imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.26)) 
Sec. 6-68. - Change of location and/or licensee. 
A license issued under the provisions of this section shall permit the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages only on the premises described in the application under the supervision of the named licensee. Any license transfer to a location other than the premises described in the original application. There shall be an application fee of $50.00 for the transfer to a new location. No license under this article shall be transferable to any person. It shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender his license to the city council when he ceases to operate the business. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.27)) 
Sec. 6-69. - Suspension and revocation—Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The city council may suspend or revoke any alcohol license. Should the council revoke a license, such license may not be reinstated for five years. Provided further, a license shall not be granted to any person who is related in the first degree of consanguinity and affinity as is computed according to common law or to any person who has had an ownership interest or management with responsibility of the applicant's business. Should the council suspend any license, the license shall be suspended for a specific period of time and shall be reinstated at the end of the suspension period upon payment of a $150.00 reinstatement fee, without further action by the city council; provided, however, should an alcohol license be suspended beyond the end of the calendar year, the city council shall approve or deny the license at the conclusion of the suspension period. Upon such approval, the applicant shall pay a $150.00 reinstatement fee and the annual license fees prescribed herein. 
(b)  The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license; whether or not such grounds exist shall be determined by the city council in its sole discretion: 
(1)  The violation by the license holder of any federal, state, or local law or ordinance relating to the use and sale of drugs or alcoholic beverages or involving the use of firearms, theft, violence, or a crime of moral turpitude. 
(2)  The failure of the license holder to report promptly to the sheriff's department any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance, or altercation occurring inside the premises. 
(3)  Any conduct on the part of the license holder or license holder's employee on- or off-premises contrary to the public health, safety, or morals of the citizens of the city. 
(4)  Operating or conducting the business on the licensed premises in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health, or morals of the citizens of the city or in such manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(5)  Upon the business or the operation or location thereof, or the owner or any person connected therewith, ceasing to meet any of the qualifications for the issuance of a license as stated under section 6-62. 
(6)  The failure of the license holder or license holder's employees to keep the licensed premises free and clear of any disturbances of the peace; loud or boisterous conduct; lewd, obscene, or immoral entertainment; or violation of any federal, state, or local law or ordinance relating to the use and sale of drugs or alcoholic beverages or involving the use of firearms, theft, violence, or a crime of moral turpitude. 
(c)  The determination of whether the license holder or license holder's employee has violated this section shall be made by the city council. An actual conviction in a court for any offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(d)  The police chief shall report any violation of this article or any state or federal law by any license holder or any disturbance or violation of law of any kind at any location that alcoholic beverages are sold to the city clerk. The report shall be placed on the agenda at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.28)) 
Sec. 6-70. - Same—Procedure; appeal. 
(a)  After the city council shall deny any application for a license or the transfer of any license or shall suspend or revoke any existing license, the applicant or license holder, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing with the reasons therefor stated. 
(b)  Any applicant or license holder aggrieved by the decision of the city council shall have the right to request, within ten days after receipt of notice, a hearing on such decision. Upon receipt by the city council of a request for such hearing, a hearing shall be scheduled within 20 working days; and the applicant or license holder, as the case may be, shall be notified of the date, time, and place of such hearing. At such hearing, the licensee or applicant shall have the right to appear in person and by attorney, to have witnesses appear on his behalf, and to cross-examine opposing witnesses. The witnesses shall testify under oath, and the technical rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.29)) 
Sec. 6-71. - Permits for alcoholic beverage handlers. 
(a)  All persons who are employed at an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages hereunder shall be required to have a permit to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Current employees shall have until August 1 to obtain a permit, while employees hired after the date of this section shall obtain a permit within 15 days from the date of initial employment. 
(c)  Application for such permit shall be made to the city clerk, at which time an application fee of $20.00 shall be paid. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, date of birth, height, weight, color of hair, and color of eyes of the applicant and the name of the establishment at which the applicant will be employed. 
(2)  A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude within the last ten years. 
(d)  The applicant shall be fingerprinted, and a record search for any criminal record shall be conducted by the police department. The application shall be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant has entered a plea of guilty to, a plea of nolo contendere to, or was convicted of any felony crime, any crime involving moral turpitude, or any crime involving the illegal sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to a minor within the previous ten years; or 
(2)  The applicant served any part of a sentence, including, but not limited to, incarceration or probation, within the previous ten years, which sentence was related to a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or a conviction of any felony crime, any crime involving moral turpitude, or any crime involving the illegal sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to a minor. 
(e)  If the application is granted, an identification card shall be issued to the applicant, who shall carry the same on his person at all times while on the job. 
(f)  The permit shall expire after four years, at which time applicant may apply to have the same renewed. 
(g)  If an application is denied or a permit suspended or revoked, an appeal may be made to the city council at its next regular meeting. 
(h)  Whenever a permit holder becomes employed by an establishment other than the one named on the identification card, he shall obtain a new card showing the name of the current establishment at which he is employed within 15 days of such change of employment. 
(i)  Any permit holder who shall sell alcoholic beverages to a person who is not of legal age to purchase the same, sell to an intoxicated person, or sell alcoholic beverages on Sunday or at other times or when same cannot be legally sold, shall have his permit suspended for a period of two weeks and until a reinstatement fee of $50.00 is paid; provided, however, that no permit shall be suspended or revoked for selling to a person not of lawful age to purchase alcohol when such sale was induced by the furnishing of false identification by the purchaser. For a second offense within 12 months, said permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days and until a reinstatement fee of $100.00 is paid. Furthermore, any permit holder who commits a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude shall have his license permanently revoked. 
(Ord. of 6-15-2015, exh. A(10.30)) 
Chapter 8 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Bingo, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-50 et seq.; Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-15-50 et seq.; Carnival Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-15-80 et seq.; operators of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gameroom, as used herein, means any establishment which realizes any portion of its revenue from coin-operated pool or billiard tables or coin-operated game machines of any kind, such as, for example only, pinball, baseball, or video games. 
Poolroom and billiard hall , when used herein, shall have the same definitions as used for the terms "billiards" and "billiard room" in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1, as said statute now exists or shall be amended from time to time. 
(Code 2000, § 14-1; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1. 
Sec. 8-2. - Application; filing form; contents. 
All persons 18 years of age or older desiring to obtain a license required for the operation of a poolroom, gameroom, or billiard hall shall make written application at the city business license office. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and stockholders; and such other information as may be required by the director of the business license office or the police department; and be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. All persons desiring an application shall pay to the city a fee of $75.00. 
(Code 2000, § 14-3; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-3. - Investigation of applicant. 
(a)  All applicants shall be investigated by the city police department, and a report shall be made to the city clerk. This requirement shall be waived if a current investigation report is on file. The term "current" is defined as being within the past six months. 
(b)  The police reports shall be sent to the city clerk to be placed in the applicant's file. 
(Code 2000, § 10-151; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-4. - Grounds for refusal of license. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to any person, partnership, corporation, or any individual having an interest, directly or indirectly, either as owner, partner, or principal stockholder, who shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere, within the past five years immediately prior to the filing of said application, for any felony of any state or of the United States. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(b)  No license shall be issued where there is evidence that the granting of such license will have an adverse impact on the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(Code 2000, § 14-4; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-5. - Sanitary and toilet facilities. 
The place of business shall have separate restrooms for males and females. Such restrooms must be kept clean, and the premises shall be in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the county health department or departments of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 14-5; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-6. - Serving food. 
If food is served, the applicant shall have a valid health certificate issued by the county health department before any license can be issued. 
(Code 2000, § 14-6; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-7. - Hours of operation. 
Licensees for the operation of a poolroom, gameroom, or billiard hall shall be permitted to engage in such activities between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(Code 2000, § 14-7; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-8. - Violations and grounds for revocation of license. 
The commission of any of the following acts by a licensee, agent, or employee of a poolroom, gameroom, or billiard hall shall be a violation of law and grounds for revocation of a billiard license: 
(1)  Engaging in, or permitting or allowing on the premises, sales, in violation of state or federal law, of "controlled substances," as that term is defined by state and/or federal law. The terms "permitting" and "allowing," as used herein, include sales where the owner or operator in charge knew, or, in the exercise of ordinary care, should have known, that such sales were taking place and failed to take effective action to stop them. 
(2)  Permitting persons to loiter on the premises without legitimate business reasons, who are known to the owner or operator or manager in charge of such business, or who, in the exercise of ordinary care, should be known to them, or who are reputed to be illegal sellers or purveyors of controlled substances as heretofore defined. 
(3)  Permitting any gambling or betting in the place of business or on the premises. 
(4)  Permitting or committing any violation of state law or city ordinance. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to play billiards in, or for any other purpose to enter or remain in, a poolroom, gameroom, or billiard hall during hours and times when alcoholic beverages are sold, consumed, or dispensed therein. This subsection shall not apply to persons under 18 years of age who are accompanied by a parent or guardian. Any person desiring admission thereto during hours and times when alcoholic beverages are sold, consumed, or dispensed who is or appears to be under 18 years of age shall produce satisfactory identification and age verification, certify his age in writing, or produce a written permit before he shall be allowed entry. 
(Code 2000, § 14-8; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-9. - Transferability of license. 
A license for the operation of a poolroom, gameroom, or billiard hall shall not be transferable except by application to the license review board in the same form and manner as an original application. 
(Code 2000, § 14-9; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-10. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
No dice, cards, dominoes, or other games of chance shall be permitted, nor any form of gambling allowed, in any poolroom, gameroom, or billiard hall or in any other business place operated in connection therewith; and such games as kelly pool, keno, pigeon pool, star pool, scrub, and similar gambling devices are prohibited. No racing or other betting pool shall be exhibited or sold in such place of business. The use of baseball tickers and the posting of results of sporting events is expressly prohibited in billiard rooms or in any place operated in connection therewith. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or allowed to be used in or on the premises of any poolroom, gameroom, or billiard hall or any place operated in connection therewith, except that this prohibition shall not apply if such premises or establishment is an establishment which is authorized to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 2000, § 14-10; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-11. - Further restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any poolroom, gameroom, or billiard hall to maintain connections with any place where gambling or illegal activity is conducted or where persons congregate for the illegal consumption, sale, possession, barter, manufacture, exchange, purchase, dispensation, delivery, or other dealing in of alcoholic beverages for any immoral purpose. 
(Code 2000, § 14-11; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-12. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the police or other constituted authorities to inspect all public poolrooms, gamerooms, and billiard halls in the city for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the provisions of this chapter are being observed; and it shall be the duty of such officer to report all violations promptly to the city attorney and furnish the city attorney such information and assistance, as is necessary for the prosecution of such violations. Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license held by the licensee, the license shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action of the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 14-12; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-13. - Exemption. 
This chapter shall not apply to billiard tables or billiard rooms operated by private industrial concerns; Young Men's Christian Associations; religious orders; charitable institutions; state, county, or city institutions; fraternal orders; or bona fide clubs using such tables for members or employees only. 
(Code 2000, § 14-13; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-14. - Additional grounds to revoke or suspend a license to operate a poolroom, gameroom, or billiard hall. 
In addition to revocation or suspension of a license for the reasons hereinabove specified, the license to operate a poolroom, gameroom, or billiard hall may be further revoked for violation of any of the following standards: 
(1)  In the event the licensee permits public drunkenness and disorderly conduct among his patrons or employees after having been warned by a city officer, such failure to act shall be grounds for revocation or suspension. 
(2)  In the event the licensee receives notice from police, city, or county officials of any violations of any section other than the above, without correction thereof, such failure to act shall be grounds for automatic revocation. 
(3)  In the event of the violation of any state or federal laws by the licensee or by his agents or servants on the premises, said violations shall be grounds for revocation or suspension. 
(4)  In the event of conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude by the licensee off premises, said conviction shall be grounds for revocation or suspension. 
(Code 2000, § 14-14; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-15. - Appeals. 
(a)  No license required by this chapter shall be denied, suspended, or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing. 
(b)  The business license director shall provide written notice to the owner/applicant and licensee of his order to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth, in reasonable detail, the reasons for such action and shall notify the owner/applicant and licensee of his right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any owner/applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the business license director may have a review thereof, in accordance with the appeal procedures specified in this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 14-15; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-16. - Notices. 
For the purposes of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by mail within three days after the date of deposit in the U.S. mail. 
(Code 2000, § 14-16; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 8-17. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment in the common jail of the county for a period not to exceed 180 days for each offense. 
(Code 2000, § 14-17; Ord. of 8-6-2001, § 1(exh. A)) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
The public health, safety, good order, and general welfare of the citizens of the city require the control of animals within the city. This chapter provides for that control and provides the procedure for accomplishing that control. 
(Code 2000, § 18-1; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-80) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abused animal means any animal which is mistreated, beaten, tormented or teased; or is deprived of water, food or shelter; or is kept under unsanitary conditions; or is abandoned; or is trained for fighting other animals. 
Animal means a multicellular organism of the kingdom Animalia, subphylum Vertebrata differing from plants in certain typical characteristics, such as a capacity for locomotion, nonphotosynthetic metabolism, pronounced response to stimuli, restricted growth, and fixed bodily structure. 
Animal control officer means the person charged by the mayor with enforcing this chapter. 
At heel means a condition in which an animal is in the immediate vicinity of its owner and clearly under the voice control of that person and that control is clearly being exerted. 
At large means a condition in which an animal is in any public street, right-of-way, park or other public grounds, or when an animal is off the premises of the owner or person who has custody of such animal, and not under restraint or under the immediate control (at heel) of the owner or the person who has custody of such animal. 
Cat means a feline of whatever breed and all ages. 
Court means the municipal court of the city. 
Dog means a canine of whatever breed and all ages. 
Dog control officer means an individual selected by a local government, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of article VI of this chapter. 
Domestic animal means an animal that has been trained or adapted to live in a human environment and to be of use to human beings. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons independently or upon command, and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of its owner and/or the property upon and within which he is located. 
Harboring. The occupant of any premises on which an animal is kept or to which it customarily returns daily for food and care for a period of ten days or more is presumed to be harboring or keeping the animal. 
Humane manner means care of an animal to include protection from injury, adequate coolness and heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water which are consistent with the normal requirements and breeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Kennel means an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, training or boarding animals. 
Nuisance means an animal hereby declared to be a public nuisance if it damages, defiles or defecates on private property, other than that of the owner of the animal, or on public property (unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the animal owner); causes an unsanitary, dangerous or offensive condition; causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noise-making; chases vehicles; molests, attacks or interferes with persons, other domesticated animals or livestock; does not have proof of rabies inoculation clearly displayed, if required; is trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of animal fighting; or is contrary to the public health, welfare or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the city, which rules and regulations are incorporated into this chapter and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this definition. Any person who knowingly keeps, owns, harbors or acts as custodian of an animal constituting a nuisance shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be treated accordingly. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of an animal within the city limits. 
Poison means a substance that, through its chemical action, usually kills, injures or impairs an organism. 
Pound means those premises designated by the city council for the purpose of holding and caring for animals found to be at large by those persons charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, securely enclosed indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Rabies vaccination means the inoculation of an animal with an approved rabies vaccine. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Under restraint means secured by a leash or lead not to exceed six feet in length and held by a responsible, able-bodied person. 
(Code 2000, § 18-2; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-02) 
Sec. 10-3. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions in this chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-3; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-81) 
Sec. 10-4. - Conflict. 
If this chapter's regulations are found to be in conflict with any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(Code 2000, § 18-4; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-84(A)) 
Sec. 10-5. - Amendments. 
When necessary to further its purposes, this chapter may be amended by the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 18-5; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-85) 
Secs. 10-6—10-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 10-29. - Authority and responsibility. 
The authority and responsibility for the administration of the regulations of this chapter shall rest with the mayor. In exercising that authority and discharging that responsibility, the mayor may designate public officers of the city to be charged with enforcing this chapter. The city shall coordinate and cooperate with the county health department and such other agencies as the city council deems advisable. 
(Code 2000, § 18-41; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-82) 
Sec. 10-30. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the mayor or the mayor's designee to enforce the regulations of this chapter. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable as provided by state law. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violations of this chapter; to recover damages; or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation; and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described in this subsection. 
(Code 2000, § 18-42; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-83) 
Sec. 10-31. - Rights of officials to enter premises. 
(a)  Whenever an animal control officer, a representative from the county health department or its authorized representative, any law enforcement officer, or other city or county official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists, in any building or upon any premises, any violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law, or whenever it is necessary for such official to make an inspection to enforce any provisions or perform any duty imposed by this chapter or any other applicable law, such person shall have the right to enter such property at any reasonable time to inspect and perform any duty imposed by this chapter or another applicable law; provided, however, that: 
(1)  If such property is occupied, such person entering shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining the reason therefor; 
(2)  If such property is unoccupied, such person entering shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or the person having charge or control of the property and request entry, explaining the reason therefor; and 
(3)  If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or control of the property cannot be found after due diligence, recourse shall be had to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspection of the property. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall affect or otherwise abridge the right of any animal control officer to pursue or impound an animal or to issue a citation when an animal is on property other than that of the owner of the animal or that of a person who has a right to control such animal. 
(Code 2000, § 18-43; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-10) 
Sec. 10-32. - Rights of officials for emergency entry. 
If an animal control officer, health department representative, any law enforcement officer, or other city or county official has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to save the animal or protect the public health or safety, such person shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property and may use reasonable means required to effect such entry and make an inspection, whether such property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, such person shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining the reasons therefor and the purpose of the inspection. Failure or refusal to permit inspection under this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2000, § 18-44; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-11) 
Sec. 10-33. - Interference with officials. 
No person shall resist or interfere with an animal control officer or any other city or county official in the performance of his official duty in enforcing this chapter; nor shall any person fail or refuse to exhibit the vaccination certificate of any animal required to be vaccinated by this chapter when required to do so by any animal control officer or other city or county official. 
(Code 2000, § 18-45; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-12) 
Secs. 10-34—10-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONFINEMENT; IMPOUNDMENT; PROHIBITED CONDITIONS 

Sec. 10-55. - Livestock on public rights-of-way. 
No one shall allow or permit any horses, mules, cattle, hogs, poultry, fowl, sheep, goats, or other livestock to run at large on public rights-of-way; or to be staked, tied, guarded, or minded so that they can go upon public rights-of-way; or to drive or lead any such animals along or on the public rights-of-way, unless fastened to a rope, chain or other substantial leading device, which device is securely held by a responsible person during all the time that such animals are being led or driven along and over the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 2000, § 18-81; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-17) 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-56. - Permitting animals in heat to roam or run free. 
No owner or custodian of any animal in heat shall permit the animal to roam free. Such animal shall be confined in a building or securely enclosed in a manner that shall not allow contact with a non-neutered male animal, except for planned breeding. 
(Code 2000, § 18-82; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-20) 
State Law reference— Permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6. 
Sec. 10-57. - At-large animals constitute a nuisance. 
(a)  No person owning, having an interest in, harboring or having the care, charge, control or possession of any animal shall permit or allow it (either willfully or through failure to exercise due care of control) to be, remain, go, or run at large upon a public right-of-way, park or other public place, or any open lot of land in the city other than on the property of the animal's owner. The presence of any animal upon a public right-of-way, park or other public place, or upon any open lot or land in the city other than on the property of such animal's owner, is declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public health and safety. 
(b)  In the R-1, R-2, R-3, M and FH zoning districts as depicted on the official zoning map of the city, an animal shall not be considered to be at large if such animal is under restraint as defined in this chapter or if such animal is upon private property which is in the possession (through ownership, lease or other similar arrangement) of a person who either owns or has control of the animal, or it is on or in a vehicle. 
(c)  In the AG zoning district, as depicted on the official zoning map of the city, an animal shall not be considered to be at large if such animal is under restraint as defined in this chapter; or is at heel as defined in this chapter and under the immediate control of the owner or the person who has custody of such animal; or if such animal is upon private property which is in the possession (either through ownership, lease or other similar arrangement) of a person who either owns or has control of the animal; or it is on or in a vehicle. 
(d)  All animals found to be at large in violation of this chapter may be impounded in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 18-83; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-30) 
Sec. 10-58. - Protection of city officials, citizens and animals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-57, any animal found at large in violation of this chapter which cannot be safely impounded or poses a real threat to city officials, citizens, other domesticated animals or livestock may be slain by any police officer or animal control officer. Such measures shall only be used when tranquilizing the animal fails or there is a significant risk of immediate danger. 
(Code 2000, § 18-84; Code 1982, § 9-3-65) 
Sec. 10-59. - Impoundment of animals running at large. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to apprehend any animal found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter and impound such animal in the animal shelter designated by the city council. 
(b)  All animals impounded by the city shall be held until claimed by the owner, or a minimum of four calendar days to include the day the animal was impounded, whichever comes first. Longer periods of custody may be used if, in the opinion of the holding agency personnel, the animal is likely to be claimed by its owner or a new owner will be found; provided that, in either case, there is a reasonable expectation that the fees, fines or other charges provided for in this article will be paid. 
(c)  Any animal not claimed within the times provided in subsection (b) of this section shall become the property of the agency serving as the city's animal shelter to dispose of humanely in accordance with their regulations and policies. 
(d)  In lieu of impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer, upon determining the owner, may return the animal to the owner (if able to apprehend such animal) and issue a summons requiring the owner to appear in the court of jurisdiction for violation of this chapter. Such summons may be issued without apprehending the animal if the owner of such animal can be identified. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the animal control officer to make reasonable efforts to ascertain the owner of each impounded animal as soon as possible after taking it into custody. If the owner is identified, a reasonably expeditious effort shall be made to notify such owner of the impoundment of the animal and make the owner aware of the city's animal control laws, the period of impounding, charges to be made, and any fees owed the city. 
(Code 2000, § 18-85; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-40) 
Sec. 10-60. - Reclamation of impounded animals. 
(a)  Any person may make application to the city for the return of any animal impounded therein and, upon presentation of proof satisfactory to the city that such person is rightly entitled to the possession of such animal, may recover it upon the presentation of a $25.00 impoundment fee, plus fees to be fixed by agreement between the city council and such agency, together with the reasonable expense of the animal's keep. The agency shall retain any fees collected by it under this section. The city shall retain the $25.00 impoundment fee. 
(b)  No animal shall be released to a potential new owner prior to the end of the impoundment period stipulated in section 10-59(b). 
(c)  If, after consultation with a licensed veterinarian, an animal is determined to have a terminal illness, a potentially lethal wound or (in the case of an animal whose owner has not been identified) a communicable disease, such animal shall be disposed of by humane methods without regard to the specified holding period. 
(d)  Enforcement personnel following the procedures prescribed in this chapter shall not be held liable for the disposal of any animal. 
(Code 2000, § 18-86; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-41) 
Sec. 10-61. - Proof of rabies vaccine required prior to release. 
No animal required to be vaccinated for rabies shall be released from impoundment prior to showing proof of a current rabies inoculation. If such animal has not had a current rabies vaccine or it cannot be shown that it has a current rabies vaccine, the animal shall be vaccinated prior to being released. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for the costs of the vaccination. 
(Code 2000, § 18-87; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-42) 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-62. - Physical facilities. 
(a)  The animal shelter for the city shall be located at the place or agency designated by the city council. 
(b)  The facilities shall be constructed so as to provide security for the citizens of the surrounding area and for the animals under impoundment. 
(c)  Facilities for sanitary storage of feed and secure storage of medicines and other chemicals shall be provided. 
(d)  Facilities for the humane destruction of animals or fowl and the appropriate means for disposal of the remains shall be provided. 
(Code 2000, § 18-88; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-43) 
Sec. 10-63. - Care of animals under impoundment. 
Animals under impoundment shall be treated in a humane manner. They shall be provided reasonable protection from extremes in weather. Animals suspected of having a communicable disease shall be isolated from the remainder of the animal population. Each animal shall be fed an adequate amount of food at least once per day and shall have fresh water available at all reasonable times. 
(Code 2000, § 18-81; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-44) 
Sec. 10-64. - Records. 
Records shall be kept at the pound and will, at a minimum, include a description of each animal, the date and time it was taken into custody, notations as to efforts to identify and notify the owner, rabies inoculation status, any other pertinent medical information, to whom the animal was released, the charges assessed and by whom they were paid, and, if not released, the date of disposal. 
(Code 2000, § 18-90; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-45) 
Sec. 10-65. - Impoundment fees. 
The city council may establish fees for the apprehension of any animals running at large, for the impoundment of animals at the county animal shelter, for the redemption of animals impounded under the provisions of this chapter and for the disposal of animals not claimed or adopted. Such fees shall be sufficient for the city to recover the costs incurred in the administration of this chapter. These fees, if any, shall be in addition to any fee charged to the animal owner by the veterinary clinic or agency serving as the city animal shelter or any fine assessed by the court for violations of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 18-91; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-46) 
Sec. 10-66. - Prohibited conditions. 
(a)  No person shall allow any animal over which he has custody or control to remain on his property or premises if such animal shall constitute a nuisance as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  In city zoning districts, except AG (agriculture), it shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any pen or enclosure for any animal within 25 feet of any property line. This subsection is intended to apply to kennels, pens and other enclosures. Fenced or walled yards are not required to have such fence or wall setback 25 feet from property. Perimeter fences are not affected by the 25-foot minimum setback. 
(Code 2000, § 18-92; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-34) 
Secs. 10-67—10-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-91. - Vaccination of animals required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any canine or feline which has not been vaccinated against rabies, as required by the rules and regulations established in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5. Evidence of such vaccination shall consist of a certificate bearing the owner's name and address, the number of the vaccination tag issued, the date of vaccination, the date the animal shall be revaccinated, the type and lot number of the vaccine administered, and the signature of the person administering the vaccine. The certificate shall be prepared in triplicate, the original given to the owner, the first copy filed in the office of the county board of health, and the second copy retained by the person administering the vaccine. All vaccinations shall be administered by or under the supervision of a veterinarian licensed by the state board of veterinary medical examiners to practice veterinary medicine in the state or by another person qualified under state law for that purpose. 
(Code 2000, § 18-121; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-31) 
Sec. 10-92. - Proof of vaccination. 
Animals required to be vaccinated under section 10-91 shall wear the vaccination tag issued for the current year in a clearly visible location. 
(Code 2000, § 18-122; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-32) 
Sec. 10-93. - Display of vaccination certificate upon demand. 
No person keeping or harboring an animal shall fail or refuse to exhibit a certificate of vaccination required by this chapter upon demand of the animal control officer, health department representative, sheriff, or any other city or county official. 
(Code 2000, § 18-123; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-33) 
Sec. 10-94. - Report of animal bite required by person bitten. 
It shall be the duty of every person bitten by an animal to report immediately to the county health department giving his full name, age and address; the circumstances surrounding the bite and the extent of the bite; the medical treatment given; and the name and address of the owner or custodian of the animal. 
(Code 2000, § 18-124; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-50) 
Sec. 10-95. - Report of animal bite required by owner of animal. 
It shall be the duty of every person owning or having custody of an animal which has bitten a human being to report such bite to the county health department and confine the animal in a secure enclosure for observation and examination by the animal control officer and/or representatives of the county health department. No person having the custody or possession of such animal shall fail, refuse or neglect to immediately notify the city, or shall fail, refuse or neglect to allow the animal control official and/or a representative from the county health department to make an inspection or examination of such animal for the purpose of determining whether such animal has rabies. 
(Code 2000, § 18-125; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-51) 
Sec. 10-96. - Bite report required by those providing care. 
It shall be the duty of every physician to report immediately to the county health department the full name, age and address of any person under his care or observation who has been bitten by an animal in the city. If no physician is in attendance and the person is a child, it shall be the duty of the parent or guardian to make such report immediately. If the person is an adult, such person shall make the report, or if incapacitated, it shall be made by whoever is caring for the person bitten. 
(Code 2000, § 18-126; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-52) 
Sec. 10-97. - Reporting animals suspected of having rabies. 
It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies to report immediately to the county health department and the city the existence and description of such animal, the place where seen, the owner's name, if known, and the symptoms suggesting rabies. 
(Code 2000, § 18-127; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-53) 
Sec. 10-98. - Reporting of suspected rabies cases by owners. 
Whenever the owner or person having custody or possession of any animal shall observe or learn that such animal has shown symptoms of rabies or has acted in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it might have rabies, such owner or person shall immediately notify the city and shall allow the animal control officer and/or a representative of the county health department to make an inspection or examination of such animal, until it shall be established that such animal does or does not have rabies. 
(Code 2000, § 18-128; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-54) 
Sec. 10-99. - Disposition of body of suspected rabies cases. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or person having custody of any animal suspected of having rabies to surrender the carcass of the animal, or such portion of the carcass as may be requested, to the animal control officer after the death of the animal. 
(Code 2000, § 18-129; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-55) 
Sec. 10-100. - Veterinarian to quarantine suspected rabies cases. 
All veterinarians treating an animal indicating symptoms of rabies shall hold such animal in quarantine until the disposition of such animal by the animal control officer. 
(Code 2000, § 18-129; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-56) 
Sec. 10-101. - Report of animal biting animal required. 
It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of any animal that bites another animal to report immediately to the county health department the existence and description of such animal, the owner's name, if known, the place where the biting incident occurred, a description of the bitten animal, and the name of its owner, if known. 
(Code 2000, § 18-131; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-57) 
Sec. 10-102. - Management of animals that scratch or bite humans. 
(a)  Dogs and cats. A healthy dog or cat that bites or scratches a person or another animal should be confined and observed for ten days. This required quarantine applies to dogs and cats only. The rabies vaccine should not be administered during the observation period. While in confinement, any signs of illness should be evaluated by a licensed veterinarian. The place of confinement shall be at the veterinary clinic or agency designated by the city as the animal shelter at the expense of the owner or person having custody or possession of the animal, the veterinarian chosen by the owner or person having the custody or possession of the animal at such owner's expense, or any other confinement location so designated and approved by the city. If symptoms suggestive of rabies are observed, the animal should be humanely killed, and a specimen should be submitted to a qualified laboratory for testing. If the animal dies during the quarantine period, the specimen should be submitted immediately for rabies testing. 
(b)  Stray domestic animals and other species. Any stray or unwanted animal that bites or scratches a person or domestic animal may be humanely euthanized and a specimen submitted for testing. Animals, other than dogs or cats, that bite or scratch a person and are suspected of being rabid should immediately be reported to the county health department. Management of animals, other than dogs and cats, is dependent upon the animal species, the circumstances of the bite, and the epidemiology of rabies in the area, and shall be at the discretion of the animal control officer or the county health department or their authorized representative. 
(c)  Livestock. Cattle, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, swine and sheep are not likely to be carriers of rabies. Treatment will be weighed against the circumstances of exposure by the animal control officer or the county health department or their authorized representative. If, at the time of exposure, the animal is clinically ill with signs suggestive of rabies, the animal control officer or his authorized representative, or an authorized representative from the county health department, will immediately and humanely kill the animal, and a specimen will be submitted to a qualified laboratory for testing. The cost of testing will be the responsibility of the animal owner, if known. 
(Code 2000, § 18-132; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-58) 
Sec. 10-103. - Management of animals exposed to rabies. 
(a)  Generally. Any animal bitten or scratched by a bat or wild carnivorous mammal (particularly a bobcat, raccoon, fox, skunk or coyote) which is not available for testing should be considered exposed to rabies. 
(b)  Unvaccinated dogs and cats exposed to rabies. Unvaccinated or unwanted dogs and cats bitten or scratched by a known or potentially rabid animal should be humanely euthanized immediately. If the owner of the animal is unwilling to have this done (upon approval of the department head of the county health department and the city), the exposed animal must be placed in strict isolation for six months and vaccinated one month prior to being released. The responsibility for isolation of an exposed, unvaccinated animal remains with the owner. The animal must be kept in a pen that has been built to the specifications of the state Rabies Control Manual Appendix "C," and approved by the department head of the county health department and the city. Additionally, a second fence 18 to 24 inches in distance from the inner pen must be erected around the perimeter to guarantee complete isolation of the quarantined animal from other animals and human contact. The total construction costs of this confinement area is the sole responsibility of the pet owner. Previously vaccinated dogs and cats whose rabies vaccination has lapsed for more than 30 days are considered unvaccinated and will be treated as such. 
(c)  Vaccinated dogs and cats exposed to rabies. Dogs and cats that are currently vaccinated (vaccinated at least one month prior to exposure) and have been bitten by a rabid animal should be revaccinated immediately, confined and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the county health department. 
(d)  Livestock exposed to rabies. Vaccinated livestock (vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with a USDA-approved vaccine for that species at least 30 days prior to the attack) bitten by a rabid animal should be revaccinated immediately, confined and observed for 45 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the county health department. 
(e)  Other animals exposed to rabies. Unvaccinated animals bitten by a rabid animal should be euthanized immediately. If an animal has been vaccinated with a USDA-approved vaccine for that species, the animal must be revaccinated immediately and placed in confinement for a minimum of 90 days. Confinement must be coordinated with and approved by the county health department. 
(Code 2000, § 18-133; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-59) 
Sec. 10-104. - Quarantine area of city. 
Whenever in the judgment of the city council, after consultation with the county health department, the public health and safety so require, the council shall declare and establish a quarantine zone or area consisting of the whole or any part of the city and maintain such quarantine therein until such time as they may deem it advisable to lift the quarantine. During the existence of such quarantine, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the rules and regulations prescribed by the city council with reference to such quarantine. 
(Code 2000, § 18-134; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-60) 
Sec. 10-105. - Retention of animals suspected of having rabies. 
(a)  If the animal control officer or pound keeper operating a pound for the city suspects that any animal impounded has rabies, he shall notify the county animal control department. A qualified veterinarian shall examine such animal and, if he believes such animal should be held for future observation, they shall so inform the animal control officer. 
(b)  If an animal is found to be afflicted with rabies, the animal control officer or agency operating the pound for the city shall confine such animal as directed. 
(c)  If an animal does not have rabies, the animal control officer or agency operating a pound for the city shall release it or dispose of it in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 18-135; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-61) 
Sec. 10-106. - Animal exposed to rabies barred from city. 
No person shall bring any animal into the city in which rabies has been present within six months prior thereto. 
(Code 2000, § 18-136; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-62) 
Secs. 10-107—10-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CRUELTY TO AND NEGLECT OF ANIMALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 

Sec. 10-126. - General prohibition. 
(a)  No animal in the incorporated areas of the city shall be subject to cruelty and/or neglect as outlined in this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform a cruel act on any animal; nor shall any person harm, maim or kill any domestic animal, or attempt to do so, except that a person may: 
(1)  Defend his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or 
(2)  Kill any animal causing injury or damage to any livestock or poultry. 
(c)  The method used for killing the animal in the situations outlined in subsection (b) of this section shall be designed to be as humane as possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely kills an animal under the circumstances indicated in subsection (b) of this section shall incur no liability for such death. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed to limit in any way the authority or duty of any law enforcement officer or animal control officer. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the animal owner, caretaker or possessor to provide adequate shelter, food, water and sanitary conditions at all times; and to provide necessary medical care, including, but not limited to, the required annual rabies inoculation. Failure to comply with this section constitutes neglect and is a violation of this article. 
(f)  When harnessed, all animals shall be harnessed in such a manner that will not cause injury to the animal, and the animal shall be given plenty of room on a harness to exercise. 
(g)  Any violation of this section shall be enforced as outlined in this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 18-171; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-70) 
Sec. 10-127. - Abandonment of animals. 
No person shall release an animal on any public or private property with the intention of abandoning the animal. 
(Code 2000, § 18-172; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-18) 
Sec. 10-128. - Confiscation of suspected abused animals. 
If an animal control officer and/or any law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that any animal is subject to abuse as defined in this chapter, he shall confiscate and impound the animal pending the conclusion of an investigation. Such investigation shall be completed by the end of the seventh business day, at which time a finding shall be issued by the animal control officer. If a finding is made that the animal is being abused, cruelty to animal charges shall be filed against the owner, and the animal will become the property of the city. If a determination is reached that the animal is not being abused, the animal will be returned to its owner, and follow-up investigations may be conducted by the animal control officer at the discretion of the animal control officer. The responsibility for costs related to the confiscation and impoundment during the investigation will rest with the owner, regardless of the determination reached. 
(Code 2000, § 18-173; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-71) 
Secs. 10-129—10-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-155—10-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLASSIFICATION OF DOGS AS DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 10-177. - Purpose, definitions, and exceptions. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  This division is passed under the authority of and in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq. The purpose of this division is to clearly define local government responsibility, as well as limit to the administrative and liability burdens upon the city, with regard to dangerous or vicious dogs. 
(2)  As set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1, to the extent that the application of any provision hereof would result in the control and regulation of dogs in a manner less restrictive that the minimum standards provided for in O.C.G.A. title 4, ch. 8, then such provision contained herein shall yield and the applicable provision contained in O.C.G.A. title 4, ch. 8 shall govern. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Unless otherwise defined within this division, all terms contained herein shall have the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21. As provided in said Code section, the following definitions are incorporated herein: 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
1.  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; 
2.  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person, although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; or 
3.  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including the transmission of an infection or contagious disease or the impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(2)  If the definition of any term contained in subsection (b)(1) of this section is modified or amended as set forth in O.C.G.A. title 4, ch. 8, then such term shall be deemed to have the meaning as provided by statute and the definitions above shall yield to such statutory definitions. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, a dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog within the meaning of this division. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, a dog shall not be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog within the meaning of this division if the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a trespass, was abusing the dog, or was committing or attempting to commit an offense under O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 5. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2014, exh. A, § 18-231) 
Sec. 10-178. - Designation of a dog control officer and designation of authority. 
(a)  The city's animal control officer shall be designated as the dog control officer for the purposes of this division. It shall be the dog control officer's duty to investigate and classify, as appropriate, suspected dangerous or vicious dogs. In the event that the city does not have a designated animal control officer, then the dog control officer shall be appointed by the city council, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(b). 
(b)  The dog control officer's duty of investigation and classification arises only after a report is made to such dog control officer regarding events which occurred within the incorporated portions of the city, which events may warrant the classification of a dog as dangerous or vicious. Such a report may be made by any law enforcement agency, rabies control office, local or state board of health, or citizen. 
(c)  The dog control officer shall not be authorized to make arrests unless he is a law enforcement officer having the powers of arrest. 
(d)  The city council may designate an animal control board or local board of health to receive appeals from dog owners regarding the classification of dangerous or vicious dogs, as set forth in section 10-179 (hereinafter referred to as the "designated authority.") In the event that the city council does not designate such an authority to receive appeals, such appeals shall be handled by the county probate court, as required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2014, exh. A, § 18-232) 
Sec. 10-179. - Investigation and determination of classification; notice of classification; right of appeal; hearings before a designated authority. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
(b)  Upon completion of his investigation, the dog control officer shall: 
(1)  Determine that the dog is not subject to classification; 
(2)  Determine that the dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog; or 
(3)  Determine that the dog is subject to classification as a vicious dog. 
(c)  In the event that the dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the dog control officer shall provide a notice of such classification to the dog's owner within 72 hours of such designation, which notice of classification shall include the following: 
(1)  A summary of the dog control officer's investigation, findings, and classification. 
(2)  A statement that the owner has a right to appeal the dog control officer's determination and classification to a hearing before the designated authority, as defined in section 10-178(d). However, if an authority has not been established or designated for the jurisdiction, the owner shall be informed of the right to appeal the determination and request a hearing before the county probate court, as required by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23. 
(3)  A notice of appeal form to be used by the dog owner for requesting an appeal of the dog's classification to a hearing before the designated authority or county probate court. 
(4)  A statement that the owner's request for appeal and hearing must be made within seven days of the date of the notice of classification. 
(5)  A statement that failure to make a request for appeal and hearing within such time period may result in a waiver of the right to a hearing and, in the event of such a waiver, the dog control officer's determination and classification shall become effective for all purposes under this division. 
Such notice of classification must be provided via certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last-known address. 
(d)  In the event that a dog owner appeals the dog control officer's determination and classification to a hearing before the designated authority or county probate court, then such determination and classification shall not become effective until issuance of the order on appeal, as set forth below. 
(e)  If an owner cannot be located within ten days of the dog control officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous or vicious dog, then such dog may be released to an animal shelter as defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2, as determined by the dog control officer. 
(f)  All hearings on appeal shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions contained in O.C.G.A. title 4, ch. 8. 
(g)  When a hearing on appeal is requested by a dog owner in accordance with this division, such hearing must be scheduled to be conducted within 30 days after the request is received. However, the hearing may be continued by the designated authority, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-23(d). 
(h)  If the hearing on appeal is conducted by the designated authority, then at least ten days prior to the hearing, the designated authority shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and the designated authority conducting the hearing shall receive evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination and classification. 
(i)  If the hearing on appeal is conducted by the designated authority, then within ten days after the hearing on appeal, the designated authority shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination and conclusions (herein referred to as the "order on appeal"). If the order on appeal upholds the dog control officer's classification of the dog as dangerous or vicious, then such order must specify the date upon which the classification shall become effective. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2014, exh. A, § 18-233) 
Sec. 10-180. - Certificates of registration; dog owner responsibilities; other restrictions. 
(a)  The owner of any classified dog must obtain a certificate of registration issued and renewed annually, pursuant to this division and O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. Such certificate of registration must be initially obtained within ten days from the effective date of classification. 
(b)  An owner must apply to renew an existing certificate of registration annually, within ten days of the expiration of one year from the previous renewal date or initial issuance date. 
(c)  An owner applying for an initial certificate of registration or renewing an existing certificate of registration shall pay an annual registration fee of $100.00. 
(d)  At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, the dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with the requirements set out in this division. 
(e)  Failure to obtain and thereafter annually apply for renewal of a certificate of registration constitutes a violation of this division. 
(f)  A certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed for a dangerous dog if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements are met by the owner: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides. 
(g)  A certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed for a vicious dog if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements are met by the owner: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; and 
(4)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. 
(h)  Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable. 
(i)  Notwithstanding any provision contained in subsections (a) through (h) of this section, a certificate of registration shall not be issued or renewed in the following circumstances: 
(1)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person under 18 years of age. 
(2)  Only one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(3)  Only one certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued per owner. 
(4)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of O.C.G.A. title 4, ch. 8, of this division, or of any local ordinance implementing the restrictions contained therein. 
(5)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
a.  A serious violent felony, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
b.  The felony of dogfighting, as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37, or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals, as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
c.  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy, as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1, from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(j)  An owner of a classified dog must notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, unconfined, has attacked a person, or has died. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the dog control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog; provided, however, a vicious dog may not be transferred, sold, or donated. 
(k)  An owner of a classified dog shall keep the dog in a proper enclosure, unless restrained by a strong leash and accompanied by a responsible person. Vicious dogs must also be muzzled when outside the enclosure. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with the dog's vision or respiration, but will prevent the dog from biting any person. 
(l)  An owner of a dog classified as dangerous or vicious in another jurisdiction within this state, which owner is moving into the city, must notify the dog control officer within ten days of residency within the city. 
(m)  An owner of a dog meeting the classification requirements hereunder, or meeting similar classification requirements in a previous state of residence, which owner is moving into the city from outside of the state, must notify the dog control officer within 30 days of residency within the city. 
(n)  The dog control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(o)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the city does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in this division are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or a vicious dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2014, exh. A, § 18-234) 
Sec. 10-181. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A classified dog shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer if the owner of such classified dog fails to comply with any provision set forth in this division. 
(b)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated may recover such dog upon proof of compliance with the provisions of this division and payment of all fines, charges for services performed by the dog control officer, and reasonable confiscation and housing costs. However, such payments shall not be a pre-requisite to the recovery of the dog if the confiscation is deemed to be in error by a dog control officer, a designated authority, or the probate court. Criminal prosecution for a violation of this division shall not be stayed due to owner recovery of the dog. 
(c)  In the event that the owner has not complied with the requirements and responsibilities set forth herein within 14 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be released to an animal shelter, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2. 
(d)  Refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall constitute a violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2014, exh. A, § 18-235) 
Sec. 10-182. - Immediate impoundment. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24, a law enforcement officer or the dog control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(b)  The owner of any dog that has been impounded may recover such dog upon the payment of reasonable confiscation and housing costs. However, such payments shall not be a pre-requisite to the recovery of the dog if the impoundment is deemed to be in error by a dog control officer. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2014, exh. A, § 18-236) 
Sec. 10-183. - Euthanasia. 
Euthanasia shall only be utilized as authorized by O.C.G.A. title 4, ch. 8. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2014, exh. A, § 18-237) 
Sec. 10-184. - Prior classification determinations. 
Any dog previously classified as a potentially dangerous dog shall, on and after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, be classified as a dangerous dog under this division. Any dog previously classified as a dangerous dog shall, on and after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, be classified as a vicious dog under this division. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2014, exh. A, § 18-238) 
Sec. 10-185. - Sovereign immunity. 
Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official of the city be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog as a result of a failure to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2014, exh. A, § 18-239) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-31. 
Sec. 10-186. - Violations of this division. 
An owner of a classified dog who fails to comply with any provision set forth in this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Additionally, such acts may constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-32. 
(Ord. of 12-16-2014, exh. A, § 18-240) 
Secs. 10-187—10-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DEAD ANIMALS 

Sec. 10-211. - Removal from public rights-of-way. 
The owner of a dead animal upon the public rights-of-way shall remove the animal, so as not to constitute a nuisance. If the owner fails to do so, the city shall remove such carcass from the public right-of-way and dispose of the carcass and charge the cost of such removal and disposal to the owner of the carcass, if known. 
(Code 2000, § 18-271; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-13) 
Sec. 10-212. - Abandonment upon public property or public right-of-way. 
No person shall abandon a dead animal on any public property or public right-of-way, unless the place in which the animal is being left is a public dump or other facility designed for receiving such and has been designated by the city as a public facility for receiving trash or refuse. 
(Code 2000, § 18-272; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-14) 
Sec. 10-213. - Removal from private property. 
When any dead animal is found on private property, the owner of the dead animal or the owner of the premises upon which such animal is located shall remove the dead animal immediately and shall be responsible for all costs of such removal. Failure to do so in a timely manner is declared a nuisance and constitutes a violation of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 18-273; Ord. of 5-1-2000(2), § 9-3-15) 
Sec. 10-214. - Abandonment upon private property. 
No person shall intentionally abandon a dead animal on any private property belonging to another unless the person so doing shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the animal is being left. 
(Code 1982, § 9-3-16; Code 2000, § 18-274) 
Chapter 12 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. title 8; adoption and administration of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. title 25; bonds for public contractors, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-100 et seq.; unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq.; electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq.; nonresident contractors, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - State codes adopted. 
The minimum codes referenced in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)—(9)(B)(i)(VIII) as now or hereafter amended are adopted and shall apply in the city. 
Sec. 12-2. - Office of building official. 
The city manager shall serve as the building official and, as such, shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of the standard codes adopted by this chapter and shall perform other duties as may be prescribed by the council. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-1; Code 2000, § 22-1) 
Sec. 12-3. - Building permits. 
(a)  Any person or corporation intending to build or have built a house or other structure having a roof or to build an addition to a house or structure within the city shall make application to the city manager, at least five days before beginning work, for a permit to erect the building or structure. The application shall state the owner of the proposed building or structure, the size, the material, the location, whether the work is done under contract or by the day's work, and, if by contract, the name of the contractor. 
(b)  The city manager shall inspect the site of the proposed building or structure with reference to its encroachment on the streets and alleys, its danger to adjacent buildings or structures, and other conditions and circumstances as necessary; and shall report to the council his approval or disapproval of the permit; and, if he disapproves, he shall give in writing the reasons therefor. In the event of the disapproval of the city manager, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the council, and, upon the approval of that body, the city manager shall issue the permit. 
(c)  No person or corporation, contractor or builder shall begin the erection of any building or structure within the city without a permit therefor, as provided in this section. Any violation of the terms of this section in refusing or neglecting to obtain a permit shall result in the person, upon conviction, being punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(d)  Any person or corporation, contractor or builder who shall, in violation of this section, encroach upon the streets and alleys or other public property of the city shall, in addition to the penalties for violation of this section, be compelled at his own expense to remove the obstructions and to repair the streets or alleys or other public property, as directed by the city manager or the council. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, contractor, builder or worker engaged in the building or repairing of any building or structure within the city, to close the streets of the city to the passage of persons or vehicles or in any way to endanger the life or limb of passersby. 
(Code 1982, § 6-2-2; Code 2000, § 22-2) 
Sec. 12-4. - Fire limits defined. 
The fire limits of the city are defined as all that area within the city limits, as those limits now exist, or as they may hereafter be amended. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-22; Code 2000, § 22-3) 
Secs. 12-5—12-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-27. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted for the purpose of establishing minimum standards governing the use, occupancy, condition, and maintenance of property, dwellings, buildings, and structures; establishing minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to make dwellings, buildings, structures, and surrounding premises safe, sanitary, and fit for human use and habitation; promoting and protecting the public health and safety through the control of weeds and grass which constitute a fire hazard; fixing certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators, and occupants of dwellings; authorizing the inspection of dwellings and structures; providing for the condemnation of all buildings and structures deemed unfit for human use and habitation and the removal of such buildings at the public expense after a hearing; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.1)) 
Sec. 12-28. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the primary dwelling or structure and which is attached thereto or located on the same lot. The term "accessory structure" includes, but is not limited to, any portable, demountable, or permanent enclosure, shade structure, and carport or garage. 
Alter or alteration means any change or modification in construction. 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Approved means approved by the city. 
Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
Boardinghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which the owner or operator rents space to five or more persons with one or more meals regularly served as part of the rental or for a separate charge. 
Cellar means that portion of a building having more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Dangerous structure means any of the following: 
(1)  An abandoned or vacant structure that constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which the structure is located and which is not fenced in or otherwise protected to reasonably prohibit public access thereto. 
(2)  A structure that is severely damaged by fire, storm or other natural or manmade causes; and which has remained in such damaged condition for a period of six months or more; and which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which it is located. 
(3)  A structure that is in a condition of being partially constructed, and construction thereon has ceased for a period of 12 months or more; and which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which it is located. 
(4)  Any combination of the foregoing which would constitute a hazard to the safety and welfare of any person living on property located adjacent thereto. 
Department means the office of the city manager, the office of the city environmental code enforcement officer, the city police department, or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Director means the environmental code enforcement officer or the representative thereof. When a department other than the office of the environmental code enforcement officer is designated to enforce this article, the term "director" means the director of that department or the designee of such director. 
Domestic sewage disposal system means a sewage disposal system designated or intended to dispose of domestic sewage which includes byproducts of domestic activities. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. title 16, ch. 13, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.), as amended from time to time, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating, whether or not such unit is occupied or vacant. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures , used singly or in conjunction with each other, means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used; and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith; and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Egress means a means of exit from a structure or dwelling unit. 
Extermination means the control or eradication of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination method. 
Family means two or more persons living together, whether related by blood, marriage, or adoption, and having common housekeeping facilities. 
Floor space means the total area of all habitable space in a building or structure. 
Flush water closet means a toilet bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water-sealed trap above the floor level. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking, and serving of food and the storage of produce, tin cans, glass containers, and newspapers. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council. 
Grade means the average elevation of the ground adjoining a building or structure. 
Habitable room means any room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces. 
Heated water means water which has been heated sufficiently to ensure a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit at the outlets from which it is dispensed. 
Inspection warrant means a warrant authorizing a search or inspection of private property where such search or inspection is necessary for the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  The owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court; provided that the term "interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Junked vehicle means any wrecked or non-operable automobile, truck, or other vehicle or any vehicle which does not bear a current license plate. 
Maintenance means the act of keeping buildings, structures, and equipment in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline or failure. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term "manufactured home" shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition, except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC section 5401 et seq. 
Mobile home means a detached single-family dwelling unit designed for long-term occupancy, which has been prefabricated and then transported to its site or to a sales lot on its own wheels and requires only minor work before occupancy, such as connection to utilities or a foundation. 
Multiple dwelling means any dwelling which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of more than two families living independently of each other, each doing its own cooking in such dwelling. The term "multiple dwelling" includes a flat or apartment. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within the state. 
Occupant means any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking, eating, or having actual possession of a dwelling or rooming unit. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care, or control of a building or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Plumbing means the practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, repair, extension, and alteration of all piping fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting systems and the public or private water supply systems within or adjacent to any building, structure, or conveyance; also, the practice and materials used in the installation, repair, extension, or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste, or sewerage and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or other approved terminal. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, including dwellings, buildings, or structures thereon. 
Proper or properly means in accordance with the general provisions of this article and in accordance with standards of cleanliness, stability, and safety as required by this article. 
Property means land and whatever is erected or growing upon or affixed thereto. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17, this article, and by ordinances adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-17, to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
Roominghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
Safety means the condition of being free from danger and hazards which may cause accidents or disease. 
Sanitary sewage disposal system means a sewage disposal system designed and intended to dispose of sanitary and domestic wastes, including all liquid and solid wastes from the flush toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower, and clothes washing machine. 
Stairway means one or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Trash means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials, such as, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, yard clippings, wood, glass, crockery, and similar materials. 
Unfit for human habitation means the designation of dwellings or dwelling units as so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that such create a serious hazard to the health or safety, or which lack illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
Unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not necessarily for cooking or eating purposes. 
Unsanitary condition means the presence of a condition which is conducive to the spreading of disease or illness, or is conducive to harboring insects, rodents, or other pests. 
Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
Water and sewer system includes private wells, public water utility mains, private septic tanks, sewage disposal systems, and public sewer mains. 
Workmanlike condition of maintenance and repair means that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner and in accordance with the requirements of all applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.2)) 
Sec. 12-29. - Article remedial. 
This article is remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings, roominghouses, buildings, structures, premises, or properties. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.3)) 
Sec. 12-30. - Scope and application. 
(a)  Every building, dwelling, or structure in the incorporated area of the city, whether occupied or vacant, shall conform to the requirements of this article, irrespective of when such building may have been constructed, altered, or repaired. Every such building, structure, and premises shall be subject to and conform with the requirements of this article. When a unit is vacant, the full application of the article may be held in abeyance for an indefinite period; provided that the exterior complies with this article, the interior has been cleaned of trash, rubbish, and debris, and the unit has been secured in a manner approved by the city and is maintained in that closed and inaccessible manner until it is fully repaired. Where applicable, this article also governs the condition of unimproved property. 
(b)  Repairs and alterations in restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration or alterations to such building in conformity with this article in such manner as will not extend or increase an existing nonconformity or hazard may be made with approved materials similar in kind to those of which such building is constructed. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any building, equipment, appliance, or system installed, altered, repaired, maintained, or used in the city, except as may be otherwise specifically provided for by statute or ordinance. 
(d)  Where repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance, and work required to meet the provisions of this article are regulated and/or required to be permitted by other ordinances, such repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance, and work shall be done only in accordance with those ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.4)) 
Sec. 12-31. - Violations. 
A person who violates a provision of this article or fails to comply with this article is guilty of an offense punishable as provided in the city Charter. The owner of a building, structure, or premises, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and all persons who may have caused or assisted in causing the commission of such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.5)) 
Sec. 12-32. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, or corporation that shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation in municipal court, shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with the city Charter. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.6)) 
Sec. 12-33. - Unsafe, unsanitary, etc., structures prohibited. 
All dwellings, buildings, or other structures which are unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise dangerous to human life or which, in relation to existing uses, constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment are unlawful. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.7)) 
Sec. 12-34. - Weeds, junk, etc., prohibited. 
(a)  Persons shall keep their property free of those weeds and underbrush which create a health menace, fire hazard, or an unsafe or unsanitary condition, as well as trash, garbage, junked vehicles, junked or abandoned appliances, or other things thereon which constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or occupant of a dwelling, roominghouse, building, or structure to use the premises of such property for the open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle, household appliance, glass, building material, building trash, or similar item. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of such owner, operator, or occupant to maintain the premises of such property and to remove from the premises all abandoned items as listed above, including, but not limited to, weeds, dead trees, trash, and garbage, upon notice from the city. In this subsection, the term "abandoned motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle that is in a state of disrepair and incapable of moving under its own power, or a motor vehicle having no valid current license tag registration. 
(c)  Owners and occupants of property shall not permit weeds or grass within 150 feet of any building or structure to grow on such property to a height exceeding 18 inches. 
(d)  Owners and tenants of property or structures abutting a street, sidewalk, lane, or parking area on which the property or structure abuts shall maintain the property or structure clean and free of garbage and trash; however, city maintenance responsibility for public rights-of-way shall not be diminished by this section. 
(e)  Where parking in open areas is used jointly for the benefit of two or more owners or tenants, the responsibility for maintaining these parking areas free of the items prohibited by this section shall be the joint and severable responsibility of the owners and tenants of these premises. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.8)) 
Sec. 12-35. - Compliance prerequisite to utility services for substandard dwelling. 
Electrical utility service shall not be reconnected to any vacant building or dwelling unit which is unfit for human habitation and has been without electrical utility service, until such building or dwelling unit has been brought into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.9)) 
Sec. 12-36. - Demolition of structures. 
(a)  The demolition of any structure shall not begin until all utilities are cut off and capped at the street. 
(b)  All debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble, and foundation exposed above the ground level shall be removed from the premises. 
(c)  Any excavation or other depression must be filled to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent stone or masonry, and all filled areas must be adequately sloped and drained. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.10)) 
Secs. 12-37—12-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 12-61. - General enforcement. 
(a)  The department shall enforce the provisions of this article. Authorized agents of the department are vested with the police power necessary for the purpose of issuing charges and prosecuting persons charged with violating this article. 
(b)  The department shall receive applications and issue permits and certificates required by this article. The department shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of this article are met. The department shall enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, repair, installation, erection, removal, demolition, use, location, and maintenance of properties, buildings, equipment, appliances, or systems, except as may be otherwise provided for in other ordinances or regulatory measures. The department shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the interests of the city so require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this article and render written reports on the same. The department shall issue notices or orders as may be necessary to enforce compliance with this article, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, or to secure the necessary safeguards. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.20)) 
Sec. 12-62. - Coordination of enforcement. 
The inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this article shall be the exclusive responsibility of the department. Wherever, in the opinion of the director, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any condition by any other department, the director shall arrange for this to be done in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors, nor to multiple or conflicting orders. An order for correction of any violation under this article shall not be issued without the approval of the director, who shall have the responsibility before issuing any such order to determine that it has the concurrence of any other department or official of the government concerned with any matter involved in the case in question. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.21)) 
Sec. 12-63. - Civil liability. 
No officer, member of the city council or city employee charged with the enforcement of this article in the discharge of duties shall be rendered liable personally; and such officer, member, or employee is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this article. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.22)) 
Sec. 12-64. - Notice of violations, etc. 
(a)  Upon the receipt of information that property, premises, buildings, systems, appliances, or equipment covered by this article are unsafe, or are otherwise in violation of the provisions of this article or other ordinances of the city relating to the condition of property and premises, the department shall cause to be made an inspection. If it is found that an unsafe condition exists, the department shall cause a written notice to be served as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The notice shall include the following: 
(1)  An enumeration of conditions which the department has determined are in violation of this article. 
(2)  An enumeration of remedial action required for each determined violation. 
(3)  A specified period of time within which such remedial action shall be completed. Such period of time for completion is to be determined by the department as the period of time reasonably required under the known circumstances for the completion of the remedial action. 
(4)  A statement adequate to notify the person served that failure to comply with the provisions of this article within the time specified in the notice is unlawful, and the penalty for such failure. 
(c)  A copy of such notice shall be filed in the office of the director. 
(d)  Notice shall be deemed perfected if served upon the owner or occupant as may be appropriate in any of the following ways: 
(1)  In person. 
(2)  By certified mail with return receipt attached and posting a copy of the notice upon the property. 
(e)  Whenever the department determines that property, buildings, systems, appliances, or equipment, or any work in connection therewith that is covered by this article is being erected, installed, altered, repaired, stored, maintained, or demolished in violation of this article, the department shall serve a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefor directing the discontinuance of such illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation. 
(f)  In case such notice or order is not complied with, the department may issue a citation for violation of this article or may request the city attorney or other proper prosecuting authority to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity to correct or remove such violation, or restrain the execution of work thereon, or prevent the use of any building, system, appliance, or equipment in violation of this article or of any order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(g)  A purchaser, transferee, lessee, or mortgagee who has actual or constructive knowledge of the issuance of a notice shall be bound by such notice as of the date of such sale, transfer, lease, or mortgage. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.23)) 
Sec. 12-65. - Inspections. 
(a)  Inspections required under the provisions of this article shall be made by the department. Upon evidence of probable cause and presentation of proper credentials, authorized agents of the department may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure, or premises in the city in order to enforce this article. 
(b)  Any property, building, equipment, appliance, or system installed, constructed, erected, altered, repaired, maintained, or used in the city shall be subject to inspection by the department. 
(c)  No official or employee of the department making inspections of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for repairs or corrections shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any repairs or corrections which may be required by this article. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.24)) 
Sec. 12-66. - Owner's right of entry. 
Every occupant of a building, dwelling, or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or the owner's agents or employees, access to any part of such building, dwelling, or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of maintenance, improving or making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article, or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.26)) 
Sec. 12-67. - Records. 
The department shall keep comprehensive records of applications received, permits and certificate issued, inspections made, reports rendered, and notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection at office hours observed by the department, but shall not be removed from the office of the director. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.27)) 
Sec. 12-68. - Stopping work. 
Whenever the department determines defective or illegal work is performed in violation of a provision or requirement of this article, it shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped until such defective or illegal work is corrected. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.28)) 
Sec. 12-69. - Placarding premises. 
(a)  The department may place a dated and signed placard on property which is in violation of this article and notify the owner of such property by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last-known address that the building has been placarded. Such notice shall specify the reason therefor and the owner's right of appeal, as provided in this article. Such placard shall contain the following words: "The City of Doerun has declared this building dangerous and unfit for human habitation. The use or habitation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to occupy the dwelling, structure, or premises or for an owner to allow occupancy of a dwelling, structure, or premises which has been placarded, if such dwelling, structure, or premises is or becomes vacant after placarding or, in all events, within 60 days from the date of placarding, unless the violation has been corrected. 
(c)  The posting of the placard and the recording of same in the records of the department shall be notice to the general public that it is unlawful for any owner to allow the dwelling or structure to be occupied, as provided herein. No further notice shall be required to be given to any subsequent owner. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to deface, alter, destroy, cover, or remove such placards. The department shall remove the placards when compliance with this article has been effected. 
(e)  If the owner and/or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close the dwelling, building, or structure and clean the premises, the department may proceed under section 12-71 et seq. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.29)) 
Sec. 12-70. - Correction of violation by city at expense of property owners, generally. 
In the event that the owner and/or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close and/or repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, and/or clean the premises, or remedy any other condition found to exist in violation of this article or any other relevant ordinance of the city, any further proceedings against the interested parties and/or the property shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 12-71 et seq., as herein amended. In addition thereto, the department may, in addition to other remedies, issue a citation for violating any requirements or provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.30)) 
Sec. 12-71. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall appoint or designate the chief of police or his designee as public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any property, dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and/or is not in compliance with applicable codes or exists in violation thereof, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer determines from investigation or inspection that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue and file in the municipal court a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated, or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists, and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such property, dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a certain date and time and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties or any of them shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or that there exist on the property other conditions which are in violation of this article or other relevant ordinances of the city, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served, upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing, an order: 
(1)  In cases involving structures or buildings on the property, if the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure, in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations, cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove said dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. For purposes of subsection (d)(1) of this section and this subsection (d)(2), the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. The income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction; or 
(3)  In cases involving violations other than buildings or structures on the property, the court shall order the owner or other person before the court to abate the condition by mowing, cutting, or removal, as the case may be. No officer, member of the city council, or city employee charged with the enforcement of this article in the discharge of duties shall be rendered liable personally; and such officer, member, or employee is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under this article. 
(e)  If the owner or other person before the court fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, or to abate the condition, as the case may be, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered or improved; to be vacated and closed and/or demolished; or the conditions existing in violation abated, as provided in said order. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of the time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief is granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes, has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including the restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The public officers designated herein may, in addition to the powers herein granted, issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem, as provided in this article. 
(2)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.31)) 
State Law reference— Unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 
Sec. 12-72. - Determination of unfit conditions in dwellings, buildings or structures. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other city residents. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; 
(7)  The existence of other conditions on the premises which are in violation of this article or other relevant ordinances of the city, such as, without limitation, the existence of weeds, junk, garbage, and trash on the premises which affect the health and/or safety of the property and/or the occupants of the premises and/or other persons residing in the city; 
(8)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.32)) 
Sec. 12-73. - Powers of public officers. 
(a)  The public officers designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation, are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as may be provided by the city. 
(b)  The department is authorized to utilize the in rem enforcement and abatement procedures, including the lis pendens, the issuance of liens and the recording and collection of same, provided by section 12-71 and this section, in all cases where there exists on the property junk, weeds, grass, junked or abandoned appliances, junked or abandoned automobiles, garbage, trash, or any other conditions which are in noncompliance with or in violation of this article, or any other applicable ordinances, codes, or laws; and the provisions of said sections shall apply fully to the abatement of such conditions. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.34)) 
Secs. 12-74—12-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS, BUILDINGS, AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 12-105. - Compliance. 
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let or sublet to another for any use or occupancy, any dwelling, building, or structure, or any portion thereof, which does not comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.4)) 
Sec. 12-106. - Sanitary facilities. 
(a)  Generally. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall contain not less than one lavatory and one water closet, all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every dwelling unit shall, in addition, contain a kitchen sink and a tub or shower connected as aforesaid. Every plumbing fixture and wastewater pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions. 
(b)  Location. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling, building, and structure and be accessible to the occupants of the same. The water closet, tub or shower, and lavatory shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user. 
(c)  Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall have connected to the lavatory and, where applicable, to the kitchen sink, tub, and shower an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply. 
(d)  Water heating facilities. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(e)  Heating facilities. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms to a temperature of at least 70 degrees Fahrenheit therein at a distance of three feet above floor level under ordinary minimum winter conditions. Where a gas or electric central heating system is not provided, each dwelling, building, and structure shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, or gas vents whereby heating appliances may be connected, so as to furnish a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three feet above the floor during ordinary minimum winter conditions. 
(f)  Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating equipment and facilities shall be maintained in a safe and good working condition. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.41)) 
Sec. 12-107. - Electrical systems. 
All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and installed, and connected to the source of electrical power in accordance with the city's adopted electrical code. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.42)) 
Sec. 12-108. - Light and ventilation. 
(a)  Electrical lights and outlets required. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall be wired for electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least one floor or wall-type electric convenience outlet. Every kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, corridor or hallway, and porch shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric outlet. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. 
(b)  Light in public halls and stairways. Every public hall and stairway in every dwelling, building, and structure containing five or more units shall be adequately lit at all times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.43)) 
Sec. 12-109. - Exterior and interior of structures. 
(a)  Foundation. The building foundation walls, piers, or other structural elements shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. In the case of a mobile home, the undercarriage of the mobile home shall be completely enclosed by the foundation or stand, or by a permanent skirt, if no foundation or stand is utilized. 
(b)  Exterior walls. The exterior walls shall be substantially weather-tight, watertight, and shall be made impervious to the adverse effects of weather and be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(c)  Roofs. Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(d)  Means of egress. Every dwelling, building, and structure shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress with a minimum ceiling height of seven feet leading to a safe and open space at ground level. 
(e)  Stairs, porches, and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto of every structure used for human habitation shall be capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(f)  Protective treatment. All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. 
(g)  Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, and basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weather-tight, watertight, and rodent-proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(h)  Windows to be glazed. Windowpanes or an approved substitute shall be maintained without holes. 
(i)  Window sash. A window sash shall be properly fitted and weather-tight within the window frame. 
(j)  Hardware. Every exterior door shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in good condition. 
(k)  Door frames. Every exterior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from entering the dwelling. Each door available as an exit shall be capable of being easily opened from the inside. 
(l)  Floor, interior walls, and ceiling. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling shall be substantially rodent-proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(m)  Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings and other accessory structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound structural condition. 
(n)  Structural supports. Every structural element shall be maintained to be structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying loads which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.44)) 
Sec. 12-110. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Responsibility for common areas. Every owner of a dwelling, building, and structure containing two or more units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or common areas and the premises thereof. 
(b)  Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling, building, and structure shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, building, and structure and premises thereof which such person occupies and controls or which is provided for such person's particular use. 
(c)  Garbage disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling, building, and structure shall dispose of garbage, any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, and rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage or rubbish storage containers. 
(d)  Extermination. Every occupant of a dwelling, building, and structure shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling, building, and structure in a reasonable rat-proof and insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(e)  Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any dwelling, building, and structure located thereon. 
(f)  Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling, building, and structure shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2004, § 1(1.45)) 
Chapter 14 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual, for purposes of documenting compensation, a form IRS W-2. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the city. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations means those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18), but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.1)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 14-20. - Levied; limitations. 
(a)  An occupation tax based upon the number of employees in the state is hereby levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city, but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
(b)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(c)  A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to the current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business' or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in the state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)  A business or practitioner which has locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government. 
(4)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(d)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(e)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees, which are the basis of this occupation tax, will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then, no later than January 15 of the following year, the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicting the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amount due and owing to the city for any reason. Any underpayment will be due upon filing the amended return. 
(f)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article, only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.2)) 
State Law reference— Occupation tax authorized, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7; taxation criteria, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10; taxation of real estate brokers, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-17. 
Sec. 14-21. - Certificate. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax shall post the occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer (or other person charged with enforcing this article) upon request. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.3)) 
Sec. 14-22. - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations, as defined in this article, shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 14-20 or shall pay an occupation tax of $200.00 per practitioner. At such time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.4)) 
State Law reference— Taxation of certain professionals, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(g). 
Sec. 14-23. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission and the state department of public safety; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.); 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal or hulls in carlot lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product, and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; or 
(10)  Any business where the levy or such occupation tax is prohibited by any applicable law. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.5)) 
State Law reference— Exempt businesses and practitioners, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6. 
Sec. 14-24. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43 by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.6)) 
Sec. 14-25. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.7)) 
Sec. 14-26. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)  On or before January 1 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this article shall file with city clerk on a form approved by and available from the city a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within the city within 30 days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax fee. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.8)) 
Sec. 14-27. - Date due; penalty. 
(a)  Any occupation tax fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on January 31. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 31 in any year, the tax shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.10)) 
Sec. 14-28. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article, and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, at the rate of one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of the delinquent tax payer located in the city. Sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code, the city Charter and state laws. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the city Charter and the laws of the state in regard to tax execution. 
(c)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax charged pursuant to this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(d)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information that the city requests or requires for determining the applicability or amount of occupation tax, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax, shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-8. 
(e)  All persons subject to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person's business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain, make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.11)) 
Sec. 14-29. - Prior ordinance. 
To the extent that any occupation taxes are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to this article, such amount remains due and owing, and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes, until such time as they are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.12)) 
Secs. 14-30—14-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATORY FEE 

Sec. 14-47. - Levied; certificate. 
(a)  Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in all articles contained within this chapter subsequent hereto must pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee in accordance with the rate set forth therein. 
(b)  If a business or individual initially engages in an activity regulated by the city on or after July 1 in any year, the regulatory fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the regulatory fee for the entire year. 
(c)  Every business, individual, and location subject to the payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer or city clerk upon request. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.9)) 
Secs. 14-48—14-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE COMPANIES 

Sec. 14-68. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The fees and taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as the other taxes of the city. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation, including the officers, agents or employees of the same, violating the provisions of this article, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Any person so convicted shall be subject to the revocation of the license granted herein. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.31)) 
Sec. 14-69. - Insurer license fees. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $15.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 14-70, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $15.00. For the purpose of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.32)) 
Sec. 14-70. - License fee for insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, the said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.33)) 
Sec. 14-71. - Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 14-69 in the amount of $15.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.34)) 
State Law reference— Local license fee, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 
Sec. 14-72. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed herein shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.35)) 
Sec. 14-73. - Gross premiums tax—Imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident, and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 14-69. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.36)) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. 
Sec. 14-74. - Same—Imposed on all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the city in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The term "gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 14-69. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.37)) 
State Law reference— Tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 14-75. - Confidential reports. 
To the extent required by applicable laws, rules, and regulations, all reports required to be filed under this article shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be solely for the use of the city officers responsible for administering this article. 
(Ord. of 9-18-2015, exh. A(26.40)) 
Secs. 14-76—14-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LICENSE FOR TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing of temporary fireworks sales, O.C.G.A. § 25-5-10.1; local regulation of sale of consumer fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-24. 

Sec. 14-94. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in 16 CFR 1500 and 1507, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in 49 CFR 172, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1. The term "consumer fireworks" additionally shall mean Roman candles. 
Distributor means any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership which sells consumer fireworks. 
Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
Pyrotechnics means fireworks. 
Proper identification means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person or such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or other identification card authorized by the state. 
Temporary means a period of time not exceeding two months in a calendar year and not exceeding 30 days in a row in any one period. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, exh. A(26-51)) 
Sec. 14-95. - License required. 
Any business selling consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand must apply for a license from the city. The license fee for a retail fireworks temporary stand license shall be $500.00 per each stand within the city. 
(1)  Requirements for license. 
a.  An applicant for a fireworks retail license from the city shall offer proof that the applicant maintains public liability and product liability insurance with minimum coverage limits of $2,000,000.00 to cover any losses, damages or injuries that might ensue to persons and property as a result of the sale of consumer fireworks. 
b.  The applicant must demonstrate that they have obtained a license from the state safety fire commissioner. The license fee for a retail fireworks license shall be $500.00 per location within the city. 
c.  A license will only be granted to applicants who agree to operate their stand in accordance with the National Fire Protection Act Provision 1124. 
(2)  Locations. A stand shall only be permitted to be located within 1,000 feet of either a fire hydrant or a fire department connection belonging to the city, unless the city fire chief provides in writing that the stand may operate further than 1,000 feet from a fire hydrant or other fire department connection. 
(3)  Number of stands permitted. 
a.  When a distributor is a retail chain license by the safety fire commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(d), the retailer may operate two temporary consumer firework stands for every retail chain store located in the county. 
b.  If, at the time of the application for a stand, no distributors licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(b) or (d) are doing business in the county, any distributor licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1(b) or (d) that maintains a retail sales facility within 75 miles of the border of the county may choose to place one of their two retail stands in the county. 
c.  A fireworks distributor who is not a retailer may operate two retail stands for each license obtained from the safety fire commissioner. 
d.  Any licensee shall notify the city clerk and the fire chief of the location of the temporary retail stand no later than ten days prior to the opening of the stand, so that the fire chief can inspect the hydrant or fire connection located near or closest to the location of the stand to ensure its proper functioning. 
(4)  Face-to-face sales; age requirement. The sale of fireworks may only be conducted through in-person, face-to-face sales. Any licensee selling fireworks within the city shall ensure that all customers purchasing fireworks from this stand show proper identification verifying that they are over the age of 18. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, exh. A(26-52)) 
Chapter 16 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-1 et seq.; interment of deceased indigents, O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5; receipt of cemetery or burial lots in trust, annual returns, commissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4; municipal corporation as trustee of funds donated to cemetery, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-5; Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; authority of coroners, etc., to disinter bodies, O.C.G.A. § 45-16-45. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY CEMETERY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dead bodies, O.C.G.A. § 31-21-1 et seq.; interment of deceased indigents, O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5; receipt of cemetery or burial lots in trust, annual returns, commissions, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-4; municipal corporation as trustee of funds donated to cemetery, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-5; Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act of 2000, O.C.G.A. § 10-14-1 et seq.; authority of coroners, etc., to disinter bodies, O.C.G.A. § 45-16-45. 

Sec. 16-19. - Authority to promulgate rules and regulations. 
The city clerk or other designated agent of the mayor and council, with the leave and approval of the mayor and council, shall promulgate and keep on file in the office of the city clerk the rules and regulations for the administration of the cemeteries in the city, which rules and regulations may be added to or amended from time to time with leave and approval of the mayor and council; and which rules and regulations shall apply to all persons engaged in the business of funeral directors, florists, monument sales and installation, grave preparation, crematory services, and any and all other such activities related to burial and maintenance of burial sites in such cemeteries; and which rules shall have the force of law and a violation of which shall be punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. 15-0918-4, § 1, 9-18-2015) 
Sec. 16-20. - General regulations. 
(a)  No cemetery lot may be used for any purpose other than the burial of human remains. 
(b)  The schedule of prices for lots in city-owned cemeteries and the charge for recording the deed of such lot shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  No person shall be buried in any cemetery operated by the city, unless and until the price for the lot in which such person is to be interned has been paid. 
(d)  No digging of graves, burials, installation of monuments, or exhumation of bodies shall be done in any city cemetery without first obtaining a permit and approval of the city clerk. 
(e)  No coping shall be placed around any lot. 
(f)  No trees, bushes, or shrubs shall be planted on or around any lot. 
(g)  A maximum of four burial urns may be buried in any lot. 
(Ord. No. 15-0918-4, § 2, 9-18-2015) 
Sec. 16-21. - Vaults. 
(a)  There shall be no burial of human remains in any city cemetery without the use of a vault. 
(b)  No vault shall be buried in any city cemetery without being leveled and sealed or weatherproofed against unreasonable moisture penetration. 
(c)  The remains of individuals who have been cremated should be placed in a sealed burial urn. 
(Ord. No. 15-0918-4, § 3, 9-18-2015) 
Sec. 16-22. - Monuments. 
(a)  There shall no burial of any human remains in any city cemetery without the placement at the gravesite of a slab or headstone bearing the name, year of birth, and the year of death of the deceased. 
(b)  No permanent monument or slab shall be erected on any lot in any city cemetery without cement foundations. 
(c)  Monuments and slabs shall be of marble or other natural stone. Concrete monuments or slabs shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Slabs shall not be elevated, but shall be even with the surface of the ground. 
(e)  Temporary grave markers of metal or other composite material shall be allowed for a period of no longer than one year. Wooden markers shall not be permitted. 
(f)  If an individual's remains are to be buried in an urn, the urn should be marked with a permanent marker placed directly above each urn. The marker should consist, at a minimum, of a copper plaque bearing the name, date of birth and date of death of the individual buried in the urn. 
(Ord. No. 15-0918-4, § 4, 9-18-2015) 
Sec. 16-23. - Sale of lots by owners prohibited. 
No cemetery lot shall be conveyed to any third party. Should the owner of any lot wish to sell the lot, it shall be transferred back to the city at a cost of 50 percent of the prevailing rate for the sale of cemetery lots by the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-0918-4, § 5, 9-18-2015) 
Sec. 16-24. - Vehicles. 
Vehicles shall be driven only upon the roadways within the cemetery at a rate of speed not in excess of 15 miles per hour. No vehicle shall enter the cemetery except for the purpose of attending funerals or visiting graves, or maintenance of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 15-0918-4, § 6, 9-18-2015) 
Sec. 16-25. - Scope. 
All lots within the city cemetery and within the extension of the cemetery at any time here and after made shall be subject to and regulated and controlled by the provisions of this chapter or any future ordinances and any rules adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-0918-4, § 7, 9-18-2015) 
Chapter 18 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Election officials. 
The council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent, election managers, registrars, an absentee ballot clerk and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1982, § 2-2-1; Code 2000, § 38-1) 
State Law reference— Superintendents, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70 et seq.; managers, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-90; registrars, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-212; absentee ballot clerk, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-380.1. 
Sec. 18-2. - Qualification of candidates. 
Notice of the opening and closing dates for candidates to qualify shall be published in the call for the election. 
(Code 1982, § 2-2-3; Code 2000, § 38-2) 
State Law reference— Filing notice of candidacy, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
Sec. 18-3. - Voting precinct; polling places. 
The area comprising the corporate limits of the city shall constitute the voting precinct of the city. The polling place shall be located at the city hall. 
(Code 1982, § 2-2-6; Code 2000, § 38-3) 
State Law reference— Precincts and polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-260 et seq. 
Chapter 20 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency management has the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, as amended. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2012, exh. A(31)) 
Sec. 20-20. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this article, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, resolutions, motions, and orders are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2012, exh. A(32)) 
Sec. 20-21. - Office of the city emergency management director. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27, there is established the city emergency management office. The city council shall nominate for appointment by the director of emergency management for the state, a director of emergency management for the city. The emergency management director must meet all the qualifications and other requirements of applicable law, including those set forth in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. The emergency management director shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with: 
(1)  Representing the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assisting city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Developing in conjunction with other city departments the plan for emergency functions/emergency operations plan. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency plan and shall be submitted to the city council for approval and thence to the state director for approval. 
(4)  Maintaining the emergency management office in carrying out the day-to-day administration of the emergency management and disaster program, including the rendering of required reports to the state emergency management office. 
(5)  Rendering reports, such as financial, daily activity, etc., as required by governing officials in keeping with good business practices. 
(6)  Procuring, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the city emergency operating center. 
(7)  Coordinating, during periods of a declared emergency and under the supervision of governing officials, the activities of the city emergency operating center staff. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2012, exh. A(33)) 
State Law reference— Local organization for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 20-22. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance; provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and that state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city council may, by resolution, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the local emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The emergency management director and his designees shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred by law, including the implementation of the applicable local emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
2.  In responding to the emergency and conducting necessary and appropriate survey of the damages caused by the emergency, the emergency management director or his designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
3.  The emergency management director is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the city; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification by the city council. 
4.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the public and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this article as appropriate: section 20-25 regarding registration of building and repair services; section 20-26 regarding closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergencies; and section 20-27 regarding prohibiting overcharging. If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the city council is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 20-24, as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The emergency management director shall have and may exercise, for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To make provisions for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
4.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
5.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
6.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster, or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare and/or the property of citizens; 
7.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster; provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances, and, further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
8.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means; provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
9.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth in this subsection, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this article which shall be in effect. 
DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, the city of ____________ , Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [DATE]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the mayor, there exist emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event; 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the applicable local emergency operations plan is hereby activated; 
(2)  That the following sections of the City Code of Ordinances be implemented : section 20-25, Registration of building and repair services; section 20-26, Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency; section 20-27; Overcharging prohibited; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: section 20-22(a)(4)c, d. 
SO ORDERED, this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ at [TIME]. 

 
(c)  Contracts with local governments. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the applicable local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2012, exh. A(34)) 
State Law reference— Local emergency management rules and orders, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; mutual aid agreements, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-29. 
Sec. 20-23. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the city police department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this article and/or implemented by the emergency management director or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this article, or with any Code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the emergency management director or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. Any person who violates any provision in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the emergency management director is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article may be enforced by the city police department. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2012, exh. A(35)) 
Sec. 20-24. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  City business. Upon the declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of city council without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon the declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). Any E-Verify affidavit or other state required affidavit shall be obtained from any contractor if otherwise required by law. 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon the declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city council may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof; where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" includes fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by the development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2012, exh. A(36)) 
Sec. 20-25. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the city designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city clerk and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the city without complying with this article constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application providing the following information: 
(1)  The name of the applicant; 
(2)  The permanent address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  The tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  The list of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  State sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  State business license number, if required; 
(9)  A copy of the license from the Secretary of State of Georgia, if required; 
(10)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's legal presence in the United States, as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1; 
(11)  At least one secure and verifiable document as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city council, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2012, exh. A(37)) 
Sec. 20-26. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons or their property within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor, until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have the discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the applicable local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the emergency management director. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating that this section is in effect. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2012, exh. A(38)) 
Sec. 20-27. - Overcharging prohibited. 
(a)  Act declared unlawful. To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of an emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within the county. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which exceed the customary charges by at least 25 percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least 25 percent the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent or greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the emergency or disaster continues to cause disruptions in the area designated in the declaration of emergency, but shall not exceed three months after the declaration has been terminated, unless extended by action of the city council. 
(c)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency as set out in this article, stating that this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city council, the provisions of this section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recovery period of three months. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2012, exh. A(39)) 
Sec. 20-28. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Ord. of 11-5-2012, exh. A(40)) 
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - General and specific prohibitory noises. 
(a)  The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unreasonable noise within the city limits is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any reasonable person, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unreasonable noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation or the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the sounding of that device for an unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Musical instruments. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any reasonable persons in the vicinity, except this subsection shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Noisy vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in any manner as to create loud and unreasonable grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authority. 
(6)  Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Construction work. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, or the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the city, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. 
(8)  On streets of institutions requiring quiet. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions of such institutions. 
(9)  Loudspeakers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes without a permit from the city council. 
(10)  Animals; fowl. The keeping of any animal or fowl which shall disturb the comfort or repose of any reasonable persons in the vicinity by making long, continual or frequent noise. 
(c)  The prohibitions in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not be applicable to: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county or state during the night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform that work during the day; nor shall the same apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is an urgent necessity therefor; 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character; and 
(4)  Any parade, celebration or performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city clerk. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of the city; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall apply to the United States of America, the state, the county, the city, nor to public agencies. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-4; Code 2000, § 42-2) 
Secs. 22-2—22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; abatement of nuisances in cities, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 

Sec. 22-21. - Certain conditions declared to be nuisances. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or disturbance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or disturbance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewer system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or disturbing to the public, including, without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes, such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas and any other noise described in this section; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)  Any abandoned, unattended or discarded container that has a compartment of more than 1½ cubic feet capacity and a door or lid that locks or fastens automatically when closed, and which cannot easily be opened from the inside, left in any place accessible to children, unless the lid, door or locking device has been removed from such container; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts of such trees, shrubbery or other plants which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(12)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-1; Code 2000, § 42-31) 
State Law reference— The term "nuisance" defined generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1. 
Sec. 22-22. - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the question of the existence of a nuisance in the city and, if found to exist, to order its abatement and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 1-8. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-2; Code 2000, § 42-32) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court to determine existence of nuisance and to order its abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 22-23. - Complaint of nuisance; hearing. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the city police department, who shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court, after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and, upon finding that a nuisance does exist, shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the municipal court judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers, license officials and building officials shall and may also receive complaints, investigate those complaints and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-3; Code 2000, § 42-33) 
Sec. 22-24. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the judge, that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police, in such case, shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating the nuisance, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-4; Code 2000, § 42-34) 
Sec. 22-25. - Nuisance per se; exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion of the public is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-5; Code 2000, § 42-35) 
Sec. 22-26. - Offense. 
It is declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist after notice to abate such nuisance. 
(Code 1982, § 9-2-6; Code 2000, § 42-36) 
State Law reference— Erection or continuance of nuisance after notice to abate, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6. 
Secs. 22-27—22-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local ordinance regulating land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

Sec. 22-56. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "City of Doerun Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 3(42-51)) 
Sec. 22-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) includes sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. The term "cut" is also known as "excavation." 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person who is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the city soil and water conservation district. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material, such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material, that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1974, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 22-59(c). 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the term "fill" also means the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed and that, for unpaved areas, areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 22-58(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcations, such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority (LIA) means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by the EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by the EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party that has operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater, in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state; any interstate body; or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project, regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Manual), published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material, such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material, that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC section 1251 et seq. and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of the term "structural erosion and sediment control practices" are rip rap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia . 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., and in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia . 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that, under normal circumstances, do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 3(42-52)) 
Sec. 22-58. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968. 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, definitions, to include those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; and the construction of farm buildings; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 22-59(c)(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and, provided further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 3(42-53)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Sec. 22-59. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with the requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements; best management practices. 
(1)  The best management practices as set forth in this subsection (b) and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  Protections to minimize erosion. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as is practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as is practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts, except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq.), shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer, and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation, as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time, as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams," pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer, and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation, as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time, as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Exceeding minimum requirements. Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Violation. The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 3(42-54)) 
Sec. 22-60. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to the EPD, if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 22-59(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. R 391-3-7-.10). 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon the receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 22-59(c)(15) and (16) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or a fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 22-59(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types; geological and hydrological characteristics; topography; watershed; vegetation; proposed permanent structures, including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities; local ordinances; and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as is practicable, but, in any event, not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary, and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 22-59(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons, and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 3(42-55)) 
State Law reference— Permits and bonds, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 et seq. 
Sec. 22-61. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.). 
(c)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and, for this purpose, to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or the division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district, the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district, the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request an investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 3(42-56)) 
Sec. 22-62. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site, with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 22-60(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 3(42-57)) 
State Law reference— Stop work orders and penalties, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-12 et seq. 
Sec. 22-63. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent upon their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph (b)(4). 
(Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 3(42-58)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Sec. 22-64. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the counsel within ten days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
(Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 3(42-59)) 
Sec. 22-65. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.) or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 10-5-2009, § 3(42-60)) 
Secs. 22-66—22-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WETLANDS PROTECTION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Protection of wetlands, O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-89. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are to promote the wise use of wetlands and to protect wetlands, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities which may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable, as determined by a permitting process. The objective of this article is to protect wetlands from alterations which will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife areas, and to comply with the requirements of state law related to wetland protection. 
(Code 2000, § 90-31; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 1.2) 
Sec. 22-90. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The wetlands within the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state. 
(b)  Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(c)  The state department of natural resources and the state department of community affairs have determined that each local government with classified wetlands located in its jurisdiction must adopt a wetlands protection ordinance under the requirements of House Bill 215, Georgia's 1989 Growth Strategies Legislation and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
(d)  It is therefore necessary for the city to ensure maximum protection for wetlands by discouraging development activities in wetlands that may adversely affect wetlands. 
(Code 2000, § 90-32; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 1.1) 
Sec. 22-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Functions means the beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including storage, conveyance and attenuation of floodwater and stormwater; protection of water quality and reduction of erosion; habitat for wildlife, including rare, threatened or endangered species; food chain support for a wide variety of wildlife and fisheries; educational, historical and archeological value protection; and scenic, aesthetic and recreational amenities. 
Generalized wetland map means map 26F, as found in the January 1992 Joint City County Comprehensive Plan for Colquitt County, such map being a subset of the U.S. Department of the Interior—National Wetlands Inventory Maps. 
Hydric soils means soils that form as a result of saturated soils conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the Federal Soil Conservation Service. 
Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent upon saturated soils conditions. 
Jurisdictional determination means an official, written statement or map signed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands, as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States, excepting those activities exempted in section 22-149 and exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Silviculture means the art of producing, reproducing and growing a forest of distinctive stands of trees. 
Temporary emergency permit means a temporary permit that may be issued in certain circumstances specified in this article. 
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support and, under normal circumstances, does support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the Corps. 
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city which are indicated on the generalized wetland map as "wetlands providing significant wildlife habitat and/or which may be subject to extensive mitigation." 
(Code 2000, § 90-33; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 6.2) 
Sec. 22-92. - Wetland protection district. 
(a)  Applicability of article provisions. This article shall apply to all wetlands within the wetland protection district and located within the jurisdiction of the city. The generalized wetland map, adopted as part of this article, shows the general location of wetlands and of the wetland protection district and shall be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands before engaging in a regulated activity. The generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The generalized wetland map shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  District boundaries. The generalized wetland map is a general reference document, and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners if they are within proximity to a wetland, which means that there is a high likelihood of the presence of a jurisdictional wetland and a need for the developer/landowner to seek the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' guidance as to whether a section 404 permit will be required prior to any activity. The generalized wetland map does not necessarily represent the exact boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Code 2000, § 90-34; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 2.2) 
Secs. 22-93—22-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 22-113. - Monitoring and enforcement. 
(a)  The council, or other party as may be designated by the city council, their agent, officers and employees shall have the authority to enter upon privately-owned land at all reasonable hours for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or samplings as the city council or their designee deems necessary. 
(1)  The city council shall have the authority to enforce this article; issue permits thereunder; and address violations or threatened violations by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders, and civil or criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(2)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have the authority to assist the city council in enforcement. 
(3)  The city council shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of violations of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to the superior court of the county. 
(b)  The city council may require a bond as set forth in section 22-151, and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 90-61; Ord. of 9-8-1998, §§ 4.1, 4.2) 
Sec. 22-114. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each violation of this article shall be a separate offense. 
(b)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may be required to remove the structure, at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the city council. 
(d)  If the city council discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of provisions of the Clean Water Act, as amended, the city council may issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(e)  Suspension or revocation. The city council may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The city council may cause notice of its denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(Code 2000, § 90-62; Ord. of 9-8-1998, §§ 5.1—5.5) 
Sec. 22-115. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city council concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a special permit shall be reviewable in the superior court of the county. 
(b)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the court, the city council may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
(1)  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
(2)  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 90-63; Ord. of 9-8-1998, §§ 6.1, 6.2) 
Sec. 22-116. - Amendments. 
The regulations of this article and the generalized wetland map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding or botanical species peculiar to wetlands become available. 
(Code 2000, § 90-64; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 7) 
Sec. 22-117. - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation restriction with the government or a nonprofit organization to permanently control some or all regulated activities in the wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the controlled wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements, such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains. 
(Code 2000, § 90-65; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 8) 
Secs. 22-118—22-147. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOCAL DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

Sec. 22-148. - General requirements. 
No regulated activity will be allowed within the wetland protection district without written permission from the city in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not exempted in section 22-149 or by other local development ordinances shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of the wetland protection district boundary, as determined from the generalized wetland map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, a local development permit will be issued only following issuance of the section 404 permit or letter of permission. 
(Code 2000, § 90-91; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 3.1) 
Sec. 22-149. - Permissible uses as a right. 
The following uses shall be allowed as a right within the wetland protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, and provided that they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging, except as provided in this section: 
(1)  Operations conducted during normal silvicultural activities, including minor dredge and fill associated with road construction, harvesting and reforestation practices, provided that they meet the performance standards and road construction best management practices required under section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(2)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided that they do not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(3)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, birdwatching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(4)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission. 
(5)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(6)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved best management practices are followed. 
(7)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. The following activities are permitted in wetlands where educational projects, scientific research and nature trails are existing: limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses, or other similar water-related structures; provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
(8)  Temporary emergency permit. A temporary emergency permit can be issued by the city or its designee for the following reasons: 
a.  Maintenance or repair of lawfully-located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services; provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and that, prior to the commencement of work, written notice has been given to the city or its designee, and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
b.  Temporary water level stabilization measures associated with silvicultural operations; provided that they are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected. 
c.  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops; provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 90-92; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 3.2) 
Sec. 22-150. - Site plans. 
Applications for a development permit within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet. The city may approve a different scale, where necessary to clearly provide the required information, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, and cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of plus/minus 200 feet. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour levels of no greater than two feet. 
(5)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(Code 2000, § 90-93; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 3.3) 
Sec. 22-151. - Activities to comply with site plan; bond may be required. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of such site plan. The site plan may be amended only with the approval of the city or its designee. The city may require a bond up to the larger of $5,000.00 or $1,000.00 per acre of project area and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The particular amount and conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of condition of any such bond, the city or its designee may collect such bond or institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. 
(Code 2000, § 90-94; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 3.4) 
Sec. 22-152. - Filing fee. 
At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified by the city or its designee. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment and mitigation measures as deemed necessary by the city or its designee. In any case, the filing fees shall not be less than the amount necessary for evaluation of the application in a manner consistent with the intent of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 90-95; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 3.5) 
Sec. 22-153. - Enforcement authority. 
The city council is established as the administrator of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 90-96; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 3.6) 
Sec. 22-154. - Review procedures. 
The application shall be made to the city council with a copy to the county planning commission or such parties which may be designated by the city council, and will be reviewed within 60 days or in accordance with established review procedures for the type of development being considered, whichever is greater. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval or disapproval) by the council and the county planning commission, or such parties which may be designated by the city council. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the review. If the review process is not completed within the time period specified in this section, the application is considered to be approved for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 90-97; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 3.7) 
Sec. 22-155. - Appeals. 
Decisions on permit applications made by the county planning commission may be appealed to the city council. The appeal must be made within ten days of the decision rendered by the county planning commission. A public hearing shall be held for appeals. Public announcement of the hearing may be printed in local newspapers at least 15, but not more than 45, days prior to the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. 
(Code 2000, § 90-98; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 3.8) 
Sec. 22-156. - Duration of permit validity. 
(a)  If the construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(b)  If the construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(c)  Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit may be issued by the city council. 
(Code 2000, § 90-99; Ord. of 9-8-1998, § 3.9) 
Secs. 22-157—22-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESTRICTIONS ON OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPES 

Sec. 22-181. - Outdoor irrigation. 
(a)  Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian productions or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental production division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or a handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property, if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  This article governs outdoor irrigation activities only. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2010, § 1(86-100)) 
Sec. 22-182. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The city shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The mayor or city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-6-2010, § 1(86-101)) 
Chapter 24 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire escapes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; forest fires, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-89; transmitting false report of fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq.; remedy of unsafe conditions upon failure to comply with court order, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-25; local ordinances, regulations or codes relating to fire prevention or protection, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; state grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; Georgia Firefighters' Pension Fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-1 et seq.; liability of officers, agents, etc., of fire departments for activities, O.C.G.A. § 51-1-30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box, or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith, located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-4; Code 2000, § 46-1) 
Secs. 24-2—24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; Georgia Firefighters' Pension Fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-1 et seq.; liability of officers, agents, etc., of fire departments for activities, O.C.G.A. § 51-1-30. 

Sec. 24-21. - Fire chief and members. 
The volunteer fire department, headed by the fire chief, also consists of other volunteer members and is recognized as the fire department of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-1; Code 2000, § 46-31) 
Sec. 24-22. - Interfering with equipment. 
No person other than a duly enrolled member of the fire department shall ride upon the city fire trucks at any time, nor use, borrow or interfere with any fire department equipment, or use or attempt to use the equipment at the scene of a fire unless authorized to do so by the fire chief. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-2; Code 2000, § 46-32) 
Sec. 24-23. - Enforcement. 
Whenever the fire department is answering an alarm or operating at the scene of a fire or other emergency, every enrolled member of the department is hereby empowered and authorized to control and direct motor vehicle traffic, stop or move vehicles, and enforce all provisions of this article and any other provisions of this Code, the enforcement of which is deemed necessary to assist in the control of the fire or other emergency. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-3; Code 2000, § 46-33) 
Secs. 24-24—24-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 

Sec. 24-50. - Issuance of new certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Any existing building or structure other than those listed in section 24-54 shall be re-inspected and evaluated as would a proposed building in the event such building or structure is subject to: 
(1)  Substantial renovation; 
(2)  A fire or other hazard of serious consequence; or 
(3)  A change in the classification of occupancy. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "substantial renovation" means any construction project involving exits or internal features of such building or structure costing more than the building's or structure's assessed value according to county tax records at the time of such renovation. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "change in classification of occupancy" includes situations in which said structure or unit in said structure is vacant for a period of six months or more. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 24-51. - Issuance of temporary occupancy permits. 
In existing buildings other than those which come under the classification in section 24-54, when substandard conditions are found, a temporary occupancy permit may be issued, such permit carrying a time limit adjusted to meet the amount of time deemed necessary to make the proper corrections in order to bring the building up to standard. All certificates of occupancy shall be issued against the building and shall not require renewal because of change of ownership. The same set of fees for certificates of occupancy as are applicable to proposed buildings shall apply. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 24-52. - Inspection of existing structures. 
(a)  The city shall have the authority at all times of the day and night to enter in or upon and to examine any building or premises where a fire is in progress or has occurred, as well as other buildings or premises adjacent to or near the same. The city shall have the right to enter in and upon all buildings and premises subject to this article, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of examination or inspection. 
(b)  Upon complaint submitted in writing, the city may enter in or upon any building or premises between the hours of sunrise and sunset for the purpose of investigating the complaint. Upon the complaint of any person, the state fire marshal or his deputized officials may inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings and premises within their jurisdiction whenever he or they deem it necessary. 
(c)  The city, in addition to other procedures now or hereafter provided, may obtain an inspection warrant. 
(1)  Inspection warrants may be issued by any judge of the superior, state, municipal, or magistrate court upon proper oath or affirmation showing probable cause for the purpose of conducting inspections authorized by this article or rules promulgated under this article and for the seizure of property or the taking of samples appropriate to the inspection. For the purposes of issuance of inspection warrants, probable cause exists upon showing a valid public interest in the effective enforcement of this article or rules promulgated under this article sufficient to justify inspection of the area, premises, building, or conveyance in the circumstances specified in the application for the warrant. 
(2)  A warrant shall be issued only upon affidavit of a person authorized to conduct inspections pursuant to this article, sworn to before the judicial officer and establishing the grounds for issuing the warrant. The issuing judge may issue the warrant when he is satisfied that the following conditions are met: 
a.  The one seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property, including those circumstances outlined in section 24-50; and 
b.  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this article. 
(3)  The warrant shall: 
a.  State the grounds for its issuance and the name of each person whose affidavit has been taken in support thereof; 
b.  Be directed to persons authorized by this article to conduct inspections to execute it; 
c.  Command the persons to whom it is directed to inspect the area, premises, building, or conveyance identified for the purpose specified and, if appropriate, direct the seizure of the property specified; 
d.  Identify the item or types of property to be seized, if any; and 
e.  Designate the judicial officer to whom it shall be returned. 
(4)  A warrant issued pursuant to this article must be executed and returned within ten days of its date of issuance, unless, upon a showing of a need for additional time, the court orders otherwise. 
(5)  If property is seized pursuant to a warrant, a copy shall be provided upon request to the person from whom or from whose premises the property is taken, together with a receipt for the property taken. The return of the warrant shall be made promptly, accompanied by a written inventory of any property taken. A copy of the inventory shall be delivered upon request to the person from whom or from whose premises the property was taken and to the applicant for the warrant. 
(6)  The judicial officer who has issued a warrant shall attach thereto a copy of the return and all papers returnable in connection therewith and file them with the county clerk of the superior court. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005, § 3) 
Sec. 24-53. - Abatement of hazards. 
Any building or other structure which, for want of repair or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or any other cause, is especially liable to fire hazard; or which is so situated as to endanger other property or the safety of the public; or when, in or around any building, an officer finds combustible or explosive matter, inflammables, or other conditions dangerous to the safety of the building shall be considered an unsafe structure in violation of section 12-33 and shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of chapter 12, article II, division 2, pertaining to property maintenance. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005, § 4) 
Sec. 24-54. - Exempted structures. 
The foregoing provisions shall apply to buildings and structures to which O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13 is inapplicable. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005, § 5) 
Secs. 24-55—24-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE PREVENTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local ordinances, regulations or codes relating to fire prevention or protection, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4. 

Sec. 24-82. - Fire extinguishers in certain businesses. 
It shall be unlawful for any business that has flammable materials on premises to fail to have a ten-pound ABC fire extinguisher on the premises at all times. 
(Code 1982, § 3-2-23; Code 2000, § 46-32) 
Sec. 24-83. - Open burning. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste or construction debris, other than yard trash, lawn trimmings, leaves, and limbs in open fires or in containers within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person may burn yard trash, lawn trimmings, leaves, and limbs in open fires or containers upon first receiving a permit from the city fire department. The fire department shall grant the permit if the open burning of allowed materials does not pose a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit burning permitted and conducted as provided in O.C.G.A. § 12-6-145, known as the Georgia Prescribed Burning Act, upon the obtaining of a permit by the state forestry commission as provided in O.C.G.A. § 12-6-90. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002(1), §§ 1—4) 
Chapter 26 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Obstructing or hindering law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; arrest of persons, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-1 et seq.; appropriation for training of police officers, O.C.G.A. § 35-4-7; qualifications of peace officers, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-8; special police, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1 et seq.; compensation of law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; peace officers' annuity and benefit fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Obstructing or hindering law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; arrest of persons, O.C.G.A. § 17-4-1 et seq.; appropriation for training of police officers, O.C.G.A. § 35-4-7; qualifications of peace officers, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-8; special police, O.C.G.A. § 35-9-1 et seq.; compensation of law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; peace officers' annuity and benefit fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-19. - Composition of department. 
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and those officers and employees of those ranks and positions as approved by the council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-1-1; Code 2000, § 50-31) 
Sec. 26-20. - Responsibilities. 
The police department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments and for any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the council. 
(Code 1982, § 3-1-2; Code 2000, § 50-32) 
Sec. 26-21. - Disposition of stolen, abandoned or impounded property. 
(a)  All personal property which comes into the custody of the police department, where the property has been stolen or impounded or where the ownership is unknown, shall be held for a period of 30 days awaiting claim by its owner. The owner of the property, upon proving ownership and paying all expenses and costs, including reasonable charges for storage, shall have the right to have such property returned to him. 
(b)  If after the expiration of 30 days the property is unclaimed, the chief of police shall advertise the property for sale in the newspaper in which the city's legal advertisements are printed. Such advertising shall take place at least 30 days before the date set for the sale, and shall give a description of the property to be sold and specify the time and place of the sale. If the property is still unclaimed by the time of the sale, it shall be sold as advertised and the proceeds shall be placed in the city treasury. 
(Code 1982, § 3-1-4; Code 2000, § 50-33) 
Chapter 28 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Courts, O.C.G.A. title 15; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 28-1. - Bailiff. 
The bailiff of the municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-1; Code 2000, § 34-31) 
Sec. 28-2. - Record of cases. 
A record of all cases heard in the municipal court for violation of this Code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume by the city clerk. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case, and the date of the final disposition. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-2; Code 2000, § 34-32) 
Sec. 28-3. - Service of summons. 
Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive a notice by service of a summons, as provided in this section. Such summons may be issued by the city clerk, the building official, or any police officer of the city. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, the time and place, as far as practicable, of the offense charged, and the day, hour and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the judge of the municipal court to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons shall be made by a police officer of the city by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his most notorious place of abode, except that in the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons, and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-3; Code 2000, § 34-33) 
Sec. 28-4. - Subpoenas. 
The city clerk shall issue subpoenas for the appearance of all witnesses necessary for the prosecution or for the defense in any case pending before the municipal court. All subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as a summons. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-4; Code 2000, § 34-34) 
Sec. 28-5. - Arrest and bond. 
When a police officer has arrested any person for violation of any provision of this Code or any municipal ordinance and a trial cannot be had immediately, the officer, if so authorized pursuant to law, may take a cash bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense or a bond with a good security for the appearance of such person before the judge of the municipal court. If such person fails or refuses to give a bond, the officer may confine him in the city jail until a trial can be held, provided that the judge, in his discretion, may release such person on his own recognizance without security. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-6; Code 2000, § 34-35) 
Sec. 28-6. - Malicious prosecution. 
Whenever the judge of the municipal court, after a fair and full trial, is satisfied that any case was frivolously or maliciously prosecuted, he shall assess the prosecution with all costs and jail fees. 
(Code 1982, § 2-3-7; Code 2000, § 34-36) 
Sec. 28-7. - Surcharge. 
There shall be a surcharge of $20.00 added to and collected with each fine and forfeiture levied by the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2011, § 1) 
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21; maintaining a disorderly house, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44; peeping Toms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-61; abandonment of containers, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; gambling, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged, and thus create turmoil; 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so; 
(6)  Fight, quarrel, or use indecent, vulgar, obscene or abusive language in or near a public place; 
(7)  Act in a disorderly, tumultuous or riotous manner on the streets or any public place; 
(8)  Curse or swear in or near public places; 
(9)  Strike or attempt to strike another person; 
(10)  Act in any manner which tends to disturb the peace and quiet of the city, or any portion of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-1; Code 2000, § 54-1) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 30-2. - Persons under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other mind-altering substances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of any alcoholic beverages, drugs or any other mind-altering substances while on the property of the general public, or while on private property which is used by the general public such as parking lots. 
(Code 1982, §§ 9-1-2, 9-1-3; Code 2000, § 54-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Discharge of weapons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than law enforcement officers in actual discharge of their duties as such, or persons in actual defense of life, limb or property of themselves or others under their lawful protection, to discharge any sort of gun, pistol, rifle or other firearm, or BB or air or spring gun, within the corporate limits of the city, whether the same is loaded with a bullet, shot, shell, missile or a mere explosive blank cartridge, shell, or other explosive device; provided, however, that it shall be lawful for any person to discharge any firearm (including air-powered firearms) in the corporate limits of the city and upon any lands owned by the city if he first obtains permission to do so from the city council, and, in the case of lands outside the corporate limits, from the local governing authority having jurisdiction over such lands. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-6; Code 2000, § 54-3) 
State Law reference— Pointing or aiming gun or pistol at another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-102; discharge of firearm, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103 et seq. 
Sec. 30-4. - Loitering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a police officer, to be in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  In accordance with section 1-8, violation of this section shall subject an individual to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, or both. 
(Code 2000, § 54-5; Ord. of 1-2-2001, § 1) 
Secs. 30-5—30-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 30-27—30-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 30-56. - Imposed on persons 16 years of age and under; exceptions; multiple violations reported to county. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any minor 16 years of age or under to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places referenced in subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section during the prescribed period of time. 
(5)  When the minor is attending or travelling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is married or has had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law; 
(7)  When the minor is engaged in travel in a motor vehicle in interstate commerce; or 
(8)  When the minor is involved in an emergency (being an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action, including, but not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life). 
(b)  Two or more violations of this section by a minor will result in a report being forwarded to the county juvenile authorities by the police department. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-12(a); Code 2000, § 54-61) 
Sec. 30-57. - Duty of parent, guardian; violations. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any minor 16 years of age and under to permit or, by insufficient control, to allow such minor to be in or upon the public streets or any other places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except in circumstances set out in section 30-56(a)(1) through (5). Upon conviction of a violation of this section for the first time, the parent or guardian shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, the parent or guardian shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-12(b); Code 2000, § 54-62) 
Sec. 30-58. - Imposed on persons 17 years old. 
It is unlawful for any person 17 years of age to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day; and provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the circumstances set out in section 30-56(a)(1) through (8). Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the person shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-12(a); Code 2000, § 54-63) 
Chapter 32 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Buyer's right to cancel home solicitation sale, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-6; disabled veterans, blind persons, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1 et seq.; charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvass means to go from place to place and seek to obtain orders for goods, wares or merchandise, or actually obtain orders for them. 
Peddle means to carry from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and offer to sell or barter them, or actually sell or barter them. 
Solicit means to request or accept, directly or indirectly, money, credit, property, financial assistance or any other thing of value to be used for any charitable purpose. 
(Code 2000, § 58-1) 
Sec. 32-2. - Registration required. 
Any person peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the city shall be required to register and obtain an identification card as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 7-2-1; Code 2000, § 58-2) 
Sec. 32-3. - Registration fee; application for identification card. 
Any person desiring to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city shall pay to the city clerk or his designated representative a registration fee as fixed from time to time by the council and shall make application with the chief of police for an identification card which shall show payment of the registration fee and the days that the registrant has registered to peddle, solicit or canvass within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 7-2-2; Code 2000, § 58-3) 
Sec. 32-4. - Exhibition of registration card. 
Each registrant shall at all times while in the city have upon his person the registration card and shall exhibit the card when requested to do so by any law enforcement officer or by any municipal authority and by any person being solicited. Possession of this registration card shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any products or project by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 7-2-3; Code 2000, § 58-4) 
Sec. 32-5. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Peddle, canvass or solicit before 8:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.; 
(2)  Peddle within the fire limits of the city at any time when such fire limits shall include a smaller area than the entire area within the city limits; 
(3)  Peddle, canvass or solicit without having registered with the city clerk in accordance with this chapter or to peddle, solicit or canvass without having on his person and in his possession an identification card issued in accordance with this chapter; 
(4)  Solicit, canvass or peddle without the express prior permission of any occupant or property owner at any residence, apartment complex, or shopping mall, other than areas open to public parking, where there is posted a sign forbidding such activity; 
(5)  Remain on private premises for the purpose of peddling, canvassing or soliciting, after being asked to leave the premises; or 
(6)  Continue peddling, canvassing or soliciting that is directed to any person, after being refused by such person, upon the public streets, public parks or other public areas or parks. Such action constitutes harassment. 
(Code 1982, § 7-2-4; Code 2000, § 58-5) 
Chapter 34 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Coordinated and comprehensive local planning, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; development impact fees, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 34-19. - Purpose; creation. 
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the city planning commission is hereby created. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-1; Code 2000, § 66-31) 
Sec. 34-20. - Membership. 
The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the council for staggered terms of four years each. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-2; Code 2000, § 66-32) 
Sec. 34-21. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then the planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the former General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act, 1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 358), as amended. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1-3; Code 2000, § 66-33) 
Chapter 36 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local solid waste management regulations, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9; local comprehensive solid waste management plan, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; cost reimbursement fees and surcharges, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39; reduction of amount of solid waste in city, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.1; local restrictions on disposal of tires, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; local and regional solid waste management authorities, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any hotel, motel, restaurant, business, public or semipublic establishment of any kind. 
Residence means all single-family dwelling units, including mobile homes and modular homes, and each individual unit of any multifamily structure, such as duplexes and apartment buildings. 
Solid waste means putrescible animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food, including food containers, and nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials, including wastepaper, metals, cans, glass, plastics, and/or other similar materials. 
(Code 2000, § 70-1; Ord. of 5-1-2000(1), §§ 1(b), 3(a)) 
Sec. 36-2. - Violation of chapter. 
Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or 180 days' imprisonment, or both the fine and imprisonment. Ordinance violations may be tried upon citations with or without a prosecuting attorney. Citations shall be issued by the mayor or the city clerk or his designee. 
(Code 1982, § 4-2-8; Code 2000, § 70-3; Ord. of 5-1-2000(1), § 3) 
Secs. 36-3—36-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local solid waste management regulations, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9; local comprehensive solid waste management plan, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; cost reimbursement fees and surcharges, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39; reduction of amount of solid waste in city, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39.1; local restrictions on disposal of tires, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; local and regional solid waste management authorities, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-50 et seq. 

Sec. 36-23. - Solid waste storage and collection. 
(a)  All solid waste shall be free from excessive liquid and placed in plastic bags or vinyl containers supplied by the city or its designated collector. 
(b)  Containers must be placed at the curbside of the nearest public road by 7:00 a.m. on regular collection days or on the next collection day if the regular collection day falls on a holiday. Containers from residential units must be moved from the curbside to a place on the side or rear within 24 hours of the collection. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to collect and dispose of all solid waste (including recyclables) within the city either through employees of the city or by contract issued to a person, firm, corporation, partnership or entity engaged in the business of solid waste collection and disposal. 
(d)  Solid waste shall be collected once a week from residential units on a day to be established by the city council. The frequency of collection for commercial units shall be at least once per week. More frequent collections from commercial units may be required if sanitary conditions in and around the container dictate. 
(e)  The city or the designated contract collector may decline to collect any solid waste containing excess liquid that is not properly contained or is contained in unauthorized containers. 
(f)  The city or the designated collector shall not be responsible for the collection of discarded building materials, dirt, rock, appliances or furniture. 
(g)  The city or the designated collector may elect to collect yard waste, including grass clippings, trees and tree branches (cut to a length of no more than four feet), and/or other vegetation, each week on a day to be established by the city council. The city shall not collect and dispose of trees and large tree branches taken down by contractors hired for the removal of trees, limbs, and large vegetation. 
(h)  Collection and disposal of bulky waste, except large appliances, shall be made upon request of the customer. The customer shall pay in advance for the cost of such collection and disposal. 
(Code 2000, § 70-31; Ord. of 5-1-2000(1), § 3(b)—(i); Ord. of 2-6-2012, § 2) 
Sec. 36-24. - Amount and collection of fee. 
(a)  Each residential and commercial unit located within the corporate limits of the city shall be charged a fee for the collection of solid waste as adopted by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  The occupant of the residential or commercial unit within the city shall be billed for the fee collected under this article. The occupant shall be billed monthly by the city showing the amount due and payable. The bill for solid waste services, together with the bill for water, gas, electrical and cable television services, if applicable, shall constitute the utilities bill for the city. Customers of the city utilities shall not be allowed to pay a water bill and not a sewer bill, or vice versa. 
(c)  Such fee shall be due and payable by the tenth day of each following month. A late payment penalty and an assessment of interest shall be imposed on each account for which payment is not made within the prescribed time limit. Occupants of each residential or commercial unit may pay the entire amount due for the calendar year in advance if they so desire. 
(Code 2000, § 70-32; Ord. of 5-1-2000(1), § 1) 
Sec. 36-25. - Use of fees. 
All fees imposed by this article shall be used and appropriated to pay for the collection and disposal of all solid waste within the city. Such fees shall be deposited in a special account set up by the city specifically for this purpose. 
(Code 2000, § 70-33; Ord. of 5-1-2000(1), § 2) 
Sec. 36-26. - Unauthorized accumulation of solid waste; nuisance. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within a reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice from the city shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 4-2-6; Code 2000, § 70-34) 
Sec. 36-27. - Interfering with containers. 
No person other than the owner of a container shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents of such container, or remove any container from the location where the container has been placed by the owner. 
(Code 1982, § 4-2-7; Code 2000, § 70-35) 
Secs. 36-28—36-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; authority of city to prohibit littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-48. 

Sec. 36-58. - Purpose. 
The city council, in furtherance of their responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well-being of the citizens, and to protect and enhance the quality of the environment, hereby establishes rules and regulations controlling the unsystematic, careless, and indiscriminate disposition of litter throughout the city. 
(Code 2000, § 70-61; Ord. of 10-2-2000, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 36-59. - Enactment. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Litter Control Ordinance of the City of Doerun, Georgia." 
(Code 2000, § 70-62; Ord. of 10-2-2000, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 36-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the duly authorized governing body of the city of Doerun, Georgia, or the geographical area of Colquitt County inside the corporate limits of the municipality of Doerun, Georgia. 
Dumpster means a bulk container used for the collection of garbage, refuse, trash, and litter. The use of this term is generic and does not refer to a bulk container manufactured by a specific manufacturer. 
Garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects, or animals. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans, or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semi-solids, sludges, and liquids, created by factories, processing plants, or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Junked vehicle includes any wrecked or inoperable automobile, truck, or other vehicle or any vehicle which does not bear a current license plate. 
Landfill means any facility where any treatment, utilization, processing, storage, or depositing of solid waste occurs. 
Litter means all discarded manmade materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, household trash, industrial waste, building materials, junked vehicles, or portions thereof, refuse, waste materials, sand gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals, or any other discarded, used, or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road, street, or highway; and any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
Refuse means any solid waste accumulations consisting of any combination of ashes, building material, garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash, and other waste, or discarded materials of all kinds. 
Road or street shall be mutually inclusive and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court, and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Rubbish means any waste paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal, cans, glass, packing materials, and similar materials. 
Scavenge or scavenging means any unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
(Code 2000, § 70-63; Ord. of 10-2-2000, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 36-61. - Unlawful deposit or placement of litter; control of accumulated refuse, trash. 
(a)  Prohibited acts; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, place, or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any road or street or any public or private property in the city, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state, city, county, or by any of their agencies for the disposal of litter, and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle, container, or dumpster installed on such property and designated for the disposal of litter; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse and trash in any street, median strip, alley, or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property except with the written consent of the owner thereof, and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles, or containers on, over, or near any storm drain or drainage ditch, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(d)  Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley, or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure of the owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the city or its designee shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this article. 
(e)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof shall disturb or interfere with any container or dumpster used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, remove any contents therefrom, or remove such container from its location. 
(Code 2000, § 70-64; Ord. of 10-2-2000, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 36-62. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced under O.C.G.A. § 16-7-45, as amended, said section being entitled "Litter Control Law." 
(Code 2000, § 70-65; Ord. of 10-2-2000, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 36-63. - Investigations. 
Members of the city police department and members of the department of public works shall report all complaints of violations of any of the provisions of this article to the city clerk. 
(Code 2000, § 70-66; Ord. of 10-2-2000, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 36-64. - Enforcing officers. 
The mayor and his authorized inspectors and the members of the city police department are authorized to issue a citation against any person violating this article. 
(Code 2000, § 70-67; Ord. of 10-2-2000, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 36-65. - Court proceedings. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried upon citations, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, and may be tried with or without a prosecuting attorney, as well as upon accusation by the city attorney. The city attorney shall serve as the prosecuting attorney. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the municipal court of the city and shall be tried in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 through 15-10-66. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the city council from bringing civil action for injunction, mandamus, or other proceedings to present, correct, or abate any violation of this article. No sanction, penalty, or remedy prescribed herein shall be considered exclusive of any other remedy, but shall be available in addition to any other sanction, penalty, or remedy by law. 
(d)  Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2000, § 70-64; Ord. of 10-2-2000, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 36-66. - Prima facie case. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, and other writings, which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Code 2000, § 70-69; Ord. of 10-2-2000, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 36-67. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating this article or any provision hereof, upon conviction, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00; 
(2)  In the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public road or highway or public right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of the sentence; or 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the judge of a court in which conviction is obtained, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(b)  No person accused of violating this article shall be arrested prior to trial, but any defendant who fails to appear for trial shall be arrested thereafter on the warrant of the judge of the municipal court and required to post bond for his future appearance. 
(Code 2000, § 70-70; Ord. of 10-2-2000, § 1(exh. A)) 
Chapter 38 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Obstruction of streets, sidewalks, etc., O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-43, 32-6-1, 36-30-10; eminent domain, O.C.G.A. title 22; highways, bridges and ferries, O.C.G.A. title 32; municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; subdivisions abutting on state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; contractors' bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Sidewalk construction. 
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or corporation without a written permit from the city. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-6; Code 2000, § 74-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run, any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the city which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut its surface. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-7; Code 2000, § 74-2) 
Sec. 38-3. - Violation of chapter provisions. 
All persons found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-8; Code 2000, § 74-3) 
Secs. 38-4—38-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 38-25. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires or poles for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the city manager. A permit shall not be required where that work is performed under a contract with the city, but, if work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city manager and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(b)  Application. All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place, as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, shall make a written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(c)  City indemnified. Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees, for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Code 1982, §§ 4-1-1—4-1-3; Code 2000, § 74-31) 
Sec. 38-26. - Street repair. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation. Where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the city manager, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-4; Code 2000, § 74-32) 
Sec. 38-27. - Leaving unprotected. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under this article to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city, without placing and maintaining proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of the work. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1-5; Code 2000, § 74-33) 
Chapter 40 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local taxation of insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1 et seq.; revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. title 48; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; local taxation of rooms, lodgings or accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Depository financial institutions tax. 
(a)  Levied. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon depository financial institutions having an office located within the city at the rate of 0.25 percent of the state's gross receipts, as defined and allocated in this section, of such depository financial institutions. The minimum annual amount of such levy upon any depository financial institution shall be $1,000.00. 
(b)  Due date of taxes. The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-30.1; Code 2000, § 78-2) 
Secs. 40-2—40-21. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 

Sec. 40-22. - Required; amount. 
The city council shall assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. The city council hereby sets and levies an annual ad valorem tax of 3.972 mils upon all real and personal property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 40-23. - Taxes due and payable. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be billed and paid in one payment. 
(b)  Ad valorem tax bills, as adjusted to conform to the tax digest of the county, shall be payable on or before December 20, but, in the event of adjustment by the state revenue commissioner, the city shall, within a reasonable time thereafter as may be determined by resolution of the council, after receipt from the county of the adjustment information, refund any overpayments or bill for any underpayments. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-12; Code 2000, § 78-32) 
State Law reference— Payment of taxes in installments, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-23. 
Sec. 40-24. - Collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue; interest. 
(a)  For the collection of delinquent taxes, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the city clerk and executed by the chief of police under the procedure provided by the laws of the state governing execution of process from the superior court, or by use of any other available processes and remedies. 
(b)  A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have the priority provided by law. 
(c)  The amount due on all delinquent fi. fas. issued under subsection (a) of this section, as well as any interest or penalty thereon, shall be listed as a part of and in addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
(d)  Any license, privilege or permit granted by the city shall be revoked by the city clerk for the failure to pay any money due the city for taxes, fees, penalties, interest, fines or other revenue within three calendar months and ten days after any payment is due; provided, however, that any person aggrieved by the order may, within ten days, appeal to the council, who, after a hearing thereon, may approve or modify the order or restore the license privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect, but only upon finding that the city clerk's action was not factually or legally correct. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all fi. fas. issued under this article shall earn interest at the maximum rate allowed by state law, and no penalty shall be charged, except in lieu of interest. 
(Code 1982, § 2-5-13; Code 2000, § 78-33) 
State Law reference— Civil practice, executions and judicial sales, O.C.G.A. § 9-13-1 et seq.; interest on past due taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40; tax executions, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-1 et seq.; tax sales, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq. 
Chapter 42 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Removal of junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. title 40; uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; authority of municipal courts to try cases involving state traffic laws, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-354, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-1; Code 2000, § 82-1) 
Sec. 42-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades and at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts. Any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them, shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-2; Code 2000, § 82-2) 
Sec. 42-3. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones; signs and traffic control devices; schedule. 
(a)  The police chief or his designee, upon approval by ordinance of the council, is authorized to designate and maintain, with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices, after engineering and traffic investigations for: 
(1)  Speed zones; 
(2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; 
(3)  One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
(4)  Freight loading zones and regulations; 
(5)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon; 
(6)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; and 
(7)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
(b)  The police chief or his designee is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices, after engineering and traffic investigations for: 
(1)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; and 
(4)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the city streets. 
(c)  The police chief shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in subsection (a) of this section, this schedule, and any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval by an ordinance of the council, and this schedule is incorporated in this subsection, and copies shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, promulgated by the state department of transportation. All signs and signals required under this section for a particular purpose shall, so far as is practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-4; Code 2000, § 82-4) 
Sec. 42-4. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in any way controlling property in this city shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of the city so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk, or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the city, to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of the city after ten days' notice by the city to do so. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1-5; Code 2000, § 82-5) 
Sec. 42-5. - Free flow of traffic; obstructions. 
All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner so as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures, so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic, needlessly circle the block, dawdle, make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 1982, § 8-2-1; Code 2000, § 82-6) 
Sec. 42-6. - Speed limits established. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any of the streets and highways of the city at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper having regard to their width, traffic and use, or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of any person. 
(b)  Thirty-five miles per hour shall be the maximum speed on all streets or portions of streets within the city, unless otherwise indicated by officially posted signs designating the maximum vehicular speed upon those streets as approved by the council. 
(Code 1982, § 8-2-2; Code 2000, § 82-7) 
Sec. 42-7. - Traffic signs, signals and markings. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and markings erected at street intersections and other locations now or hereafter approved by the council. 
(Code 1982, § 8-2-3; Code 2000, § 82-8) 
Sec. 42-8. - Riding bicycles, motorcycles or skateboards on sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, motorcycle or skateboard on the sidewalks in the downtown section of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 9-1-8; Code 2000, § 82-10) 
Sec. 42-9. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1982, §§ 8-2-5, 8-3-6; Code 2000, § 82-11) 
Sec. 42-10. - Motorized carts and personal transportation vehicles. 
(a)  Motorized carts and personal transportation vehicles may not be operated on state highways under the jurisdiction and control of the department of transportation, even in areas where the posted speed limit is 25 miles per hour or less, except that these highways may be crossed in designated areas specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Motorized carts and personal transportation vehicles may cross state highways which are under the jurisdiction of the department of transportation only at designated areas. 
(c)  Motorized carts and personal transportation vehicles may be operated on city streets only during daylight hours. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 82-12) 
Sec. 42-11. - Entering angled parking spaces and turning on rights-of-way with angled parking. 
(a)  The term "angled parking" shall be defined as any parking in marked spaces along the sides of a right-of-way which can be entered from the closest lane of travel by turning to the right approximately 45 degrees on two-way rights-of-way and on one-way rights-of-way by turning to the right or the left approximately 45 degrees. This shall include all parking on roadways other than that described in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200(a) and (b). 
(b)  The term "three-point turn" shall be defined as the process of executing a left hand turn to and proceeding toward the left hand side of the right-of-way, placing the vehicle in reverse and backing up, and placing the vehicle back in a forward gear and proceeding in a direction other than the direction the vehicle was traveling prior to the initial left hand turn, without ever fully leaving the right-of-way. For the purposes of this section, the term "three-point turn" shall also include a turn where the first two steps of this process are repeated more than once. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to enter an angled parking position on a two-way right-of-way by executing a left hand turn. It shall be considered a violation of this section if said turn is attempted, but cannot be completed in one motion such that the motor vehicle executes a three-point turn to enter a parking space that is, in relation to the vehicle's original starting position, more than 90 degrees to its left. 
(d)  It shall be illegal for any person to "back into" an angled parking position in such a manner that their headlights when parked are facing toward the closest lane of travel. 
(e)  It shall be illegal for any motor vehicle to execute or attempt to execute a three-point turn on a right-of-way containing angled parking or in any location where it would be a violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-121 for a vehicle to execute a U-turn. 
(Ord. No. 16-0606-2, §§ 1—5, 6-6-2016) 
Secs. 42-12—42-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING 

Sec. 42-41. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 1982, § 8-3-1; Code 2000, § 82-41) 
Chapter 44 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Dumping wastes into sewer pipeline, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; damaging or interfering with utility property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; blasting or excavating near underground gas pipes and utility facilities, O.C.G.A. § 25-9-1 et seq.; franchises, contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); municipal water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; disposal of public utility plants or properties, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-7 et seq.; state grants for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; contracts to provide industrial wastewater treatment services, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-2; public utilities, O.C.G.A. title 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 44-1. - Connection permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect his premises to any city utility system until he shall have applied for and received a permit furnishing any information required by the city incidental to such connection. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-1; Code 2000, § 86-1) 
Sec. 44-2. - Illegal use of systems. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, use or consume water, electric current, gas or other utility services furnished by the city, unless and until the person shall become a customer of the city lines in the manner and under the regulations prescribed therefor. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-2; Code 2000, § 86-2) 
Sec. 44-3. - Charges, fees and rates for utility service. 
(a)  The charges, fees and rates for all utility services, including water, sewer, electric and gas, shall be as fixed from time to time by the council, and a schedule of such utility fees, charges and rates shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  All utility charges, fees and rates shall be subject to a ten percent penalty if not paid by the tenth of the month in which the bill is due. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-3; Code 2000, § 86-3) 
Sec. 44-4. - Deposits. 
(a)  When a customer of the city utility system dies or for any reason vacates a residence, a deposit will be required of any current occupant of the residence, even though the occupant may have previously resided at the residence. The utility services and billing shall be transferred to the name of the new customer. 
(b)  Those customers receiving utility services shall be required to pay a deposit and/or service charge as set from time to time by the council, and a schedule of such charges shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 2000, § 86-4; Ord. of 10-4-1999, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 44-5. - Meters. 
(a)  Required. No person shall be furnished water, gas or electricity by the city for any purpose, unless the person shall have a meter as prescribed by the city for the purpose of measuring the quantity of water, gas or electricity used by such person. All meters shall be of the make and kind prescribed by the city and shall be connected at the place and in the manner prescribed by the city. 
(b)  Permission to install; placement. No person shall install or cause to be installed any city utility meter in any home or business establishment in the city without first obtaining the permission of the city, and, in all new constructions or where the old building is being remodeled, the meter shall be placed on the outside of the home or building at a place designated by the city, so that the meter will be readily accessible to the city. 
(c)  Notice and permission to disconnect. It shall be unlawful for any person who is a customer or user of water, gas or electric power supplied by the city through meters to disconnect, change or otherwise tamper with those meters, unless the person shall have first received permission from the city to remove, disconnect or change the meter. 
(Code 1982, §§ 5-1-4—5-1-6; Code 2000, § 86-5) 
Sec. 44-6. - Suspension of service. 
The city reserves the right to discontinue any or all of its utility services without notice for the following reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  The consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water, electric or gas supplies due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; and 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, or unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-7; Code 2000, § 86-6) 
Sec. 44-7. - Disconnection of utility service for nonpayment; reconnection; late charge. 
Payment for all utility services, including water, sewer, electric and gas and cable television, shall be due and payable by the tenth of the month in which the bill is due. Should a customer fail to pay the utility bill by the tenth of the month, the city shall attach a late penalty. Should the customer fail to pay within seven days of the due date, service will be discontinued, and service shall not be resumed until the utility bill, late charges, and a reconnection charge as set by the council from time to time has been paid. Should the due date or the date to discontinue utility service fall on a weekend or holiday, payment may be made or utility service disconnected on the next business day. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-9; Code 2000, § 86-7; Ord. of 4-5-2010) 
Sec. 44-8. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present this claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. The claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as provided in section 44-6. The consumer may pay the bill under protest and the payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  The city will make a special meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee as fixed from time to time by the council; provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. 
(c)  Meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(d)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-8; Code 2000, § 86-8) 
Sec. 44-9. - Property owners not responsible for unpaid bills. 
Whenever there shall be due to the city any charges for unpaid utility bills at a rental property, it shall not be the owner's responsibility to pay the bill before any service will be given to the location. A lien cannot be issued against the property for unpaid utility bills. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-10; Code 2000, § 86-9) 
Sec. 44-10. - Access to premises. 
Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purposes in connection with the utility service and its facilities. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-11; Code 2000, § 86-10) 
Sec. 44-11. - Utility policy; underground electric service. 
The following policy is intended to define costs and responsibilities for underground electrical services. The city reserves the right to convert any service to underground at the city's expense, where converting to underground service would benefit the city. 
(1)  Underground secondary service. 
a.  Low voltage secondary service is where underground service is provided from transformers at or near the customer's property line. 
b.  The city will provide up to 100 feet of conductor and conduit to the service. All required materials in excess of 100 feet will be paid for the by the customer at the actual cost to the city. 
c.  The customer will be responsible for opening and closing the ditch on the customer's property. The city will not assume responsibility for the line after proper installation. The customer open and close ditch minimum shall be 30 inches to 36 inches. 
(2)  Underground primary service. 
a.  High voltage primary service requires a padmount transformer to be located on the customer's property near the service entrance. This service is not generally available for residential and small commercial customers. 
b.  The city will provide all material for primary service up to 100 feet of the transformer. All required materials in excess of 100 feet will be paid for by the customer at the actual cost to the city. Property easements for the primary conductor must be granted by the customer. 
c.  The customer is responsible for the construction of the transformer pad and the secondary conductor to the point of service. 
(3)  Existing service. When requested, an existing overhead service may be changed to underground service. All cost for materials and labor will be paid by the customer. In general, the customer will be responsible for the installation of the conductor and conduit. City crews would make the final electrical connections. 
(4)  Underground primary distribution. High voltage primary distribution serving residential and commercial areas must be approved by the city council. 
(5)  Vault transformers (submergible). Vault transformers are currently used in only a few specific residential areas. Because of cost and maintenance concerns, no new installations of vault transformers will be made. Existing installations of vault transformers will be maintained. 
(6)  Underground security lighting. Where security lighting is requested in an area which has underground service, it will be the responsibility of the customer to install the underground conductor from the transformer to the security light location. City crews will make all final electrical connections. 
(Code 2000, § 86-11; Ord. of 6-3-2002(1)) 
Sec. 44-12. - Removal of trees and vegetation endangering electrical or cable services. 
(a)  Trees and vegetation threatening to fall on and disrupt city electrical service and cable television service are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  The city is authorized to remove any trees or vegetation threatening to fall and disrupt city electrical and cable television services. 
(c)  With permission of the owner, the city is authorized to enter upon private property to trim or remove trees or other vegetation that may fall on or disrupt city electrical service or cable television service in the city. 
(d)  Should the owner fail to grant permission to remove trees or vegetation determined to be a nuisance, the city shall abate the nuisance as prescribed by this Code. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall restrict the right of the city to trim trees and vegetation on the city rights-of-way that in any way interferes with city utilities. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002(2), §§ 1—5) 
Secs. 44-13—44-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 44-43. - Must connect to water before occupying any building. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any building of any kind, unless such building is connected with the water system of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-12; Code 2000, § 86-41) 
Sec. 44-44. - Only authorized persons to use water from public hydrants. 
No person, except authorized city officers and employees, shall take water from any public hydrant, plug, street washer or drain cock. 
(Code 1982, § 5-1-13; Code 2000, § 86-42) 
Sec. 44-45. - Separate water meter for water for lawn and garden purposes. 
(a)  All water used by any customer of the city water system shall be metered. Sewer charges shall be determined by metered water use from the primary water meter required of every utility customer. 
(b)  Upon application, the city may grant a separate water meter for water to be used for lawn and garden purposes only. When a separate water meter is granted, the water customer shall not be billed for sewer charges for all water used for lawn and garden purposes only and from the second separate water meter. 
(c)  The cost for the additional water meter and all costs of installation and connection shall be borne by the utility customer. 
(d)  The charges, fees, and rates for water service for the additional meter shall be the same as those charges, fees, and rates as provided for in section 44-3. 
(Code 2000, § 86-43; Ord. of 12-3-2001, §§ 1—4) 
Secs. 44-46—44-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 44-64—44-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 44-85. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter, under standard laboratory procedure, in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside of the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in grams per liter. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and that is controlled by a public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treating sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by the city. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Storm sewer and storm drain mean a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of utilities or his authorized deputy, agent or representative, as designated by the council. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1982, § 5-3-1(1)—(18); Code 2000, § 86-91) 
Sec. 44-86. - Basis of administrative decisions. 
The decisions of the superintendent under this division shall be made pursuant to uniform city, state or federal standards. 
(Code 2000, § 86-92) 
Sec. 44-87. - General regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be placed or deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain, or cause to be constructed or maintained, any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. 
(Code 1982, § 5-3-2; Code 2000, § 86-93) 
Sec. 44-88. - Connection to public sewers. 
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes within the corporate limits of the city and located within 250 feet of a line of public sanitary sewer now in existence or hereafter constructed to which such house, building or property may be connected so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewer line by gravity, are hereby required at their own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the line of public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division immediately. 
(Code 1982, § 5-3-3; Code 2000, § 86-94) 
Sec. 44-89. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 44-88, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before the commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and the inspection fee as fixed from time to time by the council shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities, where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(e)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 44-88, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this division, and any septic tanks and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(f)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1982, § 5-3-4; Code 2000, § 86-95) 
Sec. 44-90. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or its appurtenances without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  Permit classes. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. 
(c)  Costs and expenses. All costs and expenses incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the municipal property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the municipal property line into the public sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay the city a sewer tap fee as fixed from time to time by the council. 
(d)  Separate sewer for each building required; exception. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)  Old sewer use. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all the requirements of this division. 
(f)  Materials. The building sewer shall be cast iron pipe; plastic pipe, ASTM Specifications A74; vitrified clay sewer pipe, ASTM Specifications C13; or concrete sewer pipe, ASTM Specifications C14. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle, as approved by the superintendent. 
(g)  Size and slope. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth of an inch per foot. 
(h)  Elevation. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
(i)  Lifting of sewage. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to perform gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(j)  Excavations; pipelaying and backfill. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work, unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. Pipelaying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specifications C12; except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(k)  Joints and connections. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight and shall conform to the regulations and requirements of the city, as adopted and amended from time to time. 
(l)  Connection of building sewer to public sewer. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the Y branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located Y branch is available, the city shall install a Y branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the superintendent. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter and no properly located Y is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, which entry shall be in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection, only when approved by the superintendent. 
(m)  Readiness for inspection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
(n)  Guarding of excavations; restoration of public property. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 5-3-5; Code 2000, § 86-96) 
Sec. 44-91. - Discharges into public sewers. 
(a)  Unpolluted waters. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Use of storm sewers. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon the approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  Prohibited discharges. Except as provided in this section, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of fat, oil or greases. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. The fixed upper limits for the constituents shall be as listed as follows, in parts per million: 

 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(d)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(e)  Discharges subject to review. The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter, containing more than 350 milligrams per liter of suspended solids, containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in subsection (c) of this section, or having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(f)  Preliminary treatment facilities. Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to 350 milligrams per liter, reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in subsection (c) of this section, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is obtained in writing. 
(g)  Maintenance of treatment facilities. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(h)  Control manhole. When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and the owner at his expense shall maintain the manhole so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  Measurements, tests and analyses; standards. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in subsections (c), (e) and (f) of this section shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, The American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided in subsection (h) of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(j)  Special arrangements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1982, § 5-3-6; Code 2000, § 86-97) 
Sec. 44-92. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 5-3-7; Code 2000, § 86-98) 
Sec. 44-93. - Penalties for violation of division. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this division, except section 44-87(d), shall be served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for its satisfactory correction. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations; and, if he does not do so, he shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(b)  Any person found to be violating any provision of section 44-87(d) shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1982, § 5-3-8; Code 2000, § 86-99) 
Chapter 46 - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflict of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; zoning of condominiums, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-114; zoning of timeshare interval form of ownership, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-164; duration of covenants running with land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60; historic preservation, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-1. - Zoning ordinance incorporated by reference. 
The zoning ordinance of the city, adopted by the council on March 21, 1985, as now or hereafter amended, is incorporated into this chapter and made a part of this chapter. A copy of the zoning ordinance shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. 
(Code 1982, § 6-3-1) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1982 CODE TO 2000 CODE 
This table gives the location within 2000 Code of those sections of the 1982 Code. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1982 CODE TO 2017 CODE 
This table gives the location within the 2017 Code of sections of the 1982 Code. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2000 CODE TO 2017 CODE 
This table gives the location within the 2017 Code of those sections of the 2000 Code, as supplemented through June 3, 2002. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES IN 2000 CODE 
This table gives the location of ordinances in the 2000 Code. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES IN 2017 CODE 
This table gives the location of ordinances and other legislation within the 2017 Code. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 

 