THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND DEVELOPMENT RESOLUTION FOR THE CITY OF MACON AND BIBB COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1986 by Order of  The Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission 
____________ 
Adopted: October 26, 1981  Effective: October 26, 1981 

PREFACE 
This Comprehensive Land Development Resolution, as amended through October 28, 1985, is published at the request of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The resolution is printed herein substantially as enacted and amended, except where indicated by editorial footnotes. Stylistically, a uniform system of capitalization was employed. A feature of this publication that is particularly useful is the comparative table of amendments. Any amendatory resolution may be located therein by resolution number and date of enactment, and the individual section or subsection that was amended will be listed. 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are also numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Another special feature of this volume is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Resolution will be kept up to date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory resolutions, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Resolution with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this Resolution up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
The publication of this Resolution was under direct supervision of Robert L. Laslie, Vice President Supplements, and Mary Grace Tavel, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Vernon B. Ryle, III, Executive Director of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission and Mr. O. Hale Almand, Jr., Commission Attorney for their cooperation and assistance during the publication project. 
A RESOLUTION OF THE MACON-BIBB COUNTY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ESTABLISHING ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATING THE USES OF LAND THEREIN; SPECIFYING OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS; ADOPTING GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS; DESCRIBING ZONING RULES AND REGULATIONS IN SAID DISTRICTS; DEFINING SAID DISTRICTS; PROVIDING FOR REZONING AND REDISTRICTING; ESTABLISHING CERTAIN BUILDING AND ZONING REGULATIONS IN EACH OF SAID DISTRICTS, (PERFORMANCE STANDARDS); REGULATING LAND USES AND ACCESSORY USES; PRESCRIBING THE PERCENTAGE OF LAND AREA WHICH MAY BE OCCUPIED UNDER VARYING CIRCUMSTANCES; PROVIDING FOR VARIANCES AND NON-CONFORMING USES; PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION OF SUBDIVISION OF LAND; ADOPTING GENERAL SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; DEFINING CERTAIN OF THE TERMS HEREIN USED; PROVIDING A METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION AND PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE; PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR A VIOLATION; PROVIDING REMEDIES FOR ENFORCEMENT HEREOF; TO REPEAL ALL CONFLICTING RESOLUTIONS; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
WHEREAS, the Georgia Laws, 1947, page 1240, approved by the voters of Georgia in 1948 as a special constitutional amendment, authorizes the City of Macon and Bibb County to establish the Macon-Bibb County Planning & Zoning Commission; and 
WHEREAS, the Macon-Bibb County Planning & Zoning Commission was established on or about the 4th day of November, 1952, by joint ordinance and resolution of the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia; and 
WHEREAS, the Macon-Bibb County Planning & Zoning Commission adopted in 1957 the Land Development Resolution for the City of Macon and Bibb County for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future residents of the City of Macon and the County of Bibb; and 
WHEREAS, the Land Development Resolution was last amended in 1972; and 
WHEREAS, since that time there have been significant changes in the growth patterns of the City of Macon and the County of Bibb including changes in the lifestyles of the residents, changes in the industrial, commercial and residential development trends and significant shifts in the population in and around the City of Macon and Bibb County; and 
WHEREAS, due to these changes and due to the projected changes which will occur in the future because of the progressive nature of the City of Macon and County of Bibb, the present Land Development Resolution no longer adequately serves the needs of the residents of Macon and Bibb County; and 
WHEREAS, in order to provide for the continued orderly growth in Macon and Bibb County and to eliminate the obsolescence in the present Land Development Resolution, certain changes are necessary; and 
WHEREAS, the proposed Land Development Resolution encompasses the intent and purpose of the original Land Development Resolution while recognizing the changes which have occurred and providing solutions to meet these changes; and 
WHEREAS, a public hearing before this Commission having been held at which time all owners of property affected and all other citizens of the city and county were given opportunity after public notice as required by law to file their protests, suggestions or criticisms, if any; 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Macon-Bibb County Planning & Zoning Commission as follows: 
PURPOSE AND ENACTMENT 
The Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission, for the purposes set out below, hereby adopts and establishes an official land development resolution for the City of Macon and the unincorporated areas of Bibb County, Georgia. 
[1]  To prevent flooding of improved property; 
[2]  To prevent overcrowding of schools or other public facilities; 
[3]  To achieve such timing, density, and distribution of land development and use as will prevent overloading systems for providing water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, sanitation, police and fire protection, and other public services; 
[4]  To achieve such density, distribution and design of land development and use as will protect and preserve the design capacity of the streets and roads within the city and county and prevent traffic congestion and traffic hazards; 
[5]  To encourage such distribution of population, land development and use as will facilitate the efficient and adequate provision of public services and facilities; 
[6]  To achieve such density, design, and distribution of housing, as will protect and enhance residential property values; 
[7]  To secure such accessibility, design and density of land development and use as will reduce fire hazards and fire losses; 
[8]  To promote the continued and safe operation of general purpose airports within the county; 
[9]  To promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia; 
[10]  To encourage greater efficiency and economy of land development; 
[11]  To preserve the city's and county's natural beauty and encourage architecturally pleasing development; and 
[12]  To improve the quality of life through protection of the city's and county's total environment including, but not limited to, the prevention of soil erosion and air, water, and noise pollution. 
(Amended November 23, 1987, ZA87-11-02) 
SHORT TITLE 
These regulations shall be known as the "The Comprehensive Land Development Resolution for the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia." 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what amendments/resolutions have been considered for codification in each supplement. Amendments/resolutions that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Amendments/resolutions that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Comprehensive Land Development Resolution will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
Chapter 1 - DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED IN THIS RESOLUTION 

Section 1.01. - General definitions and principles of interpretation. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have their customary dictionary meanings. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust, or partnership. The word "lot" includes plot or parcel. The word "building" includes all other structures of every kind. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied. The word "map" means the "Official Zoning District Maps for Macon and Bibb County, Georgia." The words "zone," "zoning district," and "district" have the same meaning. 
Section 1.02. - Specific definitions. 
When used in this resolution, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section. (Supplementary definitions of words and terms are contained in Chapter 5, "Flood Hazard District Regulations," in Chapter 20, "Airport Hazard District," in Chapter 31, "Environmental Conservation," and in Chapter 32, "Street Classification Chart and Special Setbacks.") 
[1]  Accessory use or structure. A subordinate use or structure, clearly incidental and related to the principal structure, building or use of land, which does not alter, change, or in any way detract from the principal structure, building, or use of land and is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure, building, or use. 
[1.1]  Adult arcade. An establishment, where for any form of consideration, one (1) or more motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." (Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
[1.2]  Adult book store. An establishment in which more than twenty (20) percent of its stock in trade is offered for sale for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Books, magazines, and periodicals containing pictures, films, motion pictures, photographs, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction of "specified anatomical areas" or specified sexual activity." 
(b)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." (Added March 22, 1992, ZA93-03-01) 
[1.3]  Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar establishment which features or allows live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activity", or which features motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an emphasis on "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activity." (Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
[1.4]  Adult entertainment. Adult entertainment is defined as entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activity." (Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
[1.5]  Adult entertainment establishment. Any commercial establishment which features or allows any form of adult entertainment as defined in this chapter; and shall specifically include: Adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, and adult arcade. However, traditional or live theater as defined herein shall not be included in this definition. (Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
[1.6]  Adult movie theater. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." (Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
[1.7]  Adult theater. An establishment such as a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar entertainment facility which, for any form of consideration, features or allows live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." Traditional or live theater as defined herein shall not be included in this definition. (Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
[2]  Airport obstruction. Any structure, tree, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of an aircraft in landing or taking off at any airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off. 
[2.1]  Alcohol. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[2.2]  Alcoholic beverage. Any beverage containing alcohol whether distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[3]  Alley. A platted serviceway providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
[4]  Amusement facility. Establishment in which thirty (30) percent or more of the gross floor area is utilized by amusement machines or their patrons. This can be a primary or secondary use within the establishment. 
[5]  Amusement machines. Any mechanical, electronic and/or coin-operated game and/or device for the amusement of patrons. This definition shall not be construed to include coin-operated music players, coin-operated mechanical kiddie rides or coin-operated television. 
[6]  Auction houses. Commercial establishments which cater to a wide segment of the population where tangible items excluding cars, boats, trailers, motorhomes, trucks, motorcycles, other motorized, self-propelled machines and real estate, are sold on a scheduled, open competitive bid basis to more than two (2) people, provided that all sales, display, and storage be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
[7]  Automobile service station. Any area of land, including buildings and other structures thereon, that is used to dispense motor vehicle fuels, oils, and accessories at retail, and where repair service is incidental and no storage or parking space is offered for rent. 
[8]  Bar, tavern, or saloon. Any place devoted primarily to the retailing and on-premise drinking of malt, vinous, or other alcoholic beverages, or any place where any sign visible from public rights-of-way is exhibited or displayed indicating that alcoholic beverages are obtainable for consumption on the premises. The incidental service of food for consumption on the premise shall be allowed. Live entertainment shall be allowed, provided that said entertainment shall not be accompanied by music enhanced by the use of electronic amplification. No dancing shall be allowed. (Amended March 28, 1983, ZA83-03-01) 
[8.1]  Beer or malt beverage shop . Establishment engaged in the sale of beverages defined in Section 1.02[8.2], for off-premise consumption. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[9]  Beverage, malt. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004; Amended January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
[10]  Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
[11]  Boarding house. A building other than a hotel, where for compensation and/or by prearrangement, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons. 
[12]  Boundary line. The outer limits of a tract of land that is to be subdivided. 
[13]  Buffer. That portion of a lot or parcel of land set aside for open space and/or visual screening purposes, pursuant to applicable provisions of this resolution, to separate different use districts, or to separate uses on one (1) property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. Such buffer area may be either a natural buffer or landscaped buffer. 
[14]  Building. A "building" is a structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof impervious to weather and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. This definition shall include tents, cabanas, or vehicles situated on private property and serving in any way the function of a building, but it does not include screened enclosures not having a roof impervious to weather. 
[15]  Building, alterations of. Alterations of buildings include any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, beams, columns, and girders); any addition to a building; or any change of a building from one location to another. 
[16]  Building, height of. The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs, and to the deck line for a mansard roof. 
[17]  Building line. A line beyond which the foundation wall or any enclosed or covered porch, vestibule, or other enclosed or covered portion of a building shall not project. The term building line is synonymous with the term minimum building setback line. (Amended June 13, 1988, ZA88-06-02) 
[18]  Building, main. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
[19]  Business, retail. Business establishments that generally sell commodities or services in varying quantities to the general public. These commodities are basically for the utilization of the party purchasing the commodity or service. 
[20]  Business, wholesale. Business establishments that generally sell commodities in large quantities or by the piece to retailers, jobbers, other wholesale establishments, or manufacturing establishments. These commodities are basically for further resale, for use in the fabrication of a product, or for use by a business service. 
[21]  Cemetery. A cemetery is an area of land set apart for the sole purpose of the burial of bodies of dead persons or animals and for the erection of customary markers, monuments, and mausoleums. 
[22]  Change of occupancy. The term "change of occupancy" shall mean a discontinuance of an existing use and the substitution of a use of a different kind or class. Change of occupancy is not intended to include a change of tenants or proprietors unless accompanied by a change in the type of use. 
[23]  Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with beds and banks to conduct and confine continuously or periodically flowing water. 
[24]  Clinic. An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment. 
[25]  Club. Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person, or persons for social, educational, or recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service to the general public. 
[26]  Commission. The Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
[27]  Comprehensive development plan. A plan, or any portion thereof, adopted by the commission or by the legislative authority of Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission showing the general location and extent of present and proposed physical facilities including housing, industrial and commercial uses, major streets, parks, schools, and other community facilities. This plan establishes the goals, objectives, and policies for the community. 
[28]  Condominium. A form of individual ownership of a unit, combined with joint ownership of common areas of the building and grounds in a development. ("Georgia Condominium Act," Georgia Code Annotated 85-16E.) 
[28.1]  Convenience store . Establishment selling a limited variety of pre-packaged food items, beverages, including alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, and over the counter pharmaceutical items. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[28.2]  Convenience store with fuel pumps. Establishment whose principal commodity is fuel but may sell a variety of pre-packaged food items, beverages, including alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, and over the counter pharmaceutical items. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[29]  Construction, actual. Actual construction means the commencement and continuous uninterrupted prosecution of construction pursuant to a permit or certificate of appropriateness which includes the permanent placement and fastening of materials to the land or structure for which the permit or certificate of appropriateness has been issued. Where demolition, grading, clearing, excavation, or removal of an existing structure has been substantially begun preparatory to new construction, such excavation, demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be reasonably continuous until the completion of the new construction involved. Filling, grading and the installation of the drainage facilities shall be considered a part of construction. If construction is not going to be continuous over the life of the project, the applicant must disclose the phasing of the construction activity if there will be an interruption of construction or activity before the completion of the project. (Amended January 10, 1994, ZA94-01-01) 
[30]  County. Bibb County, Georgia. 
[31]  Day care center. Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or any other group wherein are received for pay six (6) or more children under eighteen (18) years of age for group care, without transfer of custody, for more than four (4) hours and less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. (Amended December 13, 1993, ZA93-12-01) 
[32]  Day care home. The use of a single-family detached dwelling for the care of three (3) to six (6) children under seventeen (17) years of age, inclusive of any children who normally reside on the premises, for periods of twelve (12) hours or less per day. (Amended December 13, 1993, ZA93-12-01; Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[33]  Development standards. Site design regulations such as lot area, lot coverage, height limits, frontage, and yard requirements (setback distances). 
[33.1]  Distilled spirits. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. For purposes of licensing and regulation, distilled spirits includes liquor, spirituous liquor, whiskey and fortified wine. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[34]  District (or zoning district). A section of Macon-Bibb County, designated in this resolution and delineated on the official zoning district maps for Macon and Bibb County, in which requirements for the use of land and building and development standards are presented with all such requirements being uniform in each district. 
[34.1]  Downtown Business District. 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Macon and lying within the boundary as outlined herein: Commence at the intersection of Hazel Street and Seventh Street which is formed at the northeasterly right of way of Hazel Street and northwesterly right of way of Seventh Street, said point being the most southern point of the area and thence run along the northwestern right of way of Seventh Street in a northeasterly direction to the intersection of Riverside Drive (its southerly right of way); thence run along the southerly right of way of Riverside Drive in a northwesterly direction to the intersection with Spring Street (its eastern right of way); thence run along the easterly right of way of Spring Street in a southwesterly direction which later turns into Calhoun Street until it intersects with Hazel Street (its northeasterly right of way); thence run along the northeasterly right of way of Hazel Street in a southeasterly direction until it intersects with Seventh Street, said point being the point of beginning. 
There is excepted from this area the property known and designated as 935 High Street, and being more fully described in a deed dated August 1, 1973 and recorded in Deed Book 1190, page 101, Clerk's Office, Bibb Superior Court. 
This area is also outlined on the attached 1981 City of Macon map compiled by Sam K. Stefano. (Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
[35]  Dwelling. Any site built (building constructed in conventional manner) building, industrial dwelling (modular home) or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes. The term "dwelling," as used in these regulations, is not to be construed to include manufactured homes, travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents or other forms of portable or temporary housing. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
[36]  Dwelling unit. One (1) or more rooms in a residential building or residential portion of a building which are arranged, designed, used, or intended for use as a complete, independent living facility for one (1) family, and which include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
[37]  Dwelling, multifamily. A building consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units with varying arrangements of entrances and party walls; excluding single-family attached dwellings as defined in Section 1.02[41]. 
[38]  Dwelling, tenant. A residential structure located on a farm and occupied by a nontransient farm worker employed by the owner of the farm. 
[39]  Dwelling, two-family (duplex). A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
[40]  Dwelling, single-family detached. A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family. 
[41]  Dwelling, single-family attached. One (1) of a series of two (2) or more single-family dwelling units on separate lots or in condominium ownership, which are joined at one (1) or more points by one (1) or more party walls or other common facilities not including the walls of an enclosed courtyard or similar area. 
[42]  Erected. The word "erected" includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operation on the premises required for building. Excavation, fill, drainage, demolition of an existing structure, and the like shall be considered part of erection. (See "Construction, actual.") 
[42.1]  Executive director. Executive director shall mean the executive director of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission and for the purposes of these regulations may mean the zoning enforcement officer or his designee. (Added May 26, 1987, ZA87-05-03) 
[42.2]  Fence. A structure, barrier, or enclosure, sturdily constructed of permanent materials such as wood, metal or wire gauge chain-links, stone (brick), etc. that is used to mark a boundary, define a specific area, or enclose a site for the purpose of protection, privacy or confinement. (Added November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-01) 
[42.3]  Flag lot. A lot or parcel, with frontage on a public right-of-way which frontage does not meet the lot width requirements for the district in which it is located, and which lot is connected to the public right-of-way by a narrow strip of land referred to as a "flag pole". (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-04) 
[43]  Floor area. Except as may be otherwise indicated in relation to particular districts and uses, "floor area" shall be construed as the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors, including basement areas, of a building. These areas are to be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings, and exclude public corridors, common restrooms, attic areas with a headroom of less than seven (7) feet, unenclosed stairs or fire escapes, elevator structures, cooling towers, areas devoted to air conditioning, ventilating, heating or other building machinery and equipment, parking structures, and basement space where the ceiling is not more than an average of forty-eight (48) inches above the general finished and graded level of the adjacent portion of the lot. 
[44]  Garage, private. An accessory building or a portion of a main building used for the parking or storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main building. 
[45]  Garage, repair. A building or portion thereof, other than a private or parking garage, designed or used for the temporary storing, servicing, repairing, equipping, and hiring of motor-driven vehicles. 
[46]  Group personal care homes. A residential care facility wherein: 
(a)  The operator is not legally related to the individuals supervised and is licensed by the State of Georgia to provide community alternatives in a residential environment to institutional care for individuals in need of such care; 
(b)  More than four (4) persons reside, including operators, supervisors, and individuals under care; and 
(c)  Such individuals are provided with room, board, personal, physical care and supervision in a family environment. The term "group personal care home" shall include, without limitation by reason of enumeration, home as established under the "Community Services Act for the Mentally Retarded" (Ga. Laws 1972, page 700), and other homes of similar intention and purpose; but shall not include facilities housing persons convicted of crimes but not housed in penal institutions. The number of persons occupying a group home as defined herein shall not exceed fifteen (15) in number at any given time, including a minimum of one (1) supervisory personnel. (Amended December 17, 1984, ZA84-12-01) 
[46.1]  Guest quarters. A primary residence or portions thereof which must exist as an owner-occupied residence which provides rooms for tourists and consists of no more than five (5) separate guest units or rooms for a length of stay not to exceed fourteen (14) days during any ninety (90) day consecutive period; not more than one (1) meal per day shall be prepared and served on the premises only to registered evening guests; no bars, taverns, restaurants, or night clubs may be included as a part of a guest quarter, and all guest quarters must be under the same roof as the primary residence. (Added May 9, 1988, ZA88-05-02) 
[47]  Home occupation. An occupation for gain or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises and entirely within the main dwelling; excluding on-premises retail sales. 
[48]  Hotel, motel. A building, or portion thereof, or a group of buildings which provides sleeping accommodations in six (6) or more separate units or rooms for transients on a daily, weekly, or similar short-term basis, whether such establishment is designated as a hotel, motel, inn, automobile court, motor inn, motor lodge, tourist court, tourist home or otherwise. A hotel shall be deemed to include any establishment which provides residential living accommodations on a more or less permanent basis, such as an apartment hotel. Where such an establishment is permitted as a principal use, all uses customarily and historically accessory thereto for the comfort, accommodation, and entertainment of the patrons, including restaurants, shall be permitted. Bars, taverns, and nightclubs to be operated in conjunction with any such establishment shall be a conditional use. 
[49]  Industrial dwelling (modular home). Any building or component thereof designed for or used for residential purposes which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, assembled, or manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly damage to, or destruction thereof. An industrial dwelling is not to be construed to include a manufactured home. This structure will have a DCA decal. (Added November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02; Amended January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
[50]  Junkyard (automobile wrecking yard). A lot, land, or a structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collection, storage, and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storing, and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof. 
[51]  Kennel. Any location where raising, breeding, grooming, caring for, or boarding of dogs, cats, or other small animals for commercial purposes is conducted. 
[52]  Kindergarten. A school for pre-elementary school children ranging in age from four (4) through six (6) years, which operates for less than four (4) hours per day. 
[53]  Landing area. The area of an airport used for landing, takeoff, or taxiing of aircraft. 
[53.1]  Landscape. The resulting feature of a deliberate attempt to control the design, appearance, and view of the exterior living environment including the removal or addition of trees, shrubbery, and other landscape features or structures. (Added January 28, 2002, ZA02-01-03) 
[54]  Laundromat. A business that provides home-type washing, drying, and/or ironing machines for hire. 
[55]  Laundry. A commercial establishment with facilities for laundering clothes, linens, etc., and such facilities are not for hire as in the case of a laundromat. 
[56]  Laundry and dry cleaning, pickup. A business that provides only for the convenience of taking and picking-up of laundry; such establishments which do not have any equipment for processing of laundry. 
[56.1]  Liquor store . Establishment engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[57]  Loading space. A space within the main building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 
[58]  Lot. A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one (1) or more main buildings and accessory buildings with such open and parking spaces as are required by the provisions of this resolution and having its frontage upon a public street or streets. 
[59]  Lot area. The total horizontal area included within the rear, side, and front lot or proposed street lines of the lot. This area excludes any street or highway, whether dedicated or not dedicated to public use, and includes off-street automobile parking areas and other accessory uses. 
[60]  Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their inspection. 
[61]  Lot coverage. The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot to the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage. 
[62]  Lot, depth of. The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line. 
[63]  Lot, double frontage. A lot having a frontage on two (2) streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
[64]  Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot, with only one (1) frontage on a street. 
[65]  Lot of record. A lot or parcel of land whose existence, location, and dimensions have been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Bibb or Jones County prior to May 27, 1955. 
[66]  Lot width. Lot width is that distance between two (2) side property lines as measured at the minimum front yard building setback line. (Amended June 13, 1988, ZA88-06-01) 
[66.1]  Manufactured home. A building transportable in one (1) or more sections which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a single-family residence with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; sometimes referred to as mobile homes or house trailers. O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131(3). This structure will have a HUD decal. (Added November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
[66.2]  Manufactured home community. A contiguous parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of three (3) or more manufactured homes for residential occupancy. (Added November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
[66.3]  Manufactured home subdivision. A subdivision designed and/or intended primarily, (but not exclusively) for the sale of individual lots for the placement of manufactured homes. (Added November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
[67]  Mobile home. A manufactured home that was built prior to June 16, 1976 and which does not have affixed to it the seal of approval of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
[68]  Mobile home park. Any lot on which are customarily parked three (3) or more mobile homes for a longer period of time than thirty (30) days. 
[68.1]  Mobile home subdivision. A subdivision designed and/or intended primarily for the sale of lots for residential occupancy by mobile homes. (Added September 24, 1990, ZA90-09-01) 
[69]  Motel. See "Hotel." 
[69.1]  Mural. A large-scale work of art applied to an exterior wall, or fence whose function is to be artistic in nature, rather than purely informational or signage. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-003; Amended January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
[69.2]  Neighborhood market. An establishment that provides staple grocery items, which can include fresh vegetables, meats, delicatessen, and dairy products, specialty or gourmet food items, and non-alcoholic beverages. These establishments are typically less than 15,000 SF and serve those living and visiting within walking distance. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[70]  Nightclub. An establishment where, in addition to the serving of any alcoholic beverages, live entertainment, both unaccompanied and accompanied by music enhanced by the use of electronic amplification, and dancing are allowed. (Amended March 28, 1983, ZA83-03-01) 
[71]  Nonconforming use. A use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this resolution, or at the time of a zoning amendment, which does not conform with the regulations of the use district in which it is located. 
[71.1]  Open-air farmers' market . A lot or parcel used by farmers for the direct sale of farm and food products to consumers. For this purpose, the term "farm and food products" means any agricultural, horticultural, forest or other product of the soil or water, including, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, eggs, dairy products, meat and meat products, poultry and poultry products, fish and fish products, grain and grain products, honey, nuts, syrups, apple cider, fruit juice, ornamental or vegetable plants, nursery products, fiber or fiber products, firewood and Christmas trees. However, the term does not include wines, malt beverages, or distilled beverages. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[72]  Open space. A yard area which is not used for or occupied by a driveway, off-street parking, loading space, drying yard, or refuse storage space. 
[73]  Performance standard. A minimum requirement or maximum allowable limit on the effects or characteristics of use. 
[74]  Permit. A certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit or any other permit required by this resolution. 
[75]  Pet store. An establishment wherein domestic or exotic pets are sold, including grooming, within a completely enclosed building. The boarding or breeding of pets is not included within this definition. 
[75A]  Plan, general plan, or master plan. The Comprehensive Development Plan as is defined in Section 1.02[27]. (Amended October 27, 2003, ZA03-10-01) 
[76]  Plat. A map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, or section of subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
[77]  Playschool. A school for pre-kindergarten children ranging in age from three (3) to four (4) years and which operates for less than four (4) hours per day. 
[77.1]  Primary residence. An owner-occupied unit being the principle structure and having fifty percent (50%) or more of the available floor space devoted to its use. (Added May 9, 1988, ZA88-05-02) 
[78]  Principal use. The primary purpose or function that land serves or is intended to serve. 
[79]  Professional. When used in connection with "use" and "occupancy," professional refers to a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including, but not limited to, accountants, architects, professional engineers, land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance officers, real estate offices, religious organizations, stockbrokers and administrative agencies considered professional in character. The term, however, does not include repairs or sales of tangible personal property stored or located within the structure or any use which would create any loud noise or noxious odors. 
[80]  Rest homes (nursing homes, convalescent). An establishment which provides full-time convalescent or chronic care or both for three (3) or more individuals who are not related by blood or marriage to the operator and who, by reason of chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. No care for the acutely ill, or surgical or obstetrical services, shall be provided in such a home; a hospital or sanitarium shall not be construed to be included in this definition. 
[81]  Restaurant. A public eating establishment in which the primary function is the preparation and service of food on the premises. A drive-in restaurant is not a restaurant for the purpose of these regulations. 
[82]  Restaurant with alcohol. Where a restaurant, as defined in Section 1.02[81] is allowed as a principal use, the serving of all alcoholic beverages shall be allowed. Live entertainment shall be allowed provided said entertainment shall not be accompanied by music enhanced by the use of electronic amplification. No dancing shall be allowed. (Amended March 28, 1983, ZA83-03-01) 
[83]  Restaurant, drive-in. An eating and/or drinking establishment which caters to motor-driven vehicle business where the person being served consumes his food and/or drink while sitting in a motor-driven vehicle, as opposed to a restaurant serving exclusively inside an enclosed building. 
[84]  Right-of-way. Access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. 
[85]  Right-of-way line. The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street, railroad, or other public utility right-of-way. 
[86]  Rooming house. A building other than a hotel where lodging without meals for three (3) but not more than twenty (20) persons is provided. 
[86.1]  Satellite earth station. A device which is used to intercept satellite television signals and consists of two (2) main components: the antenna itself, often called a dish, and a low-noise amplifier (L.N.A.). (Added May 27, 1986, ZA86-05-01; Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[87]  Setback distance. The distance between the principal structure on a lot and a lot line (either front, side or rear setback distance). 
[88]  Shopping center. A group of commercial establishments, exceeding in the aggregate of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of gross leasable area, planned and developed as a unit, with common offstreet parking provided on the property. (Amended July 22, 1985, ZA85-07-02) 
[89]—[95]  Reserved. (Deleted September 24, 1990, ZA90-09-02) 
[96]  Sign structure facing. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited, not including architectural trim and structural supports. 
[97]  Specified anatomical areas. Shall include any of the following: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; cleft of the buttocks; or any portion of the female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intercept a point above the top of the areola, or any portion of the areola, or any simulation thereof. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(b)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
[97.1]  Specified sexual activities. As used herein, "specified sexual activities" shall mean and include any of the following: 
(a)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(b)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(c)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(d)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) through (c) above. (Added March 22, 1993, ZA 93-03-01) 
[98]  Story. That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of the floor and the ceiling above it. 
[99]  Street. A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
[100]  Street, half. A street which does not meet the minimum right-of-way width as set forth in this resolution. 
[101]  Street lines. A line defining the edge of a street right-of-way and separating the street from abutting property or lots. 
[102]  Structures. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, fences, and swimming pools. 
[103]  Subdivider. Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as herein defined. 
[104]  Subdivision. Any division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development. This definition includes any division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, resubdivision, and, where appropriate to the context, includes the process of subdivision or the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition: 
(a)  The division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more where no new street is involved; and 
(b)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between separate or common owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created, and that the lots created are in accordance with the provisions of this resolution. 
[105]  Supportive living home. A facility, noninstitutional in character, in which is provided room, meals and personal care for three (3) to fifteen (15) mentally ill adults. These homes are regulated and administered through the Mental Health Division of the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
[105.1]  Traditional or live theater (Mainstream theater). A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, or display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activity" in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. (Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
[106]  Travel trailer. A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, which is not more than eight (8) feet in body width and is of any weight, provided its body length does not exceed twenty-nine (29) feet. 
[107]  Travel trailer park. Any lot on which are temporarily parked two (2) or more travel trailers for a period of less than thirty (30) days. 
[108]  Use. Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied, or any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land. 
[109]  Variance. A variance is a modification of the strict terms of the Zoning Regulations with regard to the development. This does not include a variance as to a use of land within a specified zone, but does concern performance standards. 
[109.1]  Wine . Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[109.2]  Wine, fortified . Any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[109.3]  Wine shop . Establishment engaged in the sale of as defined in Section 109.1, for off premise consumption. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[110]  Yard. A space on the same lot with a main building, such space being open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky, except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
[111]  Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the right-of-way line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building and the right-of-way line. Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front yard. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
[112]  Yard, rear. An open space on the same lot with the main building, such space being unoccupied except possibly by an accessory building and extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building projected to the side lines of the lot. On all corner lots, the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
[113]  Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building, situated between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. If no front yard is required, the front boundary of the side yard shall be the front line of the lot, and if no rear yard is required, the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the lot. On corner lots, the side yard shall be considered parallel to the street upon which the lot has its greatest dimension. 
[114]  Zero lot line. A development technique in which a building is sited on one (1) or more lot lines, thus allowing flexibility in site design (i.e., patio homes and single-family attached dwellings). 
[115]  Zoning enforcement officer. The executive director of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission or his designee. 
Chapter 2 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS (USE DISTRICTS) 

Section 2.01. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
In order to protect the character of existing neighborhoods; to prevent excessive density of population in areas which are not adequately served with water, sewerage facilities, and fire protection; to ensure that adequate and suitable areas will be available in the city and county to provide housing for a growing population; to protect residential areas from the blighting effects of the traffic, noise, odors, and dust generated by commercial and industrial activity; to provide for and accommodate growth and expansion of commercial and industrial activities; to prevent blight and slums; and to promote orderly growth and development by grouping similar and related uses together and by separating dissimilar and unrelated uses; there are hereby established, within the city and county, zoning districts, as identified in Section 2.02 of this resolution. 
Section 2.02. - Division of the city and county into districts. 
The City of Macon and all lands lying within the unincorporated areas of Bibb County, Georgia, are, for the purposes of this resolution, divided into twenty-eight (28) zoning (use) districts. The location and boundaries of these districts are shown on the "Official Zoning Maps for Macon and Bibb County, Georgia." The districts are denominated as follows: 
[1]  A—Agricultural District. 
[2]  RR—Rural Residential District. 
[3]  R-1AAA—Single-Family Residential District. 
[4]  R-1AA—Single-Family Residential District. 
[5]  R-1A—Single-Family Residential District. 
[6]  R-1—Single-Family Residential District. 
[7]  R-2A—Two-Family Residential District. 
[8]  R-2—Two-Family Residential District. 
[9]  R-3—Multifamily Residential District. 
[10]  C-1—Neighborhood Commercial District. 
[11]  C-2—General Commercial District. 
[12]  Reserved. 
[13]  C-4—Highway Commercial District. 
[14]  C-5—Neighborhood Convenience Center District. 
[15]  M-1—Wholesale and Light Industrial District. 
[16]  M-2—Industrial District. 
[17]  M-3—Heavy Industrial District. 
[18]  AH—Airport Hazard District. 
[19]  PDR—Planned Development Residential District. 
[20]  PDC—Planned Development Commercial District. 
[21]  PDI—Planned Development Industrial District. 
[22]  PDE—Planned Development Extraordinary District. 
[23]  HR-1—Historic Residential District. 
[24]  HR-2—Historic Residential District. 
[25]  HR-3—Historic District. 
[26]  HC—Historic Commercial District. 
[27]  HPD—Historic Planned Development District. 
[28]  MHR—Mobile Home Residential District. 
[29]  SC—Special Commercial District. (Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
[30]  CBD-1—Central Business District. 
[31]  CBD-2—Central Business District. 
(Amended November 23, 1987, ZA87-11-02; Amended August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 2.03. - Incorporation of zoning map. 
[1]  Official zoning district maps. The Digital Zoning Maps for Macon and Bibb County, Georgia maintained in electronic format on the Bibb County Geographic Information System, hereinafter called "official zoning maps," with all notations, references and other information contained thereon shall be the official zoning maps and are hereby made a part of this resolution. The maps are maintained in the form of a machine-readable representation of a geographic phenomenon stored for display or analysis digitally on a computer. Said maps shall be a public record and shall be maintained permanently as part of the Bibb County Geographic Information System. 
[2]  Airspace zoning maps. 
(a)  The airspace zoning map of Herbert Smart Airport consisting of one (1) map, dated May 19, 1978, prepared by Delta Associates, Inc., Consulting Engineers, with all notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby made part of this resolution. Said map shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the commission, where the map will be accessible to the general public. 
(b)  The airspace zoning map of the Middle Georgia Regional Airport (formerly Lewis B. Wilson Airport) consisting of one (1) map entitled Current Airspace Requirements, dated November 1988, prepared by Delta Associates Inc., Consulting Engineers, with all notations, references and other information shown there on are hereby made part of this resolution. Said map shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the commission, where the map will be accessible to the general public. 
(c)  The airspace zoning map of Robins Air Force Base consisting of one (1) map entitled Airspace Requirements for Robins Air Force Base, dated January 1994, prepared by the 653rd Civil Engineering Squadron, Robins Air Force Base, Georgia, with all notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby made part of this resolution. Said map shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the commission, where the map will be accessible to the general public. (Amended March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-01) 
[3]  Noise zone maps. 
(a)  Noise zone map for Herbert Smart Airport consisting of one (1) map, dated 1975 and prepared by Delta Associates, Inc., Consulting Engineers, with all notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this resolution. Said map shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the commission, where the map will be accessible to the general public. 
(b)  Noise zone map entitled 1993 Ldn Contours With Full Noise Compatibility Program Implementation for Middle Georgia Regional Airport consisting of one (1) map, dated May 1989, and prepared by D & Z, Inc., Consulting Engineers, with all notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this resolution. Said map shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the commission, where the map will be accessible to the general public. (Amended March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-01) 
[4]  Robins Air Force Base Environs Maps. Base Environs Overlay Zones for Robins Force Base (RAFB) which represent differing levels of noise impact and aircraft accident potential dated January 1994, prepared by the 653rd Civil Engineering Squadron, Robins AFB, Georgia, with all notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this resolution. Said map shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the commission, where the map will be accessible to the general public. (Amended March 23, 1987, ZA87-03-06; March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-01) 
[5]  Intown historic district map. For the purpose of applying specific standards to the Intown Historic District under Chapter 21 of these regulations, a map showing the external boundaries of the Intown Historic District consisting of one (1) map, dated May 9, 1988, is hereby made a part of these regulations by reference and shall be kept in the office of the commission, where the map will be accessible to the general public. 
[6]  Economic and community development target area map. For the purpose of applying specific standards to certain ECDD target areas under Chapter 23 of these regulations, a map showing the external boundaries of the ECD target area for Pleasant Hill, Intown, East Macon, South Macon, Bellevue, Cherokee Heights, Unionville, Montpelier, Village Green, Lynmore and Tindall Heights consisting of one (1) map and area descriptions and [are] hereby made a part of these regulations by reference and shall be kept in the office of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission, where the map will be accessible to the general public. 
(Added May 9, 1988, ZA88-05-02; Amended May 29, 2001, ZA01-05-01; Amended January 8, 2007, ZA07-10-01) 
Section 2.04. - Map amendment. 
The district boundaries shall be as shown on the official zoning maps as of the date of this resolution. Said boundaries may be changed from time to time by the commission in accordance with the procedures set out in this resolution, after which any change in district boundaries or any change in information shown on the official zoning maps will promptly be entered on the official zoning maps together with a numerical entry on the official zoning maps referring to the application on file which states the date of the official action and a brief description of the nature of the changes. No amendment to this resolution involving matters portrayed on the official zoning maps shall become effective until after such change and entry have been made on said maps. 
Section 2.05. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning districts as shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules shall apply: 
[1]  Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines, land lot lines, center lines of streets, highways, alleys, or railroads, shorelines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries; and they shall be construed to follow such lines; 
[2]  Where district boundaries are approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, highways, or railroads, or rights-of-way of the same, or the center lines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or said lines extended, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official zoning maps. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning maps; 
[3]  Where a district boundary line, as appearing on the official zoning maps, divides a lot which is in single ownership at the time of this enactment, the use classification of the larger portion may be extended to the remainder by the commission without recourse to amendment procedure; 
[4]  Where a public road, street, or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverts (or merges with) shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street, or alley; and 
[5]  In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the commission shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
Section 2.06. - Newly annexed land. 
All land newly annexed to the corporate limits of the City of Macon, outside the boundary line of the County of Bibb shall be automatically classified as R-1AAA, Single-Family Residential Dwelling District, pending further study by the commission to determine its proper use district. 
Chapter 3 - APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 3.01. - Territorial application of regulations. 
The provisions of this resolution shall apply to all land and all structures located in the City of Macon and all areas of Bibb County, Georgia. The provisions of this resolution shall not apply to the City of Macon or Bibb County governments, including public rights-of-ways, the Development Authority of the Medical Center of Central Georgia, the Macon Water Authority and the Bibb County Board of Education. 
(Amended November 14, 2011, ZA11-004) 
Section 3.02. - Application of regulations. 
The regulations established by this resolution for each zoning district shall be minimum regulations, and they shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or use of land. 
[1]  No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the zoning district in which it is located. 
[2]  No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
(a)  To exceed the height, to accommodate or house a greater number of families, or to occupy a greater percentage of lot area than that allowed within the zoning district in which it is located; 
(b)  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or 
(c)  To in any other manner contravene the provisions of this resolution. 
[3]  No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this resolution shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
[4]  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this resolution shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this resolution shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this resolution, except as may be allowed pursuant to the provisions of Section 27.11. 
[5]  No building shall hereafter be erected, and no building shall be altered, modified, or changed; nor shall any land or building be used in such a way that because of emission of dust, fumes, gas, smoke, odor, noise, vibration or other disturbance a nuisance would be created. 
[6]  No land-disturbing activity such as clearing, dredging, grading, excavating and filling of land, nor removal of trees or tree cover shall be permitted, unless in conformity with all of the regulations established by this resolution. 
Section 3.03. - A definition of permitted use, conditional use, and special exception. 
Only those uses of land and structures as provided for each zoning district in the district regulations set out in this resolution are permitted. A use is either a "permitted use" or a "conditional use" as defined herein. 
[1]  Permitted use. A use which is allowed in the district in which the land is situated. Where a proposed use is a permitted use in accordance with other regulations herein, a certificate of zoning compliance will be issued by the zoning enforcement officer without a public hearing if such use otherwise complies with all applicable requirements of this resolution. Where a permitted use would impact unfavorably on adjoining property the commission, upon recommendation of the zoning enforcement officer, and after a public hearing thereon, may require in appropriate situations as defined in Section 4.08, buffer areas and screening. 
[2]  Conditional use. A use which the commission, after review of the application and hearing thereon, determines to be consistent with the general plan and in the public interest. The commission, in reviewing application for conditional uses, may consider the proposed use in relation to the following standards where applicable: 
(a)  The existing land use pattern. 
(b)  Whether the proposed use would have an adverse effect on the comprehensive land development plan. 
(c)  Whether all proposed structures, equipment or material will be readily accessible for fire and police protection. 
(d)  Whether the proposed use will be of such location, size, and character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the area in which it is proposed to be situated and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent properties or a deterrent to the improvement of adjacent properties in accordance with the zoning classification of such properties, the existing land use pattern, or the comprehensive land development plan. 
(e)  Whether, in the case of any use located in, or directly adjacent to, a residential district or area: 
(i)  The nature and intensity of operations will be such that both pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use and the assembly of persons in connection therewith will not be hazardous or inconvenient to, or incongruous with, said residential district or area, or conflict with the normal traffic of the neighborhood; and 
(ii)  The location and height of buildings, and other structures, and the nature and extent of screening, buffering or landscaping on the site will be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings in conformance with existing zoning districts and development pattern. 
(f)  Whether the proposed use will increase the population density resulting in the increase or overtaxing of the load on public facilities such as schools, utilities, streets, etc.; or approval of the use would encourage adjacent areas to develop at higher densities than provided in the comprehensive plan resulting in the overtaxing of such public facilities. 
(g)  Whether the proposed use will cause a health hazard, a public safety problem, or nuisance created or excessively increasing traffic and associated congestion; creating a drainage problem; generating unnecessary disturbances due to noise, the emittance of smoke or other contaminants, odor, electrical interference or causing pollution to land, air and/or water. 
(h)  Whether the proposed change will adversely affect property values in adjacent areas. 
(i)  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used for a permitted use in the district where the property is located. 
[3]  Special exception. A use which the commission, after review of the application and hearing thereon, determines to comply with the performance standards set out for the specified use. The commission, in reviewing applications for special exceptions, shall approve said application and issue the permit if all prescribed performance standards are met. The commission in conducting hearings on special exceptions shall follow the procedures set out in Section 27.07 for special zoning permits. (Amended November 14, 1988, ZA88-11-02; Amended May 28, 1991, ZA91-05-04; Amended July 22, 2002, ZA02-07-01) 
Chapter 4 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 4.01. - General. 
The following provisions relating to the use of land and the construction, alteration, moving and modification of structures and buildings, shall apply in all zoning districts. 
Section 4.02. - Lot regulations. 
[1]  Lot may not be reduced in size below minimum requirements. No parcel of land, even though it may consist of one (1) or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, front, side, or rear yard, inner or outer courts, lot area per unit, or other requirements of this Resolution are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use. 
[2]  Lot size. All lots shall conform to the area requirements set forth in the zoning districts in which they are located. Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to permit appropriate building setbacks from and orientation to both abutting streets. 
[3]  Building lines. A building line, meeting the front, rear and side yard setback requirements of the zoning district in which the parcel of land is located, shall be established on all lots. 
[4]  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots should be avoided, except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. When allowed, a strip of land at least ten (10) feet in width, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the lot or line of lots abutting such traffic artery. 
[5]  Lots must abut a public street. No building or structure shall be erected on a lot or portion of a lot which does not abut on a public street for at least thirty (30) feet. 
Section 4.03. - Building height restrictions. 
[1]  General application. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, or altered so as to exceed the height limits specified in this Resolution and set out for the district in which it is located. 
[2]  Permitted exceptions to height regulations. The building height restrictions imposed on buildings and structures by this Resolution for each zoning district shall not apply to the following buildings or structures, except where imposed by the airport hazard district regulations: 
(a)  Churches, schools, hospitals, sanitariums and other public buildings and public utility structures. There shall be no restriction on the height of such buildings or structures, provided the front, side, and rear yards required in the district in which such building is to be located shall be increased an additional one (1) foot for each ten (10) feet that the building exceeds the maximum height permitted in the district; 
(b)  Barns, silos, grain elevators, other farm structures, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, windmills, chimneys, smoke stacks, flag poles, masts, support poles and towers for electrical transmission lines, and structures under seventy (70) feet in total height used for amateur or recreational purposes such as a ham radio, a citizens band radio or home television antenna. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(c)  Where located on building roofs, bulkheads, watertanks, scenery lofts, and similar structures, provided that such structures shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total roof area of the building. 
None of these exceptions to height limits shall apply to temporary or business signs which shall be subject to all height limitations of the district in which they are located or to outdoor advertising signs which shall be subject to height limitations applicable to such signs or to satellite dish height limitations which shall be subject to limitations applicable to satellite dishes provided for in Chapter 23, Section 23.21. 
(Amended May 27, 1986, ZA86-05-01) 
Section 4.04. - Yard regulations. 
[1]  General application. No building shall be erected nor shall any existing building be altered, enlarged, moved, or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner not in conformity with the yard requirement regulations hereinafter established for the district in which such building or open space is located, except as may be specifically provided for in this Resolution. No part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Resolution shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills, cornices, buttresses, ornamental features, chimneys, flues, balconies, and eaves, provided such projections shall not extend more than four (4) feet beyond the yard area requirements. 
[2]  Modified requirements. Specified yard requirements established by this Resolution for zoning districts shall be modified as follows: 
(a)  On double frontage lots the required front yard shall be provided on each street; 
(b)  Whenever a rear property line of a lot abuts upon an alley, one-half (½) of the alley width shall be considered a portion of the required rear yard; 
(c)  An unroofed porch and steps may project into a required front yard for a distance not exceeding ten (10) feet; and 
(d)  Moveable awnings may be placed over doors or windows in any required yard, but such awnings shall not project closer than one (1) foot to any property line. 
[3]  Front and side yard setback distances for dwellings on corner lots. The setback requirements of this Resolution for side yards on corner lots or front yards shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on adjacent developed lots fronting on the same street is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the adjacent developed lots on the same street. 
[4]  Section 32.05 of the Resolution provides for special minimum setbacks for certain streets and highways listed in that section. Additionally, the zoning enforcement officer may require additional minimum front yard setbacks when he finds special circumstances to exist relating to the particular location. Special circumstances include, but are not limited to, topography, utility location, future road widening plans and drainage facilities. Any applicant who disagrees with such a decision of the zoning enforcement officer requiring additional minimum front yard setbacks may appeal the zoning enforcement officer's decisions as set out in Section 27.14 of the Resolution. 
(Amended February 10, 1997, ZA97-02-01) 
Section 4.05. - Access to public streets. 
Access to public streets shall be maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
[1]  All lots shall have a minimum thirty-foot frontage on a public street; and 
[2]  Each principal use shall be located on a lot or parcel which provides frontage on a public street having a right-of-way of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
Section 4.06. - Minimum distance between buildings on same lot or parcel of land. 
The following minimum distances between buildings located on the same lot or parcel of land shall be required, unless otherwise specified by this Resolution: 
[1]  The minimum distance between main buildings located on the same lot or parcel of land shall be: 
(a)  Front to front arrangement ..... 40 feet 
(b)  Front to rear arrangement ..... 50 feet 
(c)  Rear to rear arrangement ..... 30 feet 
(d)  Side to side arrangement ..... 20 feet 
(e)  All other combinations ..... 20 feet 
[2]  There shall be a distance of not less than twenty (20) feet between a main and accessory building located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
[3]  No mobile home unit shall be located within thirty (30) feet of any permanent principal use type building. 
Section 4.07. - Accessory and temporary buildings. 
[1]  Accessory Buildings. Location and uses of accessory buildings in all zoning districts shall be governed by the following conditions: 
(a)  Accessory Buildings in Residential and Agricultural Districts: 
(i)  Attached to main dwelling. Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory building must be an integral part of the main building, and such accessory building must be attached to the main building in a substantial manner by a roof. Such attached accessory building shall comply in all respects with the requirements applicable to the main building. 
(ii)  Detached from main dwelling. A detached accessory building shall not be closer than twenty (20) feet to the main dwelling, not closer than five (5) feet to any interior lot line. The accessory building shall comply with the setback requirements from rights-of-way for the main dwelling, but in no case shall the accessory building be located between the actual building line of the main dwelling and a right-of-way line. (Amended December 10, 2001, ZA01-12-02) 
(iii)  Height and lot coverage requirements for detached accessory building. A detached accessory building shall not exceed two (2) stories in height and shall not be located in a front yard nor cover more than thirty (30) percent of the side or rear yard. 
(b)  Accessory Buildings in All Other Districts: Accessory buildings in all zoning districts except for residential and agricultural districts shall meet the requirements of Section 4.06[2], and the yard requirements for the district in which they are located. 
[2]  Temporary Buildings. Temporary buildings may be used only in conjunction with construction work in any zoning district and shall be removed immediately upon the completion of construction. A certificate of zoning compliance must be obtained for use of a temporary building. 
[3]  Satellite Dish Antennae. Satellite dishes shall be treated as accessory structures and shall be specifically governed by Section 23.21. 
(Added May 27, 1986, ZA86-05-01) 
[4]  Prohibited Accessory and Temporary Buildings or Structures. Manufactured homes, mobile homes, freight trailers, box cars, trailers, or any other structure or vehicle that was not originally fabricated for use as an accessory building shall be prohibited. 
(Added June 23, 2008, ZA08-06-01) 
Section 4.08. - Buffer areas and screening. 
The use of buffer areas and screening reduces potential incompatibility between or among different uses of land in proximity to each other. Where the Commission determines that a proposed use(s) of land or the granting of a variance from the requirements of this Resolution would have an unfavorable impact on adjoining use(s) or property, the Commission may require, as a condition of the granting of a permit for such use or variance, a permanent buffer area or screening. 
[1]  Buffer areas. Buffer areas, when required, shall be established and permanently maintained under the following provisions: 
(a)  Be maintained as a planted area (or landscaped berm), using existing vegetation or, when required, additional plantings as provided below; 
(b)  Be in such dimension as the Commission may determine necessary, but in no event less than twenty (20) feet measured at right angles to property lines contiguous to the designated property line(s); 
(c)  Be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stone, rocks and other landscaping materials; 
(d)  Be free of structures other than a fence, and not be used for parking, utility easements, or drainage improvements, unless the applicant can demonstrate that these improvements are necessary; 
(e)  The natural topography of the land shall be preserved and natural growth shall not be disturbed beyond that which is necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin this natural growth where too dense for normal growth, or to remove diseased or dangerous and decayed timbers. However, with Commission approval, a slope easement may be cleared and graded where required to prevent soil erosion. This easement may cover no more than twenty percent (20%) of the required buffer area, and shall be immediately replanted upon completion of easement improvement; 
(f)  Where, by reason of the topography of the land or by reason of the prior removal or lack of timber and foliage, the owner of the buffer area may be required to erect a permanent wall or fence of not less than six (6) feet in height or screen of evergreen plantings, so designed and developed to provide visual screening. These plantings shall consist of evergreen shrubs which will, with normal growth, attain a height of six (6) feet within three (3) years; 
(g)  The Commission may require the applicant(s), owner(s), and/or agent(s) to execute an agreement which shall constitute a covenant running with the land, binding any transferee, successor, or assignee [1] to the maintenance of the buffer area or screen. Any agreement and covenant executed pursuant hereto shall be in writing, shall contain a complete description of the property, shall be signed by the applicant and owner, and shall be recorded in the deed records in the clerk's office of the superior court of Bibb County; and 
(h)  Whenever the Commission grants permission to destroy natural vegetation which otherwise would constitute a buffer, contingent on a replanting of the buffer, the applicant may be required to post a bond, letter of credit, or cash escrow in such amount as the Commission may determine, conditioned upon satisfactory installation of the required buffer. 
[2]  Requirements for screening. Screening shall consist of a wall or fence of opaque appearance not less than six (6) feet in height. Where required by the Commission, such screening shall be maintained in stable condition and appearance. 
[3]  Application where regulations set out different requirements. In those instances where these zoning regulations set out a different buffering requirement (e.g., a greater width of landscaped buffer or a different type of buffer) the specific provisions of those regulations applicable to the particular type of use shall govern. 
[4]  Variance. In specific cases the Commission may authorize a variance from the terms of Section 4.08[1](b) where a literal enforcement of these requirements will result in an unnecessary hardship and where the variance, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the intent and purposes to be served by this section. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Word "assignee" substituted for "assign." 

Section 4.09. - Lighting. 
[1]  Outdoor lighting of all types shall be directed so as not to reflect glare into residential dwellings or districts and shall be so situated as not to reflect into any public right-of-way. (Amended January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
[2]  Flashing or running lights within public view are prohibited, provided that this prohibition shall not apply to temporary holiday displays. (Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 4.10. - Control of curb cuts and vision clearance. 
The requirements for controlling curb cuts and maintaining vision clearance shall be as follows: 
[1]  No curb cut shall exceed fifty (50) feet in length nor shall curb cuts be closer than twenty (20) feet to other curb cuts or closer than twenty (20) feet to an intersection of two (2) streets measured along the curb lines; and 
[2]  Within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) streets or railroad lines or of a street intersection with a railroad line, there shall be no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, marquee, or other obstruction to vision permitted to protrude in the space between the heights of two and one-half (2½) feet and ten (10) feet above ground level. This requirement does not apply to C-3 (CBD) Central Business Districts. 
Section 4.11. - Fences and walls. 
The following regulations shall apply to the construction of fences. 
[1]  Location. 
(a)  Fences (walls and decorative fences) shall not be located outside or beyond the property or lot lines of the lot upon which said improvement shall serve. 
(b)  Fences shall be placed no closer to the public right-of-way than ten (10) feet except in the historic zoning districts designated as HR-1, HR-2, HR-3, HC, and HPD. The appropriate setback for fences in the historic zoning districts shall be determined through the design review process as specified in Chapter 27A of this resolution. (Amended September 14, 2015, ZA15-002) 
(c)  No fence or wall shall constitute an obstruction to the vision for or create a hazard to vehicular traffic. 
[2]  Height. 
(a)  Fences shall not exceed four feet in height in front yards or eight (8) feet in height in side or rear yards for all residential zoning districts; nor shall fences exceed eight (8) feet in height in any yard in commercial or industrial zoning districts. 
(b)  All designated fence heights must exist without the use of additions or extensions (barbed wire, razor wire, etc.) in meeting height requirements. (e.g., a ten-foot fence in a commercial area must be ten (10) feet of fence, not eight (8) feet of fence and two (2) feet of barbed wire). 
[3]  Design and type. 
(a)  All fences shall be constructed with the finished side exposed, the support posts placed on the inside, and in a manner which serves to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or surrounding area. 
(b)  Barbed wire fences or barbed wire assemblies or additions atop fences shall be prohibited in all residential districts. In commercial zoning districts, such fences may be allowed by the Commission as a conditional use. 
(c)  Barbed wire fences are permitted in agricultural and industrial districts with the following restrictions: 
(i)  Barbed wire assemblies or additions shall be restricted to three horizontal wire strands not to exceed a maximum of eighteen (18) inches; 
(ii)  Barbed wire assemblies shall be erected atop fences with a minimum height of six (6) feet; 
(iii)  Razor ribbon shall be prohibited. 
[4]  Enclosure of swimming pools. 
(a)  All swimming pools, whether above or in ground shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall. The fence regulations and requirements for swimming pools shall be as follows: 
(i)  Fences or walls around all swimming pools shall not be less than four (4) feet in height and have both a self-latching and self-closing gate; 
(ii)  Fences or rails constructed along the deck of an above ground pool will not qualify as meeting the requirements of this section. A separate fence or wall meeting the requirements of this section will be required. 
(iii)  Openings in fences shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch diameter sphere. 
(b)  Access gates. All access gates shall open outwards away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. (Added November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-01) 
Section 4.12. - Transitional area regulations. 
Where allowed, the location of industrial and commercial uses adjoining residential districts, frequently causes an unfavorable impact upon the character of the adjoining residential district. To control this impact and to minimize the impact of noise, odor, vibrations, dust, light, and other objectionable disturbances, the Commission or the zoning enforcement officer, as applicable, may for any such use, permitted or conditional: 
[1]  Prohibit any use which, because of its character, would produce obnoxious odors, glare, noise, vibrations, electrical disturbance, radioactivity, or other conditions detrimental to the character of the adjoining residential district; 
[2]  Require landscaped buffers or screening; 
[3]  Prohibit signs within twenty-five (25) feet adjacent to a residential district; 
[4]  Require lighting to be controlled and directed so as not to be objectionable to adjacent residential districts; and 
[5]  Prohibit any use which cannot conform to any requirement imposed by this section. 
Section 4.13. - Additions and alterations to existing structures. 
Additions and alterations to existing structures are permitted where such additions or alterations do not cause such structure to be in violation of any provision of this Resolution including, but not limited to provisions regulating density, yard requirements, height restrictions, or parking requirements. A certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit shall be obtained in accordance with Section 27.06 or 27.07, respectively. 
Section 4.14. - Limitation on the occupancy of a dwelling unit. 
A dwelling unit may be occupied by not more than one (1) family, and such family may consist of not more than one (1) of the following 
[1]  One (1) person or two (2) or more persons related by blood or marriage, with no more than two (2) roomers or boarders, and with any number of natural children, foster children, stepchildren or adopted children; or 
[2]  A group of not more than four (4) persons not necessarily related by blood or marriage. 
[3]  Limitations provided in this section do not apply to a dwelling unit which is utilized as a residential facility for handicapped persons as governed by the provisions of 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq. 
(Added April 22, 1996, ZA96-03-01) 
Section 4.15. - Aboveground storage tanks. 
All aboveground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquified petroleum gas, oil, or other flammable liquids or gases, shall be located not less than five hundred (500) feet from any residential district. All tanks must meet the standards and specifications established by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Georgia State Fire Marshal. [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Word "Marshal" substituted for "Marshall." 

Section 4.16. - Minimum dwelling space requirements. 
Every residential dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum dwelling space requirements of Section 306 of the Standard Housing Code as adopted by the City of Macon and Bibb County. 
(Added April 22, 1996, ZA96-03-01) 
Chapter 5 - SC—SPECIAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment No. ZA93-03-01, adopted March 22, 1993, added a new Ch. 5, sections 5.01—5.09, to read as herein set out. 

Section 5.01. - Intent. 
Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia, and based on the evidence and testimony presented at the hearing on these regulations by citizens and experts, the commission takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which does not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Recognizing that these activities and land uses pose a special problem on regulation and have a potential to adversely affect adjacent properties, it is the intent and purpose of these regulations to employ a higher degree of scrutiny for locations chosen or potential sites and to acknowledge that the traditional concept of spot zoning and size of zoning districts may be incompatible with the proper regulation of these uses. The commission, therefore, finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety, and morals of its neighborhoods, as well as churches, schools, and parks, to reduce the possible adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefor, the Planning and Zoning Commission enacts the following zoning regulations to further the legitimate governmental interest of preventing the problems of crime, blight, and deterioration which accompany and are brought about by a concentration of adult entertainment establishments, and the legitimate governmental interest of preventing the deleterious effects that adult entertainment establishments have upon neighborhoods and property values, as well as other public places such as churches, schools, and parks without unreasonably infringing upon the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons. 
(Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
Section 5.02. - Eligibility requirements for SC Special Commercial Districts. 
In determining the eligibility of an area of land or development for designation as a SC Special Commercial District, the commission shall find that the following conditions exist: 
[1]  The boundaries of a proposed district shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet from the boundaries of the downtown business district (as defined in Section 1.02 [34.1]; and 
[2]  The boundaries of a proposed district shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet from the boundaries of RR Rural Residential Districts; MHR Mobile Home Residential Districts; R-1AAAA, R-1AAA, R-1AA, R-1A and R-1 Single Family Districts; R-2 and R-2A Two-Family Residential Districts, Residential R-3 Multi-Family Residential Districts, and PDR Planned Development Districts; and 
[3]  The boundaries of a proposed district shall be at least two thousand (2000) feet from any existing SC Special Commercial District. 
[4]  The boundaries of a proposed district shall be at least one thousand (1000) feet from any historic district or structure defined or created pursuant to Chapter 21 of this resolution or by applicable state or federal law. 
All distances established in Section 5.02 [1], [2] and [3] shall be radial distances determined by a straight line and not street distance. Geographical size or number of uses that might exist in such district shall not be a determining factor when deciding on an amendment to the official zoning maps. The commission, in reviewing an application for a SC Special Commercial District, shall also apply the criteria contained in Section 28.08 before rendering a decision thereon. 
(Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
Section 5.03. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Adult entertainment establishments subject to meeting the performance standards in Section 23.25. 
[2]  Any permitted use allowed in C-1 Neighborhood Commercial districts, C-2 General Commercial districts, and C-4 Highway Commercial districts. 
(Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01; Amended July 22, 2002, ZA02-07-02) 
Section 5.04. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Any conditional use allowed in a C-1 Neighborhood Commercial, C-2 General Commercial, and C-4 Highway Commercial Districts. 
(Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01; Amended July 22, 2002, ZA02-07-02) 
Section 5.05. - Lot and area requirements. 
[1]  Minimum lot area shall be the same as for the existing zoning district that preceded the zoning district change. 
2]  Minimum lot width at the building line shall be the same as for the existing zoning district that preceded the zoning district change. 
3]  Maximum lot coverage shall be the same as for the existing zoning district that preceded the zoning district change. 
(Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
Section 5.06. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
Yard requirements shall be the same as for the existing zoning district that preceded the zoning district change. 
(Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
Section 5.07. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided for in Section 4.03. 
(Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
Section 5.08. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
(Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
Section 5.09. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
(Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01) 
Chapter 6 - A—AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 

Section 6.01. - Intent. 
Agricultural district regulations are designed to permit only those land uses which are compatible with existing and future agricultural uses. Recognizing that increasing residential development is occurring in agricultural areas, these regulations are designed to ensure that such residential development is compatible with the predominantly agricultural and open space character of this district. 
Section 6.02. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Agriculture, forestry, livestock, and poultry production, provided that there shall be no structure containing poultry or livestock; storage of manure or other odor- or dust-producing substances, located within five hundred (500) feet of a residential district or two hundred (200) feet of any property line. 
[2]  Single-family dwellings on a minimum one-acre lot. 
[3]  Tenant dwellings (one- and two-family) for farm workers when located on the same lot or tract as the principle residence on the basis of one (1) dwelling unit for each five (5) acres in addition to the minimum lot area required for the principle residence. 
[4]  Temporary stands for sale of agricultural produce, grown or raised by the seller; provided that such stand is set back twenty-five (25) feet from the street or highway right-of-way line, and provided that customers are served off of the street or highway right-of-way. 
[5]  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any use allowed (permitted and conditional) within this district including private garages and buildings or structures commonly required for agricultural operations. The requirements of Section 4.07 must be met. 
[6]  Fall-out shelters, provided the requirements in Section 23.15 are met. 
[7]  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool area is completely enclosed by a wall or a fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
[8]  Home occupations, provided the requirements of Section 23.01 are met. 
[9]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[10]  Manufactured homes located in previously approved manufactured home subdivisions provided that the requirements of Section 23.09[2] of the Comprehensive Land Development Resolution are met. (Added June 26, 2006, ZA06-06-04) 
[11]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Amended October 18, 1985, ZA85-10-02) 
Section 6.03. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Garage apartments. 
[2]  Reserved. (Deleted October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02) 
[3]  Churches and other places of worship with attendant educational and recreational buildings, provided such buildings shall have a fifty-foot setback from any property line. 
[4]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[5]  Private schools, colleges, and libraries, excluding business or trade schools. 
[6]  Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics, and convalescent or nursing homes. 
[7]  Veterinary hospitals, clinics, or kennels, provided, that any structure used for such purposes shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from a residential district and provided further that noise and odor shall not adversely affect adjacent uses. 
[8]  Cemeteries, mausoleums, or crematories, provided the requirements in Section 23.16 are met. 
[9]  Public utility structures and buildings, excluding communication towers and antennas. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[10]  Airplane landing fields, including flight strips and helicopter ports and accessory facilities. All federal and state laws and regulations must be complied with. 
[11]  Athletic fields, racetracks and speedways, miniature golf courses, gun clubs, and other recreational areas or structures for public or private use. The size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to adjacent land uses shall be a determinative factor. 
[12]  Sawmills and planing mills used for removing and processing timber on the adjacent areas, provided that no mill shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any road, street, or highway right-of-way nor closer than two hundred (200) feet to any property line. 
[13]  Development of natural resources, including the removal of minerals and natural materials, together with necessary buildings, machinery, and appurtenances thereto, provided the requirements of Section 23.17 are met. 
[14]  Reserved. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02; Deleted June 26, 2006, ZA06-06-04) 
[15]  Selected retail and service facilities: 
(a)  Required conditions. Where allowed in this district, selected retail and service facilities shall comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  The facility shall be located on arterial streets or highways or collector streets and be intended primarily to serve the local shopping needs of neighboring residents. 
(ii)  All activities must be conducted wholly within an enclosed building unless the nature of the activity makes it impossible. Manufacturing or the processing or treatment of materials, goods, or products shall not be allowed. 
(iii)  The facility must not be objectionable by reason of the emission of odors, dust, smoke, noise, vibrations, or bright lights. 
(b)  Selected uses. Only those uses listed below shall be allowed under the provisions of this section: 
(i)  Convenience food stores with ancillary sales of gasoline and oil products, provided the requirements of Section 23.11[4] are met. 
(ii)  Commercial greenhouse or plant nurseries. Any structure shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential property line. 
(iii)  Automobile service stations are allowed only on arterial highways and streets. 
(iv)  Radio and television broadcasting stations. 
(v)  Reserved. (Deleted November 30, 1988, ZA88-11-04) 
(vi)  Beauty salons and barber shops. (Amended July 23, 1984, ZA84-07-02) 
(vii)  Grocery stores which do not exceed 10,000 square feet (gross) in area. (Amended April 22, 1985, ZA85-04-03; October 14, 1985, ZA85-10-01) 
[16]  Motels and other facilities to serve the traveling public on sites adjacent to or within five hundred (500) feet of any interstate highway interchange. 
[17]  Drive-in theaters, provided acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least two hundred (200) feet in length are provided for use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume or concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movement, and provided the face of the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, or arterial or collector streets located within two thousand (2,000) feet of such screen. 
[18]  Open land recreation (public and private) such as country clubs, golf courses, tennis courts, boating and fishing establishments, beaches, or riding stables, and structures and uses necessary and incidental thereto, provided that no structure is within one hundred (100) feet of a property line and no structure, pen, or corral having animals shall be closer than two hundred (200) feet to a property line. 
[19]  Transient labor camps or dormitories, subject to dimensional requirements of the R-3 Multifamily Residential District. 
[20]  Public uses and buildings. 
[21]  Travel trailer parks when located adjacent to a freeway, expressway, or arterial street subject to the requirements of Section 23.06. 
[22]  Sanitary landfills subject to the requirements of Section 23.14. 
[23]  Home swimming pool without fence. 
[24]  Two-family dwellings (duplex) on a minimum one (1) acre lot. 
[25]  Manufactured homes provided the requirements of Section 23.09[2] of the Comprehensive Land Development Resolution are met. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02; Amended June 26, 2006, ZA06-06-04) 
[26]  Retail meat curing and butchering shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  A minimum lot size of five (5) acres; 
(b)  The structure shall comply with setback requirements set out in Section 6.05; 
(c)  The applicant must provide the commission with a set of plans approved by all local, state or federal agencies vested with the regulatory jurisdiction over meat curing and butchering; 
(d)  No live animals shall be slaughtered on site; 
(e)  No live animals shall be raised or kept on the site in conjunction with meat curing and butchering operation; 
(f)  All retail sales shall comply with Section 6.03[15] excluding Section 6.03[15](a)(ii); and 
(g)  All activities must be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. (Amended March 28, 1983, ZA83-03-03) 
[27]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[28]  Group personal care homes and supportive living homes. (Amended December 17, 1984, ZA84-12-02; October 14, 1985, ZA85-10-01) 
[29]  Office in the home, provided the requirements of Section 23.19 are met. (Amended May 13, 1985, ZA85-05-01; October 14, 1985, ZA85-10-01) 
[30]  Stone cutting and splitting operations for the processing of ornamental or building stone, provided that the operation is properly screened as required by Section 4.08. (Added December 8, 1986, ZA86-12-03) 
[31]  Fruit packing operations, provided use is located on arterial or collector street. (Added March 28, 1988, ZA88-03-04) 
[32]  Radio, television, and other communication transmission towers. (Added November 30, 1988, ZA88-1104) 
[33]  Manufactured home subdivisions provided that the requirements of Section 23.23 are met. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
[34]  Auction houses shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  A minimum lot size of five (5) acres; 
(b)  Such facilities shall only be located on arterial or collector roadways; 
(c)  All activities shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings; 
(d)  All buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from all rear and side property lines. 
[35]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(Added October 28, 1991, ZA91-10-02) 
Section 6.04. - Lot and area requirements. 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 
(a)  With septic tank and well (square feet) ..... 43,560 
(b)  With septic tank (square feet) ..... 43,560 
(c)  With public sewer (square feet) ..... 43,560 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line: 
(a)  With septic tank and well ..... 150 feet 
(b)  With septic tank ..... 150 feet 
(c)  With public sewer ..... 150 feet 
[3]  Maximum lot coverage (percentage) ..... 25% 
Section 6.05. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum building setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures as measured from: 
[1]  Arterial and collector streets right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 60 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 60 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 60 feet 
[2]  Minor streets right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 50 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 50 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 50 feet 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 
(a)  Front yard (where applicable) ..... 60 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 50 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 20 feet 
[4]  Special setbacks ..... Sec. 32.09 
Section 6.06. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided for in Section 4.03. 
Section 6.07. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
Section 6.08. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Section 6.09. - Economic and community development target areas. 
The zoning enforcement officer may reduce the minimum standards for residential properties within ECD target areas as specified in Section 23.28. 
(Added May 29, 2001, ZA01-05-01) 
Chapter 7 - RR—RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 7.01. - Intent. 
This district is established in recognition of the existence of substantial areas of the county presently committed to a form of development which is characterized by rural nonfarm uses. The intent of this district is to encourage the development of rural areas in a coordinated and orderly manner. This district is also intended to protect the use of land adjoining roads passing through rural portions of the county against strip development which can lead to traffic congestion and traffic hazards. District regulations are designed to permit only those land uses which are compatible with existing and future rural, nonfarm, residential uses. 
Section 7.02. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Single-family dwellings on a minimum one (1) acre lot. 
[2]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. (Amended October 22, 1990, ZA90-10-01) 
[3]  Fallout shelters, provided the requirements of Section 23.15 are met. 
[4]  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
[5]  Reserved. 
[6]  Gardening on land of one (1) acre or less. (No permit required.) 
[7]  Agriculture, forestry, livestock, and poultry production, provided that the operation is conducted on a tract of land greater than five (5) acres in area and provided there shall be no structure containing poultry or livestock, storage of manure or other odor- or dust-producing substance located within two hundred (200) feet of a property line. 
[8]  Home occupations, provided the requirements in Section 23.01 are met. 
[9]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[10]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Amended October 28, 1985, ZA85-1002) 
Section 7.03. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Reserved. (Deleted October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02) 
[2]  Churches and related accessory buildings, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
[3]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[4]  Private schools, colleges, and libraries, excluding business or trade schools. 
[5]  Public utility structures and buildings, excluding communication towers and antennas, provided that the installation is properly screened and serves the immediate area. No office shall be permitted, and no equipment shall be stored on the site.(Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[6]  Golf, swimming, tennis, or country clubs, public and private community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks, and recreation areas, provided that no building for such proposed use is located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line. The size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to adjacent land uses shall be a determining factor. 
[7]  Home swimming pool without a fence. 
[8]  Office in the home, provided the requirements of Section 23.19 are met. 
[9]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(Amended May 13, 1985, ZA85-05-01; October 14, 1985, ZA85-10-01; Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 7.04. - Lot and area requirements. 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 
(a)  With septic tank and well (square feet) ..... 43,560 
(b)  With septic tank (square feet) ..... 43,560 
(c)  With public sewer(square feet) ..... 43,560 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line: 
(a)  With septic tank and well ..... 150 feet 
(b)  With septic tank ..... 150 feet 
(c)  With public sewer ..... 150 feet 
[3]  Maximum lot coverage (percentage) ..... 25% 
Section 7.05. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum building setback distance requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures as measured from: 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 60 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 60 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 60 feet 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 50 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 50 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 50 feet 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 
(a)  Front yard (where applicable) ..... 60 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 50 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 20 feet 
[4]  Special setbacks ..... Section 32.09 
Section 7.06. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided for in Section 4.03. 
Section 7.07. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions in Chapter 26. 
Section 7.08. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Section 7.09. - Economic and community development target areas. 
The zoning enforcement officer may reduce the minimum standards for residential properties within ECD target areas as specified in Section 23.28. 
(Added May 29, 2001, ZA01-05-01) 
Chapter 8 - R-1AAA and R-1AAAA—SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Section 8.01. - Intent. 
The R-1AAA and R-1AAAA Single-Family Residential Districts are established as districts in which the principal use of land is for low density residential development. Structures and uses, specifically enumerated below, which are designed to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational, and other immediate needs of these districts may be allowed as conditional uses subject to requirements which provide for the protection of the single-family, low density, residential character of the respective districts. 
(Amended ZA88-10-01, October 24, 1988) 
Section 8.02. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Single-family dwellings. 
[2]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. (Amended October 22, 1990, ZA90-10-01) 
[3]  Fallout shelters, provided the requirements of Section 23.15 are met. 
[4]  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
[5]  Home occupations, provided the requirements of Section 23.01 are met. 
[6]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[7]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Amended October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02; Amended October 24, 1988, ZA88-10-01) 
Section 8.03. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Reserved. (Deleted October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02) 
[2]  Places of worship and related accessory structures; in either district, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street, and provided that no structure is located within fifty (50) feet of a property line or street right-of-way. 
[3]  General farming and horticulture only in R-1AAA, and the raising of livestock or poultry shall not be permitted. 
[4]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers; only in R-1AAA districts and further provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[5]  Private and public schools and libraries only in R-1AAA, and excluding business or trade schools. 
[6]  Public utility structures and buildings, excluding communication towers and antennas, in either district, provided that the installation is properly screened and services the immediate area. No office shall be permitted, and no equipment shall be stored on the site.(Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[7]  Golf, swimming, tennis or country clubs, public and private community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks and recreation areas; in either district, provided that no building for such proposed use is located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line. The size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to adjacent land uses shall be a determinative factor. 
[8]  Single-family detached cluster developments only in R-1AAA and only as provided for in Section 23.02. 
[9]  Home swimming pool without a fence or wall; in either district. 
[10]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(Amended October 24, 1988, ZA88-10-01; Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 8.04. - Lot and area requirements. 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 

 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line: 

 

 
(Amended October 24, 1988, ZA88-10-01) 
Section 8.05. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum building setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures as measured from: 

 

 

 
(Amended October 24, 1988, ZA88-10-01) 
Section 8.06. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted heights for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided for in Section 4.03. 
(Amended October 24, 1988, ZA88-10-01) 
Section 8.07. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
(Amended October 24, 1988, ZA88-1001) 
Section 8.08. - Lot area, lot width, yard, setback and parking requirements for single-family detached cluster developments in R-1AAA Districts. 
All lot area, lot width, yard, setback and parking requirements for single-family detached cluster developments shall be governed by Section 23.02. 
(Amended October 24, 1988, ZA88-1001) 
Section 8.09. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in these districts shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
(Amended October 24, 1988, ZA88-10-01) 
Section 8.10. - Economic and community development target areas. 
The zoning enforcement officer may reduce the minimum standards for residential properties within ECD target areas as specified in Section 23.28. 
(Added May 29, 2001, ZA01-05-01) 
Chapter 9 - R-1AA, R-1A, and R-1—SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Section 9.01. - Intent. 
R-1AA, R-1A, and R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts are established to provide for low density residential development (although allowing a greater density of development than that allowed in R-1AAA Single-Family Residential District). The R-1AA, R-1A, or R-1 districts differ in the density of development allowed by varying the lot area and width and the yard size requirements. Duplexes and other uses designed to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational, and other immediate needs of this district are allowed as conditional uses, subject to those requirements which provide for the protection of the single-family, low density, residential character of the district. 
Section 9.02. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Single-family dwellings. 
[2]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. (Amended October 22, 1990, ZA90-10-01) 
[3]  Fall-out shelters, provided the requirements of Section 23.15 are met. 
[4]  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
[5]  Home occupations, provided the requirements of Section 23.01 are met. 
[6]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[7]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Amended October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02; Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 9.03. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Reserved. (Deleted October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02) 
[2]  Churches and other places of worship and related accessory structures, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and provided no structure is located within fifty (50) feet of a property line or street right-of-way. 
[3]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[4]  Private and public schools and libraries, excluding business and trade schools. 
[5]  Public utility structures and buildings, excluding communication towers and antennas, provided that the installation is properly screened and serves the immediate area. No office shall be permitted, and no equipment shall be stored on the site. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[6]  Golf, swimming, tennis, or similar clubs and recreational areas, provided that no structure is located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line. The size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to adjacent land uses shall be a determinative factor. 
[7]  Single-family detached and attached residential cluster development in conformance with regulations contained in Section 23.02, provided that by allowing such development adjacent residential areas are not adversely affected. 
[8]  Two-family dwellings (duplexes) only in R-1A and R-1 districts, provided the requirements of Section 23.03 are met. 
[9]  General farming and horticulture, except that the raising of livestock and poultry shall not be permitted. 
[10]  Home swimming pool without a fence. 
[11]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 9.04. - Lot area requirements for all uses except two-family dwellings (duplexes) and residential cluster developments. 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 

 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line: 

 
[3]  Maximum lot coverage: 

 
Section 9.05. - Lot and area requirements for two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 

 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line: 

 
[3]  Maximum lot coverage: 

 
Section 9.06. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum building setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures as measured from (except for residential cluster developments which shall be governed by Section 23.02): 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of-way lines: 

 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 

 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 

 
[4]  Special setbacks ..... see Section 32.09 
Section 9.07. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided for in Section 4.03. 
Section 9.08. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces, shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
Section 9.09. - Lot area, lot width, yard, setback and parking requirements for residential cluster developments. 
All lot area, lot width, yard, setback and parking requirements for residential cluster developments shall be governed by Section 23.02. 
Section 9.10. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Section 9.11. - Economic and community development target areas. 
The zoning enforcement officer may reduce the minimum standards for residential properties within ECD target areas as specified in Section 23.28. 
(Added May 29, 2001, ZA01-05-01) 
Chapter 10 - R-2A AND R-2—TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 10.01. - Intent. 
R-2A and R-2 Two-Family Residential Districts are designed to accommodate increased density of development (medium density) by decreasing lot size requirements, and allowing two-family dwellings (duplexes). Medium density multifamily developments and uses designed to serve primarily the governmental, educational, religious, recreational, and other immediate needs of this district are allowed as conditional uses, subject to requirements necessary to preserve and protect their medium density residential character. 
Section 10.02. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Single-family dwellings. 
[2]  Two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
[3]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. (Amended October 22, 1990, ZA90-10-01) 
[4]  Fall-out shelters, provided the requirements of Section 23.15 are met. 
[5]  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
[6]  Home occupations, provided the requirements of Section 23.01 are met. 
[7]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[8]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Amended October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02; Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 10.03. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Churches and other places of worship and related accessory buildings, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
[2]  Reserved. (Deleted October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02) 
[3]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[4]  Public and private schools and libraries, excluding business or trade schools. 
[5]  Public utility structures and buildings, excluding communication towers and antennas, provided that the installation is properly screened and serves the immediate area. No office shall be permitted, and no equipment shall be stored on the site. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[6]  Golf, swimming, tennis or country clubs, public and private community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks, and recreation areas, provided that no building for such purposes is located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line. The size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to adjacent land uses shall be a determinative factor. 
[7]  Multifamily dwellings, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 23.04. 
[8]  Residential cluster developments in conformance with regulations contained in Section 23.02. 
[9]  General farming and horticulture, except the raising of livestock or poultry shall not be permitted. 
[10]  Home swimming pool without a fence. 
[11]  Professional offices in R-2 Districts only provided the following conditions can be met: 
(a)  Location must be on an arterial or collector street. 
(b)  Only existing structures can be utilized for the professional office. 
(c)  All off-street parking must be provided on the same property as the structure. 
(d)  Signage will be limited to two (2) square feet and must be attached to the structure. 
[12]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(Added August 8, 1988, ZA88-08-01; Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 10.04. - Lot and area requirements for all uses except two-family dwellings (duplexes) and residential cluster developments. 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 
(a)  With septic tank and well (square feet) ..... 43,560 
(b)  With septic tank (square feet) ..... 10,000 
(c)  With public sewer (square feet) ..... 6,000 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line: 
(a)  With septic tank and well ..... 150 feet 
(b)  With septic tank ..... 75 feet 
(c)  With public sewer ..... 60 feet 
[3]  Maximum lot coverage (percentage) ..... 35 
Section 10.05. - Lot requirements for two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 

 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line: 

 
[3]  Maximum lot coverage (percentage) ..... 35 
Section 10.06. - Lot and area requirements for residential cluster developments. 
Lot and area requirements for multifamily and single-family cluster developments shall be governed by Sections 23.02 and 23.04. 
Section 10.07. - Yard requirements (building setback distance.) 
The following minimum building setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures as measured from (except for multifamily and single-family cluster developments which shall be governed by Section 23.04): 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 40 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 40 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 40 feet 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 25 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 25 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 25 feet 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 
(a)  Front yard (where applicable) ..... 40 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 30 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 10 feet 
[4]  Special setbacks ..... see Sec. 32.09 
Section 10.08. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided for in Section 4.03. 
Section 10.09. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
Section 10.10. - Lot area, lot width, yard, setback and parking requirements for residential cluster developments. 
All lot area, lot width, yard, setback and parking requirements for residential cluster developments shall be governed by Section 23.02. 
Section 10.11. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Section 10.12. - Economic and community development target areas. 
The zoning enforcement officer may reduce the minimum standards for residential properties within ECD target areas as specified in Section 23.28. 
(Added May 29, 2001, ZA01-05-01) 
Chapter 11 - R-3—MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 11.01. - Intent. 
The R-3 Multifamily Residential District is primarily designed to provide sufficient areas for high density residential development with greater emphasis on multifamily uses than is found in single-family or two-family residential districts. R-3 districts are situated so that they are well served by public and commercial activities and have convenient access to arterial and collector streets. Certain structures and uses designed primarily to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational, and certain service needs of high density residential occupants are allowed, subject to requirements necessary to preserve and protect their multifamily residential character. Professional office buildings, hotels and motels may be permitted in this district if the commission determines that such uses will not adversely affect the primarily residential character of the district. 
Section 11.02. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Single-family dwellings. 
[2]  Two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
[3]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. (Amended October 22, 1990, ZA90-10-01) 
[4]  Fall-out shelters, provided the requirements of Section 23.15 are met. 
[5]  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
[6]  Home occupations, provided the requirements of Section 23.01 are met. 
[7]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[8]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Amended October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02) 
Section 11.03. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Multifamily dwellings located on a public sewer. 
[2]  Single-family cluster developments in conformance with the requirements of Section 23.02. 
[3]  Reserved. (Deleted October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02) 
[4]  Places of worship and related accessory structures, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
[5]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[6]  Colleges, private and public schools, and libraries. 
[7]  Public utility structures and building, excluding communication towers and antennas, provided that the installation is properly screened and serves the immediate area. No office shall be permitted, and no equipment shall be stored on the site. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[8]  Golf, swimming, tennis, or country clubs, public and private community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks, and recreation areas, provided that no building for such purposes is located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line. The size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to adjacent land uses shall be a determinative factor. 
[9]  High-rise multifamily dwellings, with a minimum of fifty (50) units and at least five (5) stories in height. 
[10]  High-rise multifamily dwellings exclusively for the elderly with a minimum of fifty (50) units and at least five (5) stories in height. 
[11]  Hotels and apartment hotels. 
[12]  Professional offices or office buildings used exclusively for professional occupancy of such character and nature as will not adversely affect adjacent and nearby residential properties. 
[13]  Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics, and convalescent or nursing homes. 
[14]  Clubs, lodges, boardinghouses, rooming houses, and fraternity and sorority houses. 
[15]  Motels with a restaurant, provided that a minimum lot area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet is maintained. 
[16]  The following commercial uses, when included on the ground floor of a multifamily dwelling which exceeds five (5) stories and/or fifty (50) units, and provided that business or advertising signs are displayed only within the enclosed buildings: 
(a)  Drugstores. 
(b)  Gift shops. 
(c)  Florists. 
(d)  Laundromats. 
(e)  Newsstands. 
(f)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(g)  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations. 
(h)  Restaurants. 
[17]  Branch banks and branch savings and loan associations. 
[18]  Mobile home parks, provided the requirements of Section 23.07 are met. 
[19]  Farming and general horticulture, except that the raising of livestock or poultry is prohibited. 
[20]  Group personal care homes and supportive living homes. 
[21]  Home swimming pool without a fence. 
[22]  Antique furniture stores located on an arterial or collector street. 
[23]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[24]  Barber and beauty shops located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street. (Added January 9, 2006, ZA06-01-01) 
(Amended September 9, 1985, ZA85-09-01) 
Section 11.04. - Lot and area requirements for all uses except two-family dwellings (duplexes), single-family residential cluster developments, multifamily and high-rise multifamily developments. 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 
(a)  With septic tank and well (square feet) ..... 43,560 
(b)  With septic tank (square feet) ..... 10,000 
(c)  With public sewer (square feet) ..... 6,000 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line: 
(a)  With septic tank and well ..... 150 feet 
(b)  With septic tank ..... 75 feet 
(c)  With public sewer ..... 60 feet 
[3]  Maximum lot coverage (percentage) ..... 40 
Section 11.05. - Minimum lot requirements for two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 
(a)  With septic tank and well (square feet) ..... 43,560 
(b)  With septic tank (square feet) ..... 20,000 
(c)  With public sewer (square feet) ..... 6,000 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line: 
(a)  With septic tank and well ..... 150 feet 
(b)  With septic tank ..... 100 feet 
(c)  With public sewer ..... 60 feet 
[3]  Maximum lot coverage (percentage) ..... 40 
Section 11.06. - Minimum lot requirements for multifamily developments. 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Lot area: 
(a)  No multifamily development shall be constructed on a lot containing less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(b)  Lot area requirements shall be governed by the following table: 

 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line ..... 75 feet 
[3]  Maximum lot coverage (percentage): 
(a)  One- to three-story buildings ..... 40 
(b)  Four- and five-story buildings ..... 30 
(c)  Six- or more story buildings ..... 25 
Section 11.07. - Minimum lot area requirements for high-rise multifamily dwelling units and high-rise multifamily dwelling units for the elderly. 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses. 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 
(a)  The minimum lot area for high-rise multifamily dwelling units shall be twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet and fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for multifamily dwelling units for the elderly. 
(b)  Lot area requirements shall be governed by the following table: 

 
[2]  Maximum lot coverage (percentage) ..... 25 
Section 11.08. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum building setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures, as measured from: 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 40 feet* 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 40 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 40 feet 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 25 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 25 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 25 feet 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 
(a)  Front yard (where applicable) ..... 40 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 30 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 10 feet 
[4]  Special setbacks ..... see Sec. 32.09 
Section 11.09. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet. The commission may, however, allow construction and erection of buildings and structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that any application to exceed the maximum permitted height shall be treated as an application for a conditional use. 
Section 11.10. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
Section 11.11. - Lot area, lot width, yard, setback and parking requirements for single-family cluster developments. 
All lot area, lot width, yard, setback and parking requirements for single-family cluster developments shall be governed by Section 23.02. 
Section 11.12. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Section 11.13. - Economic and community development target areas. 
The zoning enforcement officer may reduce the minimum standards for residential properties within ECD target areas as specified in Section 23.28. 
(Added May 29, 2001, ZA01-05-01) 
Chapter 12 - C-1—NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Section 12.01. - Intent. 
The purpose of this district is to provide locations for neighborhood shopping facilities in which are found retail commercial uses which have a neighborhood orientation and which supply necessities usually requiring frequent purchasing with a minimum of consumer travel. Such facilities should be located so that their frequency and distributional patterns reflect their neighborhood orientation. In addition, such facilities should not be so large or so broad in scope of services as to attract substantial amounts of trade from outside the neighborhood. It is further the intent of this district that, in order to restrict the size of such facilities, the neighborhood commercial zone should not be located in close proximity to other commercial areas. 
Section 12.02. - Required conditions. 
Retail sales, displays of merchandise, and storage must be within a completely enclosed building, except that the Commission may grant an exception to this requirement (as a conditional use) where it finds that enforcement would create an unreasonable hardship. No single business activity shall occupy more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of building area. 
(Amended January 8, 1990, ZA90-01-02) 
Section 12.03. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Appliance stores, including repairs and service. 
[2]  Art and antique shops. 
[3]  Bakeries employing not more than ten (10) persons. 
[4]  Health clubs, spas, and other similar activities. 
[5]  Bicycle stores. 
[6]  Book, stationery, camera, or photographic supply stores, and newsstands. 
[7]  Confectionery stores. 
[8]  Clothing, shoe, millinery, dry good and notion stores. 
[9]  Ice cream parlors. 
[10]  Drugstores. 
[11]  Furniture and home furnishings stores. 
[12]  Florist, nursery, and gift shops. 
[13]  Grocery, fruit, vegetable, meat markets, delicatessens, catering stores, and supermarkets. 
[14]  Hardware and paint stores. 
[15]  Jewelry stores. 
[16]  Beverage stores, including sales of alcoholic beverages. 
[17]  Barber and beauty shops. 
[18]  Dressmaking and tailoring shops. 
[19]  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations and self-service laundries. 
[20]  Shoe repair shops. 
[21]  Garden supply stores. 
[22]  Any other retail sales or service establishment similar in character to those permitted in Sections 12.03[1] through 12.03[21]; provided that such use is compatible with the intent of this district as stated in Section 12.01. 
[23]  Professional and business offices, including banks and financial institutions. 
[24]  General farming and horticulture, except the raising of livestock and poultry shall not be permitted. 
[25]  Single and two-family dwellings, provided the lot area and yard (setback) requirements for their use in R-2 Residential District are met. 
[26]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. (Amended October 22, 1990, ZA90-10-01) 
[27]  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
[28]  Pet shops. 
[29]  Fall-out shelters, provided the requirements in Section 23.15 are met. 
[30]  Cafes, grills, lunch counters, and restaurants without alcohol. 
[31]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. 
[32]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 12.04. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Automobile service stations, provided the requirements of Section 23.11 are met. 
[2]  Auction houses. 
[3]  Print shops with not over five (5) employees. 
[4]  Theaters, but not including drive-in theaters. 
[5]  Public utility structures and buildings, excluding communication towers and antennas, provided that the installation is properly screened and serves the immediate area. No office shall be permitted, and no equipment shall be stored on the site. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[6]  Churches and other places of worship with attendant educational and recreational buildings. 
[7]  Veterinary hospitals, treating small animals only, provided any structure or outside area used for such purpose shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any residential district. 
[8]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[9]  Golf, swimming, tennis, or country clubs, public and private community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks and recreational areas. The size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to adjacent land uses shall be a determinative factor. 
[10]  Private clubs, and fraternal orders or lodges. 
[11]  Bars, taverns, saloons, and restaurants with alcohol, excluding nightclubs. 
[12]  Variety stores. 
[13]  Hospitals, clinics, and convalescent or nursing homes, but not to include sanitariums. 
[14]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[15]  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, provided that such operation is for local service only and no work is done on the premises for other similar establishments or pickup stations. 
[16]  Shopping centers including businesses or activities listed in Sections 12.03 and 12.04. The following guidelines govern construction of shopping centers: 
(a)  Shopping centers should not exceed sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in gross floor area. 
(b)  Leading tenants shall be a grocery store or a drug store, neither shall exceed fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in gross floor area. (Amended January 8, 1990, ZA90-01-02) 
(c)  Shopping centers shall be located along arterial, collector or secondary streets. 
(d)  Section 23.12 provides additional standards for shopping center construction. 
[17]  Retail sales, displays of merchandise and storage pursuant to Section 12.02. 
[18]  Colleges, public and private schools, and libraries. 
[19]  Group personal care homes and supportive living homes. 
[20]  Home swimming pool without a fence. 
[21]  Recreational, amusement, or entertainment facilities. (Amended December 14, 1981, ZA81-12-01) 
[22]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[23]  Funeral homes. (Amended November 19, 1984, ZA84-11-01; October 14, 1985, ZA85-10-01) 
[24]  Used car sales lot; provided, however, that such lot shall not maintain for sale more than ten (10) cars at any one time, and, provided further, that said used car sales lot is located on an arterial or collector street as defined elsewhere in this resolution. (Amended August 26, 1985, ZA85-08-03) 
[25]  Self-serve carwashing facilities, provided they are located on an arterial or collector street. 
[26]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(Added December 8, 1986, ZA86-12-02) 
Section 12.05. - Lot and area requirements. 
Only for residential uses which are governed by Section 12.03[25]. 
Section 12.06. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum building setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings and structures, as measured from (except for residential uses which are governed by Section 12.02[26]): 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 35 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 35 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 35 feet 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 25 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 25 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 25 feet 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 

 
[4]  Special setbacks ..... see Section 32.09 
Section 12.07. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as allowed by Section 4.03. The commission may, however, allow construction and erection of buildings or structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height; except that any application to exceed the maximum permitted height shall be treated as an application for a conditional use. 
Section 12.08. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
Section 12.09. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Chapter 13 - C-2—GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment No. ZA97-08-01, § 2, adopted August 14, 1997, deleted Ch. 13, §§ 13.01—13.09 in its entirety and added a new Ch. 13, §§ 13.01—13.09, to read as herein set out. 

Section 13.01. - Intent. 
The C-2 Commercial District is intended to promote general commercial activity by concentrating in appropriate locations all types of commercial and miscellaneous service activities in beneficial relation to one another. Development of strip commercial areas is not encouraged. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13.02. - Required conditions. 
Retail sales, displays of merchandise, and storage must be within a completely enclosed building, except that the commission may grant an exception to this requirement (as a conditional use) where it finds that enforcement would create an unreasonable hardship. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13.03. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  All permitted uses in a C-I Neighborhood Commercial District. 
[2]  Bottling works for soft drinks. 
[3]  Printing, blueprinting, bookbinding, photostating, lithography, and publishing establishments. 
[4]  Reserved. 
[5]  All uses of a predominantly retail nature, including: 
(a)  Electrical supplies; 
(b)  Heating and plumbing equipment; 
(c)  Dairy products; 
(d)  Bakeries; 
(e)  Tires, batteries, and other automotive accessories, including the installation of accessories sold; 
(f)  Sporting goods; 
(g)  Farm and garden supplies; 
(h)  Real estate offices; and 
(i)  Home building supplies, provided the entire storage area is screened as provided in Section 4.08, or screened to a greater height as required to adequately screen such areas. 
[6]  Bars, taverns, saloons, and restaurants with alcohol. 
[7]  Newspaper publishing establishments. 
[8]  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments. 
[9]  Theaters, except for drive-in theaters. 
[10]  Private clubs, and fraternal orders or lodges. 
[11]  Bowling alleys and billiard rooms. 
[12]  Office buildings. 
[13]  Radio and television broadcasting studios. 
[14]  Telephone offices or communications centers. 
[15]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. 
[16]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[17]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13.04. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Ice plants. 
[2]  Drive-in theaters, provided acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least two hundred (200) feet in length are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume or concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movement and provided the face of the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, or arterial or collector streets within two thousand (2,000) feet of such screen. 
[3]  Public utility structures and buildings, excluding communication towers and antennas, provided that the installation is properly screened and serves the immediate area. No office shall be permitted, and no equipment shall be stored on the site. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[4]  Churches and other places of worship with attendant educational and recreational buildings. 
[5]  Colleges, private and public schools, and libraries. 
[6]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[7]  Golf swimming, tennis, or country clubs, public and private community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks and recreational areas. The size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to adjacent land uses shall be a determinative factor. 
[8]  Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, or convalescent and nursing homes. 
[9]  Motels and hotels. 
[10]  Commercial parking garages or lots, provided that no entrance or exit is located on the same side of the street and within the same block as a school and that curb breaks be limited to two (2) for each one hundred (100) feet of street frontage, each curb break not exceeding thirty (30) feet in width and not located closer than twenty (20) feet to a street intersection. 
[11]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[12]  Food locker plants where lockers are rented for the storage of food, including sale at retail, delivery, and the cutting, and packaging of meat but not including slaughtering. 
[13]  Automobile, travel trailer, and mobile home sales, which need not be enclosed, but any mechanical or body repair must be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure which may not have any openings, other than a stationary window, facing a residential district if such structure is located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district. No parts or waste material may be stored outside such structure. 
[14]  Bus, railroad, and air terminal facilities. 
[15]  Drive-in restaurants. 
[16]  Automobile laundries or car washes, provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain the number of vehicles (at two hundred (200) square feet per vehicle) equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machines, and in addition, that curb breaks be limited to two (2), each not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width and located no closer than twenty (20) feet to a street intersection. 
[17]  Milk bottling and distribution plants and ice-cream manufacturing. 
[18]  Places of assembly including auditoriums, stadiums, coliseums, dance halls, and nightclubs. 
[19]  Produce and farmers' markets. 
[20]  Wholesale warehouses. 
[21]  Garages, tire retreading and recapping establishments, provided that no buildings for such use located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district shall have any openings, other than stationary windows or doors for pedestrian (nonvehicular) ingress and egress, facing such residential district. 
[22]  Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided any structure used for such purpose shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any residential district, and provided further that such use shall not adversely affect adjacent uses. 
[23]  Recreational, amusement, or entertainment facilities. 
[24]  Trade shops including sheet metal, roofing, upholstering, electrical, plumbing, Venetian blind, cabinet malting and carpentry, rug and carpet cleaning and sign painting shops, provided that all operations are conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any openings, other than stationary windows or doors for pedestrian ingress and egress, facing a residential district within one hundred (100) feet of any such district. 
[25]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[26]  Trade or business schools. 
[27]  Group personal care homes and supportive living homes. 
[28]  Bakeries. 
[29]  Automobile service stations, provided that the requirements of Section 23.11 are met. 
[30]  Shopping centers, provided that the shopping center guidelines contained in Section 23.12 governing the construction of shopping centers are met. 
[31]  Mini-warehouses, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Shall be limited to storage only. 
(b)  All storage shall be within the building area. 
(c)  No auctions or commercial sales or uses shall be conducted on the site. 
(d)  A fencing and landscaping plan shall be approved by the commission. 
[32]  Retail sales, displays of merchandise, and storage pursuant to Section 13.02. 
[33]  Museums and institutions of a similar nature. 
[34]  Auction houses. 
[35]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[36]  Undertaking or mortuary establishments and ambulance services. 
[37]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[38]  Self service ice machines provided the standards in Section 23.29 are met. (Added July 9, 2007, ZA07-07-01) 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13.05. - Lot and area requirements. 
None. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13.06. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum building setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings and structures, as measured from (except for residential uses which are governed by Section 13.04[27]): 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard—35 feet 
(b)  Rear yard—35 feet 
(c)  Side yard—35 feet 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard—25 feet 
(b)  Rear yard—25 feet 
(c)  Side yard—25 feet 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 
(a)  Front yard—None, except when abutting a residential district, in which case it shall be twenty (20) feet (where applicable). 
(b)  Rear yard—None, except when abutting a residential district, in which case it shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(c)  Side yard—None, except when abutting a residential district, in which case it shall be ten (10) feet. 
[4]  Special setbacks ..... See Sec. 32.09 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13.07. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet except as allowed by Section 4.03. The commission may, however, allow construction and erection of buildings or structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that any application to exceed the maximum permitted height shall be treated as an application for a conditional use. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13.08. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13.09. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Chapter 13A - CBD-1—CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment No. ZA97-08-01, § 3, adopted August 14, 1997, added a new Ch. 13A, §§ 13A.01—13A.10, to read as herein set out. 

Section 13A.01. - Intent. 
The CBD-1 Central Business District is intended to promote an harmonious tenant mix and to encourage an environment which complements both residential and business activities. This district is also concerned with the protection of significant historic structures, and the preservation of the architectural character and ambiance of the downtown area. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13A.02. - Required conditions. 
Storage of merchandise must be within a completely enclosed building, except that the commission may grant an exception to this requirement (as a conditional use) where it finds that the enforcement would create an unreasonable hardship. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13A.03. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Neighborhood Markets. (Amended September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[2]  Printing, blueprinting, bookbinding, photostating, lithography, and publishing establishments. 
[3]  Bars, taverns, saloons, and restaurants with or without alcohol. 
[4]  Newspaper publishing establishments. 
[5]  Auction houses. 
[6]  Theaters, but not including drive-in theaters. 
[7]  Museums and institutions of a similar nature. 
[8]  Dwelling units located in existing buildings. (Amended April 27, 2009, ZA09-04-01) 
[9]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[10]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[11]  Appliance stores, including repairs and service. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[12]  Art and antique shops. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[13]  Bakeries employing not more than ten (10) persons. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[14]  Health clubs, spas, and other similar activities. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[15]  Bicycle stores. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[16]  Book, stationery, camera, or photographic supply stores, and newsstands. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[17]  Confectionery stores. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[18]  Clothing, shoe, millinery, dry good and notion stores. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[19]  Ice cream parlors. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[20]  Drugstores. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[21]  Furniture and home furnishings stores. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[22]  Florist, nursery, and gift shops. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[23]  Fruit, vegetable, meat markets, delicatessens, and catering stores less than 15,000SF. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[24]  Hardware and paint stores. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[25]  Jewelry stores. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[26]  Barber and beauty shops. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[27]  Dressmaking and tailoring shops. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[28]  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations and self-service laundries. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[29]  Shoe repair shops. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[30]  Any other retail sales or service establishment similar in character to those permitted in Sections 13A.03[1] through 12.03[29]; provided that such use is compatible with the intent of this district as stated in Section 13A.01. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[31]  Professional and business offices, including banks and financial institutions. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[32]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[33]  Pet shops. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[34]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[35]  Tire batteries, and other automotive accessories, including the installation of accessories sold, provided there is no outside display and all work is performed wholly within building. (Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01; Amended March 26, 2001, ZA01-02-01) 
Section 13A.04. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Convenience stores, convenience stores with fuels sales, liquor stores, wine shops, beer/malt shops. (Deleted April 27, 2009, ZA09-04-01; Added September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[2]  Reserved. (Deleted September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[3]  All uses without outside storage or sales, smaller than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size and retail in nature, including: 
(a)  Electrical supplies, 
(b)  Heating and plumbing equipment, 
(c)  Dairy products, 
(d)  Bakeries, and 
(e)  Tires, batteries, and other automotive accessories, including the installation of accessories sold. 
[4]  Public utility structures and buildings, excluding communication towers and antennas, provided that the installation is properly screened and serves the immediate area. No office shall be permitted, and no equipment shall be stored on the site. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[5]  Churches and other places of worship with attendant educational and recreational buildings. 
[6]  Swimming, tennis, public and private community clubs or associations, parks, and recreational areas. The size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to adjacent land uses shall be a determinative factor. 
[7]  Motels and hotels. 
[8]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[9]  Bus and railroad facilities. 
[10]  Open-air farmers' markets. (Amended September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[11]  Recreational amusement, or entertainment facilities. 
[12]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[13]  Multifamily dwellings as new construction. (Amended April 27, 2009, ZA09-04-01) 
[14]  Auto repair garages, provided that no buildings for such use located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district shall have any openings, other than stationary windows or doors for pedestrian (non-vehicular) ingress and egress, facing such residential district. (Amended September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[15]  Shopping centers, provided that the shopping center guidelines in Section 23.12 governing the construction of shopping centers are met. 
[16]  Parking garages and lots. 
[17]  Undertaking or mortuary establishments and ambulance services. 
[18]  Reserved. (Deleted September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[19]  Colleges, universities, and other educational facilities. 
[20]  Hospitals and other medical facilities limited to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in ground floor area. 
[21]  Nightclubs. 
[22]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[23]  Automobile showrooms. (Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
[24]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[25]  Radio and television broadcasting studios. 
(Added September 13, 1999, ZA99-09-01; Amended March 26, 2001, ZA01-02-01) 
Section 13A.05. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— ZA09-04-01, adopted April 27, 2009, repealed § 13A.05 which pertained to lot and area requirements. See also the Comparative Table. 
Section 13A.06. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
There shall be no minimum setback requirements, except as provided below: 
[1]  Setbacks may be required to meet design standards, 
[2]  A setback to twenty (20) feet shall be required from any property line that abuts a residential district, and 
[3]  Special setbacks shall be as required in Section 32.09. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13A.07. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet except as allowed by Section 4.03. The commission may however, allow construction and erection of buildings or structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that any application to exceed the maximum permitted height shall be treated as an application for a conditional use and a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13A.08. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13A.09. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13A.10. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
No building, structure or landscape, including walls, fences, steps, and paving that can be viewed from the public right-of-way, shall be erected, reconstructed, altered, restored, moved or demolished within a design district, and no sign, fence, wall, or other appurtenant structure shall be erected or displayed on any lot, building, or structure located within said district unless an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been approved by the commission pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of appropriateness is not required for communications antennas permitted by Section 23.27[4](a) or (b). 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01; Amended January 28, 2002, ZA02-01-03) 
Chapter 13B - CBD-2—CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment No. ZA97-08-01, § 4, adopted August 14, 1997, added a new Ch. 13B, §§ 13B.01—13B.10, to read as herein set out. 

Section 13B.01. - Intent. 
The CBD-2 Central Business District is intended to encourage an harmonious tenant mix and an environment which complements both residential and business activities within the CBD-1 Central Business District by protecting gateways into said district and offering compatible uses as well as ancillary services for residents and businesses located therein. This district is also concerned with the protection of significant historic structures, and the preservation of the architectural character and ambiance of the downtown area. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13B.02. - Required conditions. 
Storage of merchandise must be within a completely enclosed building, except that the Commission may grant an exception to this requirement (as a conditional use) where it finds that the enforcement would create an unreasonable hardship. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13B.03. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  All permitted uses allowed in a CBD-1 Central Business District. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13B.04. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  All conditional uses allowed in a CBD-1 Central Business District. 
[2]  Automobile sales, which need not be enclosed, but any mechanical or body repair must be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure which may not have an opening, other than a stationary window, facing a residential district if such structure is located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district. 
[3]  Automobile laundries or car washes, provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles waiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain the number of vehicles (at two hundred (200) square feet per vehicle) equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the capacity of the washing machines, and in addition, that curb breaks be limited to two (2), each not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width and located no closer than twenty (20) feet to a street intersection. 
[4]  Drive-in restaurants. 
[5]  Wholesale warehouses. 
[6]  Reserved. (Deleted September 24, 2012, ZA13-004) 
[7]  Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided any structure for such purpose shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any residential district, and provided further that such use shall not adversely affect adjacent uses. 
[8]  Group personal care, homes and supportive living homes. 
[9]  Hospitals and medical facilities greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in ground floor area. 
[10]  Electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning and storage in a facility no greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet. (Added August 13, 2007, ZA07-08-01) 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13B.05. - Lot and area requirements. 
The following lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses: 

 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13B.06. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
There shall be no minimum setback requirements, except as provided below: 
[1]  Setbacks may be required to meet design standards, 
[2]  A setback of twenty (20) feet shall be required from any property line that abuts a residential district, and 
[3]  Special setbacks shall be as required in Section 32.09. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13B.07. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet except as allowed by Section 4.03. The Commission may, however, allow construction and erection of buildings or structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that any application to exceed the maximum permitted height shall be treated as an application for a conditional use and a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13B.08. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13B.09. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 13B.10. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
No building, structure or landscape, including walls, fences, steps, and paving that can be viewed from the public right-of-way, shall be erected, reconstructed, altered, restored, moved or demolished within a design district, and no sign, fence, wall, or other appurtenant structure shall be erected or displayed on any lot, building, or structure located within said district unless an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been approved by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of appropriateness is not required for communications antennas permitted by Section 23.27[4](a) or (b). 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01; Amended January 28, 2002, ZA02-01-03) 
Chapter 14 - C-4—HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Section 14.01. - Intent. 
The C-4 Highway Commercial Districts are specialized districts intended primarily to provide meaningful development for vehicular related uses for the traveling public. Primarily, these districts are intended to be located on highways and major thoroughfares. Uses in such districts are permitted or conditional, subject to criteria and standards intended to preserve the character of the district and to minimize friction with abutting and nearby uses. 
Section 14.02. - Required conditions. 
Retail sales, displays of merchandise, and storage must be within a completely enclosed building, except that the commission may grant an exception to this requirement (as a condition use) where it finds that enforcement would create an unreasonable hardship. 
Section 14.03. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Automobile service stations, provided the requirements of Section 23.11 are met. 
[2]  Automobile laundries or car washes, provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain the number of vehicles at two hundred (200) square feet per vehicle equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machines, and in addition, that curb breaks be limited to two (2), each not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width and located not closer than twenty (20) feet to a street intersection. 
[3]  Museums and institutions of a similar nature. 
[4]  Professional office buildings. 
[5]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. (Amended October 22, 1990, ZA90-10-01) 
[6]  Motels and hotels, which shall contain a minimum lot area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet, if attached to a public sewer, or a larger lot area as determined by the Macon-Bibb County Health Department if not attached to a public sewer. 
[7]  Building and lumber supply establishments, provided the entire storage area is properly screened as provided in Section 4.08, or screened to a greater height as required to adequately screen such areas. 
[8]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. 
[9]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 14.04. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Automobile (indoor or outdoor), travel trailer and mobile home sales (which need not be enclosed) and automobile repair garages and mechanical and body shops, provided all operations are conducted in a building which shall not have any openings other than a stationary window facing a residential district within one hundred (100) feet of such district and which shall not store or otherwise maintain any parts or waste material outside such buildings. 
[2]  Bus stations. 
[3]  Restaurants, including drive-in establishments, provided that when a drive-in establishment abuts a residential district, it shall be separated from such district by a six-foot high masonry wall and shall have no light shining directly into residential districts. 
[4]  Tourist homes. 
[5]  Public utility structures and buildings, excluding communication towers and antennas, provided that the installation is properly screened and serves the immediate area. No office shall be permitted, and no equipment shall be stored on the site. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[6]  Churches, and other places of worship and attendant educational and recreational buildings. 
[7]  Colleges, public and private schools and libraries. 
[8]  Truck terminals, provided that they are not located adjacent to residential uses and that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least two hundred (200) feet are provided for trucks entering and leaving the site, and that the truck traffic so generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impede traffic movement. 
[9]  Theaters, including drive-in theaters, provided that for drive-in theaters acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least two hundred (200) feet in length are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume or concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movements, and provided the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, or arterial or collector street located within two thousand (2,000) feet of such screen. 
[10]  Any permitted use in C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District. 
[11]  Shopping centers, subject to the shopping center guidelines contained in Section 23.12 governing the construction of shopping centers. 
[12]  Veterinary hospital or clinic, provided any structure or open area used for such purpose shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from a residential district. 
[13]  Ambulance services. 
[14]  Automobile parking garages or lots. 
[15]  Recreation, amusement, and entertainment facilities. 
[16]  Boat sales, indoor and outdoor. 
[17]  Bowling alleys. 
[18]  Farm implements, feed and grain sales and storage. 
[19]  Automobile, truck, and trailer rentals. 
[20]  Outside retail sales, display of merchandise and storage pursuant to Section 14.02. 
[21]  Travel trailer parks, when located adjacent to a freeway, expressway, or arterial street, subject to the requirements of Section 23.06. 
[22]  Bars, taverns, saloons or restaurants with alcohol. 
[23]  Group personal care homes and supportive living homes. 
[24]  Auction house. (Amended February 22, 1982, ZA82-02-02) 
[25]  Multifamily dwellings with the density in accordance with Section 11.06, except the minimum lot size shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Amended June 13, 1983, ZA83-06-01) 
[26]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[27]  Trade shops including sheet metal, roofing, upholstering, electrical, plumbing, venetian blind, cabinet making and carpentry, rug and carpet cleaning and sign painting shops, provided that all operations are conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any openings, other than stationary windows or doors for pedestrian ingress and egress, facing a residential district within one hundred (100) feet of any such district. (Amended February 25, 1985, ZA85-02-01) 
[28]  Convalescent homes. (Added December 16, 1985, ZA85-12-02) 
[29]  Dance halls and night clubs. (Added July 13, 1987, ZA87-07-01) 
[30]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[31]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[32]  Hospitals, sanitariums, clinics and convalescent or nursing homes. (Added February 26, 2007, ZA07-02-01) 
[33]  Self service ice machines provided the standards in Section 23.29 are met. (Added July 9, 2007, ZA07-07-01) 
(Added February 28, 1994, ZA94-02-02) 
Section 14.04.01. - Special exceptions. 
Adult entertainment establishments provided such establishment is in compliance with the performance standards set out in Section 23.25. 
(Added July 22, 2002, ZA02-07-03) 
Section 14.05. - Lot and area requirements. 
No development or construction shall be located on a tract containing less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
Section 14.06. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures, as measured from: 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 40 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 40 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 40 feet 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 25 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 25 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 25 feet 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 

 
[4]  Special setbacks: See Section 32.09. 
Section 14.07. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as allowed by Section 4.03. The commission may, however, allow construction and erection of buildings or structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that any application to exceed the maximum permitted height shall be treated as an application for a conditional use. 
Section 14.08. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
Section 14.09. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Chapter 15 - C-5—NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE CENTER DISTRICT 

Section 15.01. - Intent. 
The purpose of this zone is to provide locations for small convenience shopping facilities. These facilities are intended to serve the daily or frequent trade or service needs of immediate surrounding populations. 
Section 15.02. - Required conditions. 
Retail sales, displays of merchandise, and storage must be within a completely enclosed building, except that the commission may grant an exception to this requirement (as a conditional use) where it finds that enforcement would create an unreasonable hardship. This district shall be limited to developments not exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross leasable floor area. 
Section 15.03. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Convenience food stores. 
[2]  Variety and dry goods stores. 
[3]  Drug stores. 
[4]  Barber or beauty shops. 
[5]  Specialty food stores. 
[6]  Art, craft, and antique shops. 
[7]  Bakery not employing more than ten (10) persons. 
[8]  Bicycle (but not motorcycle) stores. 
[9]  Book, stationery, camera, and photography supply stores and newsstands. 
[10]  Confectionery stores. 
[11]  Florist and gift shops. 
[12]  Grocery, fruit, vegetable, meat market, delicatessen and catering stores (but not supermarkets). 
[13]  Hardware and paint stores. 
[14]  Beverage stores including the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
[15]  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. 
(Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 15.04. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Restaurants including restaurants with alcohol consumed-on-premises and ice cream parlors. (Amended November 14, 1988, ZA88-11-01) 
[2]  Medical, dental and professional offices. (Amended April 24, 1989, ZA89-04-02) 
[3]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[4]  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations and self-service laundries. 
[5]  Shopping centers not exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross leasable floor area. Business or activities located within the shopping center must be only those listed within Sections 15.03 and 15.04. No business or activity shall exceed seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. Shopping center guidelines contained in Section 23.12 govern the construction of shopping centers. 
[6]  Outside retail sales, display of merchandise and storage pursuant to Section 15.02. 
[7]  Recreational, amusement, and entertainment facilities. 
[8]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[9]  Pet shops and pet grooming establishments. 
[10]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(Added October 23, 1989, ZA89-10-01) 
Section 15.05. - Lot and area requirements. 
None. 
Section 15.06. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures, as measured from: 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 35 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 35 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 35 feet 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 25 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 25 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 25 feet 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 

 
Section 15.07. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet, except as allowed by Section 4.03. 
Section 15.08. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
Section 15.09. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Chapter 16 - M-1—WHOLESALE AND LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Section 16.01. - Intent. 
The M-1 district is intended for wholesale and light industrial uses where resultant noise, odors, pollution, and congestion are minimized. Residential development is prohibited. This district is not suitable for heavy industrial uses. 
Section 16.02. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Office buildings. 
[2]  Ice plants. 
[3]  Public utility structures and buildings, excluding communication towers and antennas, but including electric and natural gas substations, telephones exchanges, radio and television stations, and similar structures for the storage of supplies, equipment, or service operations when properly screened as required in Section 4.08. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[4]  Automobile, travel trailer, and mobile home sales (new and used) which need not be enclosed, but any mechanical or body repair must be conducted entirely within a structure which shall not have any openings, other than a stationary window or door for pedestrian egress and ingress facing a residential district within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district, and provided further that all vehicles on a used car sales lot must be in operating condition at all times. 
[5]  Vehicle repair garages, mechanical and body, provided all operations are conducted in a building which shall not store or otherwise maintain any parts or waste material outside such building. 
[6]  Vehicle laundries or car washes, provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain the number of vehicles at two hundred (200) square feet per vehicle equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machines, and in addition, that curb breaks be limited to two (2), each not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width, and located not closer than twenty (20) feet to an intersection. 
[7]  Drive-in restaurants. 
[8]  Milk bottling and distribution plants and ice cream manufacturing plants. 
[9]  Dry cleaning and laundry facilities. 
[10]  Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided any structure used for such purpose shall not be any closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential district. 
[11]  Recreation, amusement, and entertainment establishments. 
[12]  Contractors' storage and equipment yards when located entirely within a building, fenced area, or screened as provided in Section 4.08. 
[13]  Building and lumber supply establishments, provided the entire storage area is properly screened as may be required by the commission. 
[14]  Establishments for repair, assembly or processing and light manufacturing, including: 
(a)  Confectionery manufacturing; 
(b)  Clothing and garment manufacturing; 
(c)  Laboratories for testing materials, chemical analysis, photographic processing; 
(d)  Manufacturing and assembly of scientific, optical and electronic equipment; 
(e)  Manufacturing of musical instruments and parts; 
(f)  Manufacturing of souvenirs and novelties; 
(g)  Manufacturing of toys, and sporting and athletic goods; and 
(h)  Other light manufacturing activity similar in character and type to those permitted in subsections (a) through (g) above. 
[15]  Wholesale warehouses, provided that no new rail lead tracks are included and that any outside storage must be fenced or screened in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.08. 
[16]  Vehicle service stations, provided that the requirements in Section 23.11 are met. 
[17]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. 
(Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 16.03. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Churches and other places of worship with attendant educational and recreational buildings. 
[2]  Clinics. 
[3]  Theaters, including drive-in theaters, provided that for drive-in theaters acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least two hundred (200) feet in length are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume or concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movement, and provided that the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, arterial or collector street located within two thousand (2,000) feet of such screen. 
[4]  Bus, railroad, and air terminals. 
[5]  Places of assembly including auditoriums, stadiums, coliseums and dance halls. 
[6]  Produce and farmers' markets. 
[7]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[8]  Motels and hotels when located adjacent to a state or federal highway and containing a minimum lot area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
[9]  Commercial parking garages or lots, provided that no entrance or exit will be on the same side of the street and within the same block as a school and that curb breaks be limited to two (2) for each one hundred (100) feet of street frontage, each not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width and not to be located closer than twenty (20) feet to a street intersection. 
[10]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[11]  Truck terminals, provided that lanes of two hundred (200) feet long are provided for trucks entering or leaving the site and that the truck traffic so generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impede traffic movement. 
[12]  Wholesale warehouses requiring new rail lead tracks, provided that any outside storage must be fenced or screened in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.08. 
[13]  Auto auctions. 
[14]  Development of natural resources including the removal of minerals and natural materials together with necessary buildings, machinery, and appurtenances related thereto, provided that the requirements of Section 23.17 are met. 
[15]  Trade shops including sheet metal, roofing, upholstering, electrical, plumbing, venetian blind, cabinet making and carpentry, rug and carpet cleaning, and sign painting, provided that all operations are conducted entirely within a building. 
[16]  Food processing plants, such as bakeries, meat packers, or fish and poultry houses. 
[17]  Frozen dessert and milk processing plants. 
[18]  Any other establishment for the manufacture, repair, assembly, or processing of materials similar in nature to those listed in Section 16.03 which is not objectionable by reason of smoke, dust, odor, bright lights, noise, or vibration. 
[19]  Shopping centers, provided that the guidelines contained in Section 23.12 governing the construction of shopping centers are met. 
[20]  Mobile home units for the exclusive use of a watchman or caretaker when located on the same tract as the industrial use, provided the unit meets the requirements of the Macon-Bibb County Bureau of Inspections and Fees, Macon-Bibb County Health Department, and Section 4.06[3] of these regulations. 
[21]  All permitted uses in a C-2 General Commercial District. Residential uses shall only be in areas originally developed as residential and shall continue to exist as predominantly residential. (Any restrictions in this resolution concerning the location of a commercial or industrial use adjacent to a residential area or structure shall not apply to any residential structure permitted under this subsection.) (Amended January 13, 1986, ZA86-01-01; Amended August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
[22]  Auction house. (Amended February 22, 1982, ZA82-02-02) 
[23]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[24]  Aboveground storage tanks and containers for Class 2 or 3 flammable liquids (said classification being according to the Fire Codes of the City of Macon). (Amended November 19, 1984, ZA84-11-02; October 14, 1985, ZA85-10-01) 
[25]  Group personal care homes and supportive living homes. (Amended November 19, 1984, ZA84-11-03; October 14, 1985, ZA85-10-01) 
[26]  Mini-warehouses, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Shall be limited to storage only. 
(b)  All storage shall be within the building area. 
(c)  No auctions or commercial sales or uses shall be conducted on the site. 
(d)  A fencing and landscaping plan shall be approved by the commission. (Added February 13, 1989, ZA89-02-01) 
[27]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[28]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[29]  RV recreational travel trailer parks when located adjacent to a freeway, expressway, or arterial street subject to the requirements of Section 23.06. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-02) 
(Added September 25, 1995, ZA95-09-01) 
Section 16.04. - Lot and area requirements. 
No development or construction shall be located on a tract containing less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
Section 16.05. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures, as measured from: 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of-way lines: 

 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 

 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 

 
[4]  Special setbacks ..... see Section 32.09 
Section 16.06. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as allowed by Section 4.03. The commission may, however, allow construction and erection of buildings or structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that any application to exceed the maximum permitted height shall be treated as an application for a conditional use. 
Section 16.07. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
Section 16.08. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Chapter 17 - M-2—HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Section 17.01. - Intent. 
The M-2 Heavy Industrial District is intended to provide appropriate locations for any use which may be obnoxious or offensive by reason of emission of odors, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or vibration. Residential uses are prohibited in this district. 
Section 17.02. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  All permitted uses in M-1 Wholesale and Light Industrial District. 
[2]  Theaters, including drive-in theaters, provided that for drive-in theaters acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least two hundred (200) feet in length are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume or concentration of traffic will not constitute a safety hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movement, and provided that the screen is not visible from any expressway, freeway, or arterial or collector street located within two thousand (2,000) feet of such area. 
[3]  Places of assembly including auditoriums, coliseums, and stadiums. 
[4]  Produce and farmers' markets. 
[5]  Commercial parking garages or lots, provided that no entrance or exit will be on the same side of the street and within the same block as a school and that curb breaks be limited to two (2) for each one hundred (100) feet of street frontage, each not to exceed thirty (30) feet in width and not located closer than twenty (20) feet to a street intersection. 
[6]  Truck terminals, provided that acceleration and deceleration lanes of at least two hundred (200) feet long are provided for trucks entering or leaving the site and that the truck traffic so generated will not create a safety hazard or unduly impede traffic movement. 
[7]  Warehouses. 
[8]  Auto auctions. 
[9]  Development of natural resources, including the removal of minerals and natural materials together with necessary buildings, machinery, and appurtenances related thereto, provided the requirements of Section 23.17 are met. 
[10]  Trade shops, including sheet metal, roofing, upholstering, electrical, plumbing, venetian blind, cabinet making and carpentry, rug and carpet cleaning, and sign painting, provided operations are conducted entirely within a building. 
[11]  Agriculture, forestry, livestock and poultry production, provided that the operation is conducted on a tract of land not less than ten (10) acres in area and that no structure containing poultry or livestock and no storage of manure or odor- or dust-producing substance or use shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of a property line. 
[12]  Dwellings, excluding mobile homes, for the exclusive use of a watchman or caretaker when located on the same tract as the industrial use, and subject to all dimensional and area requirements of R-3 Multifamily Residential District. 
[13]  Food processing plants, such as bakeries, meat packers, or fish and poultry houses. 
[14]  Frozen dessert and milk processing plants. 
[15]  Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repairing and servicing of any product except those conditional uses set forth in Section 17.03[7], or any other use that may endanger the public health, welfare, and safety. 
[16]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. (Amended October 22, 1990, ZA90-10-01) 
[17]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. 
(Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 17.03. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Bus, railroad, and air terminals. 
[2]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[3]  Motels and hotels when located adjacent to a state or federal highway and containing a minimum lot area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
[4]  Outside aboveground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil, or other inflammable liquids or gases, but not when located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential district. 
[5]  Junkyards (automobile wrecking yard), provided the following provisions are met: 
(a)  No such operation shall be permitted to be located closer than three hundred (300) feet to a residential district and no closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line; 
(b)  No such operation shall be permitted to be located on or facing a state or federal highway; 
(c)  All such operations, except driveway areas, shall be completely enclosed by an opaque fence or wall, having a minimum height of six (6) feet, but in no case less than such a height as will effectively screen all operations from view; and 
(d)  The number of vehicular driveways permitted on any single street frontage shall be limited to one (1) per five hundred (500) feet with a maximum of twenty (20) feet driveway width. 
[6]  Mobile home units for the exclusive use of a watchman or caretaker when located on the same tract as the industrial use and subject to all dimensional and area requirements of the R-3 district, provided the unit meets the requirements of mobile home units located in a mobile home park as specified by the Macon-Bibb County Bureau of Inspections and Fees. 
[7]  Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repairing and servicing of any commodity or product such as the following: 
(a)  Manufacturing of acetylene gas or storage thereof; acid, asbestos, ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine, asphalt or products thereof; cement, lime gypsum or plaster of Paris, coal tar or derivatives thereof; creosote or creosote treatment, clay, tile or vitrified products, emery cloth or sand paper, explosives or fireworks or storage thereof; fertilizer, glue or gelatine, linoleum, matches, paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish, rubber and soda compounds, and alcohol distillation; and 
(b)  Petroleum refining, tanning, curing, storage of hides and skins, boiler works, foundry or forge operations, incineration, reduction or dumping of offal, dead animals, garbage or refuse, fat rendering, junk iron, rags, storage and baling, and distillation of bones, coal, or wood. 
[8]  Sanitary landfills, subject to the requirements of Section 23.14. 
[9]  Shopping centers, provided that the guidelines contained in Section 23.12 governing the construction of shopping centers are met. 
[10]  Any retail uses that are consistent with the heavy industrial character of the district, including products manufactured on the premises and the following: 
(a)  Electrical supplies; 
(b)  Heating and plumbing equipment; 
(c)  Dairy products; 
(d)  Bakeries; 
(e)  Sporting goods and recreational equipment; 
(f)  Farm and garden supplies; 
(g)  Home building supplies; 
(h)  Appliance stores including repairs and service; 
(i)  Furniture and home furnishings stores; 
(j)  Tires, batteries and other automotive accessories, including the installation of accessories sold; and 
(k)  Clothing, shoe, millinery, dry good and notion stores. 
[11]  Auction house. (Amended February 22, 1982, ZA82-02-02) 
[12]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[13]  Trade or business schools, colleges and universities. (Added December 16, 1985, ZA85-12-01) 
[14]  Mini-warehouses, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Shall be limited to storage only. 
(b)  All storage shall be within the building area. 
(c)  No auctions or commercial sales or uses shall be conducted on the site. 
(d)  A fencing and landscaping plan shall be approved by the commission. (Added February 13, 1989, ZA89-02-01) 
[15]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[16]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. 
(Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 17.03.01. - Special exceptions. 
Adult entertainment establishments provided such establishment is in compliance with the performance standards set out in Section 23.25. 
(Added July 22, 2002, ZA02-07-03) 
Section 17.04. - Lot and area requirements. 
None, except that no development or construction shall be located on a tract containing less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
Section 17.05. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures, as measured from: 
[1]  Arterial and collector right-of-way lines: 

 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 

 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 

 
[4]  Special setbacks ..... ..... See Section 32.09 
Section 17.06. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as allowed by Section 4.03. The commission may, however, allow construction and erection of buildings or structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that any application to exceed the maximum permitted height shall be treated as an application for a conditional use. 
Section 17.07. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
Section 17.08. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Chapter 18 - M-3—HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Section 18.01. - Intent. 
The M-3 district is intended to provide areas for heavy industrial activities, where the uses require that some noise, vibration or other environmental pollutants must be tolerated. This district is intended for use by the larger manufacturing operations, heavy equipment, construction and fuel yards, major transportation terminals and other basic industrial activities required by an urban economy. 
Section 18.02. - Required conditions. 
All uses listed are permitted; however, such uses in appropriate situations may be subject to such conditions as required by the staff and commission to protect neighboring properties from any harmful effects that may be caused by noise, vibration, dust, or any other effect that may endanger the public health, welfare, and safety. 
Section 18.03. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Bus, railroad, motor, freight, and air terminals. This includes storage and inspection yards, railroad switching and classification yards, and railroad car and locomotive repair shops. 
[2]  Contractor's office, shop and storage. 
[3]  Heavy equipment sales, service, rental, and storage. 
[4]  Lumber yards, fuel yards, and building material yards to include rock, sand, and gravel. 
[5]  Manufacturing, processing, fabrication, repairing and servicing of any commodity or product. All federal or state requirements must be satisfied prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance. 
[6]  Sanitary landfills, subject to the requirements of Section 23.14. 
[7]  Food processing plants. 
[8]  Outside aboveground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquified petroleum gas, oil, or other inflammable liquids or gases, but not when located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential district. 
[9]  Junkyards (automobile wrecking yard) provided the following provisions are met: 
(a)  No such operation shall be permitted to be located closer than three hundred (300) feet to a residential district and no closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line; 
(b)  No such operation shall be permitted to be located on or facing a state or federal highway; 
(c)  All such operations, except driveway areas, shall be completely enclosed by an opaque fence or wall, having a minimum height of six (6) feet, but in no case less than such a height as will effectively screen all operations from view; and 
(d)  The number of vehicular driveways permitted on any single street frontage shall be limited to one (1) per five hundred (500) feet with a maximum of twenty (20) feet driveway width. 
[10]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. 
(Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 18.03.01. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Reserved. (Deleted March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
[2]  Mini-warehouses, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Shall be limited to storage only. 
(b)  All storage shall be within the building area. 
(c)  No auctions or commercial sales or uses shall be conducted on the site. 
(d)  A fencing and landscaping plan shall be approved by the commission. (Added February 13, 1989, ZA89-02-01) 
[3]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Added September 25, 1995, ZA95-09-01; Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[4]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. 
(Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Section 18.03.02. - Special exceptions. 
Adult entertainment establishments provided such establishment is in compliance with the performance standards set out in Section 23.25. 
(Added July 22, 2002, ZA02-07-03) 
Section 18.04. - Lot and area requirements. 
None, except that no development or construction shall be located on a tract containing less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
Section 18.05. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum setback requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures, as measured from: 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of way lines: 

 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 

 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 

 
Section 18.06. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as allowed by Section 4.03. The commission may, however, allow construction and erection of buildings or structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that any application to exceed the maximum permitted height shall be treated as an application for a conditional use. 
Section 18.07. - Off-street parking and loading space regulations. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
Section 18.08. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
Chapter 19 - PDR, PDC, PDI AND PDE—PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 

Section 19.01. - Intent of districts. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide greater design flexibility in the development of land consistent with the comprehensive development plan. The use of planned development zoning classifications should be encouraged when they promote a harmonious variety of uses, provide for an economy of shared services and facilities, are compatible with surrounding areas, and foster the creation of attractive, healthful, efficient, and stable environments for living, shopping or working. 
The planned development district regulations and procedures may apply to the development of presently open or vacant lands and may apply to parcels of relatively small size as well as large scale development, depending upon the nature of the proposed use and improvements and their relationship with other surrounding uses and the overall characteristics of the area in which they are located. 
Planned development district regulations are intended to encourage innovations in land development techniques so that the changing demands of the community may be met with greater flexibility and variety in type, design, and layout of sites and buildings and by the conversion and more efficient use of open spaces and other amenities generally enhancing the quality of life. 
Planned development projects should also encourage a more efficient use of land which reflects changes in the technology and economics of land development so that resulting economies may accrue to the benefit of the community at large. 
PDR, PDC, PDI and PDE districts differ from each other in the nature of the uses permitted. 
Section 19.02. - Eligibility requirements for planned development districts. 
In determining the eligibility of an area of land or development for designation as a planned development district, the commission must find that one (1) or more of the following conditions exists: 
[1]  More than one (1) principal use of land or separate uses of land, which would not be permitted to locate within the same district, are proposed for development on a parcel(s) under single ownership or unified control; 
[2]  Development standards contained elsewhere in these regulations would not permit the proposed development; and 
[3]  Controlled development of a parcel(s) of land is necessary to reduce the adverse impact of a proposed use on neighboring properties. 
Section 19.03. - Uses allowed and development standards for each planned development district. 
Listed below by district are the uses allowed and development standards for each district. All uses allowed hereunder shall be treated as a conditional use. (Amended October 24, 1988, ZA88-10-02) 
[1]  PDR—Planned Development Residential. This district is intended primarily for residential development, emphasizing flexibility in design to permit varying densities as circumstances may require. Limited retail sales and services may be allowed. 
(a)  Uses allowed: 
(i)  All residential uses in residential districts. (Amended October 24, 1988, ZA88-10-02) 
(ii)  Multifamily developments. 
(iii)  Residential cluster developments. 
(iv)  Retail and service uses limited to the following: convenience stores, bakeries, confectioneries, drug stores, barber and beauty shops, branch post offices, and laundromats. Such uses are to be designed for the service and convenience of the population living within the PDR. 
(v)  Recreation areas and structures, including private clubs. 
(vi)  Public utility structures and uses excluding communication towers and antennas. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(vii)  Public and private schools and libraries. 
(viii)  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(ix)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(x)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any use allowed in this district. 
(xi)  Group personal care homes, supportive living homes, nursing homes and similar uses. (Added December 8, 1986, ZA86-12-01) 
(xii)  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(xiii)  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(b)  Development standards: 
(i)  The size of the proposed PDR district shall be approved by the commission. 
(ii)  Not less than eighty (80) percent of the interior floor area of all buildings to be included in the development shall be used for residential dwellings or customary accessories to such dwellings. 
(iii)  Not more than five (5) percent of the interior floor area of all buildings shall be used for commercial purposes as defined in Section 19.03[1](a)(iv). 
(iv)  Multifamily dwelling units shall be connected to public sewer and be arranged to provide an access for fire fighting as certified by the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department. 
(v)  Residential cluster developments shall be developed in accordance with Section 23.02. 
(vi)  Development within the district shall maintain a harmonious relationship with adjacent uses and between uses within the district. 
(vii)  Lot size, density, yard requirements, height requirements, parking, and other development standards shall be established by the commission. 
(viii)  Only business signs two (2) feet square in area are permitted and no neon or other self-illuminated signs shall be used either on the exterior or in windows, and all signs shall be attached flat to the face of the building. 
[2]  PDC—Planned Development Commercial. This district is intended primarily for commercial or other nonresidential uses, emphasizing flexibility in design. 
(a)  Uses allowed: 
(i)  Any commercial use in any commercial zoning district under this resolution, except residential uses. 
(ii)  Theaters (indoor). 
(iii)  Public utility buildings and structures, excluding communication towers and antennas. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(iv)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(v)  Private and public schools and libraries. 
(vi)  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(vii)  Recreation areas and structures including private clubs, bowling alleys, skating rinks, and the like. 
(viii)  Places of assembly including auditoriums, stadiums and coliseums. 
(ix)  Motels when located on a state or federal highway. 
(x)  Shopping centers containing uses which are otherwise allowed in this section. 
(xi)  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(b)  Development standards: 
(i)  The size of the proposed PDC district shall be approved by the commission. 
(ii)  Development within the district must maintain a harmonious relationship with adjacent areas and between areas within the district. 
(iii)  Lot size, density, yard requirements, height requirements, signs, parking, and other development standards as approved by the commission. 
[3]  PDI—Planned Development Industrial: 
(a)  Uses allowed: Manufacturing and industrial uses and such commercial uses as reasonably relate to the support or convenience of the intended industrial uses or their occupants. Communication towers and antennas shall be subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(b)  Development standards: 
(i)  The size of the proposed PDI district shall be approved by the commission. 
(ii)  Not less than eighty (80) percent of the interior floor area of all buildings to be included in the development shall be used for industrial or manufacturing purposes or such accessory uses customarily relating to industrial uses. 
(iii)  Lot size, density, yard requirements, height requirements, signs, parking, and other development standards as approved by the commission. 
(c)  Special exceptions. 
(i)  Adult entertainment establishments provided such establishment is in compliance with the performance standards set out in Section 23.25. 
[4]  PDE—Planned Development Extraordinary: 
(a)  Uses allowed: Any use allowed in PDR, PDC and PDI districts. To be eligible for this district, a development plan must not be otherwise distinguishable under any previous planned development classification. Communication towers and antennas shall be subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(b)  Development standards: 
(i)  The size of the proposed PDE district shall be approved by the commission. 
(ii)  Development within the district must maintain a harmonious relationship with adjacent areas and between areas within the district. 
(iii)  Lot size, density, yard requirements, height requirements, signs, parking, and other development standards as approved by the commission. 
(Amended July 22, 2002, ZA02-07-03) 
Section 19.04. - Two-step procedure required for planned development districts. 
Creation of planned development districts requires, first, the approval of the commission to rezone the land in question from its present zoning classification to a planned development classification and, second, site plan approval by the commission, which approval permits issuance of a special zoning permit allowing construction to begin. 
Section 19.05. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. ZA97-04-04, adopted May 27, 1997, repealed Section 19.05, which pertained to origination of application for PD designation; who may originate. See the Comparative Table. 
Section 19.06. - Application procedures for rezoning to planned development districts. 
It is the intention of this section of the land development resolution that proposals for planned development be of such community significance and concern that they be made at the early planning stages in order to allow time for full evaluation and orderly processing, to consider alternative plans or methods of development, to assess the full impact and consequences of the proposal, to formulate modifications or conditions that may be necessary, and to provide ample opportunity to determine the best means for implementation. The planning and zoning commission may, from time to time, promulgate such guidelines, rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary for the orderly presentation and processing of such proposals in addition to those contained in this section, which guidelines may also establish permanent or temporary priorities on the type, location or scale of the development proposed. 
[1]  Submission of application. Application for a planned development district shall be submitted to the commission through its zoning enforcement officer or designated staff member. 
[2]  General requirements: 
(a)  An application for a planned development district shall conform to all requirements of Chapter 28, except as may otherwise be required by this section. Applications shall be submitted thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing at which the application will be heard by the commission. 
(b)  An application for a planned development district shall indicate the requested category and shall be accompanied by a conceptual plan for the development of the site. 
[3]  Submission requirements for the conceptual plan. The conceptual plan shall consist of text, maps, drawings and any other information which the applicant may deem necessary to support his application. The application shall clearly describe how the proposed development of the site will meet the standards and purposes of the planned development district. Such text, maps and drawings may be conceptual and shall include the following information: 
(a)  A graphic representation of existing topography, major vegetative growth, floodplains, significant water bodies, landfills, rock outcroppings and areas of historic significance. 
(b)  A land use plan indicating: the location and use of all buildings, which will include, where applicable, the numbers and types of dwelling units; the location and type of community and recreational facilities; open spaces, including developed open spaces, and those to be preserved in their existing state; location of land to be dedicated to public use; and points of access to the site, pedestrian and vehicular circulation ways, and parking spaces. 
(c)  A statement and analysis demonstrating the manner in which the proposed development will result in a more efficient and desirable development than could be accomplished by the use of conventional zoning categories. 
(d)  Statements relating to proposed restrictions, agreements or other documents indicating the manner in which any land intended for common or quasi-public use but not proposed to be in public ownership will be held, owned and maintained in perpetuity for the indicated purpose. 
(e)  A list of proposed development standards consisting of lot area or size, yard setbacks, lot widths at building lines, building heights, maximum lot coverage of buildings and structures, distances between all structures and buildings and parking requirements. 
(f)  Such other material as the applicant may consider of importance in the evaluation of the plan or as the commission may require in order to evaluate the proposed planned development with the requirements and purposes of the planned development district. 
Section 19.07. - Action of zoning enforcement officer upon submission of application for planned development district. 
The zoning enforcement officer shall process the application utilizing the following procedures: 
[1]  The zoning enforcement officer shall review the proposal to determine if it meets the requirements of these regulations. 
[2]  The zoning enforcement officer shall transmit the application and any accompanying material to the planning staff for review. The planning staff shall prepare a professional opinion regarding: 
(a)  The verification of data shown on the application or in accompanying materials; 
(b)  The proposed development's relationship with existing zoning regulations and with the comprehensive development plan; 
(c)  The compatibility of the proposed development with surrounding development; and 
(d)  Such other factors or considerations as may be appropriate considering the merit of the proposed development. 
[3]  Upon completion of the application procedure and the requirements of Sections 19.07[1] and [2], the matter will be placed on the agenda for rezoning by the commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 28. 
Section 19.08. - Action of the commission on application for planned development district. 
[1]  The commission will hear the application in accordance with the procedures outlined in Section 28.06. 
[2]  Approval of the application by the commission will be by amendment to the official zoning maps reflecting the planned development classification approved. Such approval is land use approval only and shall not constitute approval of any site plan submitted with the application. 
[3]  In the event the commission rezones the property, it shall have the power to approve the rezoning subject to such restrictions, conditions, or limitations as it may deem appropriate. 
[4]  The approval of the conceptual and/or final site plan for a planned development shall not expire until two (2) years after approval of the same, but may be amended upon application to the commission. (Added November 14, 2011, ZA11-004) 
[5]  Any use which conforms to the approved planned development conceptual and/or final site planned design standards may be approved by staff without further action of the Commission. (Added November 14, 2011, ZA11-004) 
[6]  A conceptual and/or final site plan may be approved to include permitted uses. (Added November 14, 2011, ZA11-004) 
Section 19.09. - Procedures after rezoning. 
Following approval by the Commission of the rezoning and general conceptual plan application, the applicant will submit to the zoning enforcement officer a conditional use application for a detailed conceptual site plan approval. The detailed conceptual plan shall include development densities, street patterns, lot area and width and setbacks. 
The zoning enforcement officer shall process the site plan utilizing the following procedures: 
[1]  The zoning enforcement officer shall review the site plan to determine if the plan meets the requirements of these regulations and the conditions of the previously approved rezoning and general conceptual plan application. 
[2]  The staff shall prepare a professional opinion regarding: 
(a)  The verification of data shown on the site plan or in the accompanying materials; 
(b)  The site plan's relationship with existing zoning regulations and with the comprehensive development plan; 
(c)  The compatibility of the site plan with surrounding development; and 
(d)  Building plans showing the architectural layout for all floors and architectural elevations. 
(e)  Such other factors or considerations as may be appropriate considering the merit of the site plan. 
[3]  Upon completion of the application procedure and the requirements of Sections 19.09[1] and [2], the matter will be placed on the Commission agenda for detailed conceptual plan approval. 
[4]  Once a zoning permit is issued for the detailed conceptual plan, subsequent applications for final site plan approval for various portions of the project can be issued at staff level provided the final site plan is consistent with the detailed conceptual plan approved by the Commission. Submission of an application for final site plan approval shall include agreements, deed restrictions, and/or covenants to ensure that functions, and facilities as approved are provided, operated, or maintained without public (city or county) expense, and all applicable departmental approvals. 
If the proposed plan is not consistent with the previously approved detailed conceptual plan, the application must be placed on a Commission agenda and must be heard at a public hearing. 
(Amended November 14, 2011, ZA11-004) 
Section 19.10. - Requirements for site plan. 
Each site plan shall become a part of the initial application and shall include the following requirements (if not previously incorporated within the conceptual plan): 
[1]  Be in accordance with the conceptual plan, or as it may have been amended by the commission, to include stated development standards; 
[2]  Include all of the information required for the submission of a preliminary subdivision plan, as set forth in Chapter 29 of this resolution; 
[3]  Include a grading plan, showing the existing topography and proposed grading of the site at contour intervals of not more than five (5) feet; 
[4]  Show water runoff drawings, calculations, and plans for soil erosion and sedimentation control, both during and after construction, pursuant to Chapter 31; 
[5]  Show existing vegetation, tree line, and other natural features, rock outcroppings, bodies of water and watercourses, and the hundred-year floodplain; 
[6]  Show location, height, ground coverage, and use of all structures and location and areas of open spaces, parking facilities and areas dedicated to public spaces. Calculations of building coverage, numbers of parking spaces, and areas devoted to open spaces shall also be indicated; 
[7]  Show all utility service lines, and all easements and rights-of-way, existing or proposed; 
[8]  Show adjacent highways and streets serving the site, noting centerlines, widths of paving, grades, and median break points; 
[9]  Show the location, dimensions, and grades of all roads, streets, driveways, parking facilities, loading areas, points of access surrounding streets, and pedestrian walks and pathways; 
[10]  Provide building plans showing the architectural layout for all floors and architectural elevations; 
[11]  Show, for each residential structure, the number and type of dwelling units; 
[12]  Floor areas of all nonresidential buildings shall be shown; 
[13]  Contain a landscaping and screening plan, showing all man-made features and the location, size, and species of all planting materials; 
[14]  Contain an exterior lighting plan, covering all parking areas, driveways, and pedestrian ways, and including the height, number, and type of fixtures to be installed; 
[15]  Show the location of all public schools, parks, and other community recreational facilities, indicating the location and use of all land to be dedicated to public use; 
[16]  Provide documents indicating in detail the manner in which any land intended for common or quasi-public use, but not proposed to be in public ownership, will be held, owned, and maintained in perpetuity for the indicated purposes; 
[17]  If a detailed site plan is one of a number of detailed site plans within a planned development, each detailed site plan shall show how it is related to and coordinated with other detailed site plans, either completed, under construction, or yet to be submitted; and 
[18]  Contain any additional information which may be required by the commission in order to enable it to evaluate the detailed site plan. 
Section 19.11. - Binding nature of rezoning to planned development district. 
[1]  All terms, conditions, safeguards, and stipulations made or imposed at the time of rezoning to a planned development district shall be binding upon the applicant or any successors in interest. Deviations from approved plans or failure to comply with any requirement, condition, or safeguard without commission approval shall constitute a violation of these zoning regulations. Any proposed amendment, change, or deviation from the approved developments must be approved by the commission under the provisions of Section 19.09. 
[2]  Where a planned development project is proposed in phases and the commission finds that the development of all phases is necessary for the development of any part to be approved, the commission may require that the applicant agree to the following: [1] 
(a)  Proceed with the proposed development according to the provisions of these zoning regulations and the proposed development plan for the area and such conditions as may be attached to the rezoning of the land to a planned development district; 
(b)  Provide agreements, contracts, deed restrictions, and sureties acceptable to the commission for completion of the development according to the plans approved at the time of rezoning to PD and for continuing operation and maintenance of such areas, functions, and facilities as are not to be provided, operated, or maintained at public expense; and 
(c)  Bind their successors in title to any commitments made under (a) and (b) preceding. 
All such agreements and evidence of unified control shall be examined by the commission attorney and no rezoning of land to a planned development classification shall be adopted without a certification by the commission attorney that such agreements and evidence of unified control meet the requirements of these zoning regulations. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The word "that" was added by the editors. 

Chapter 20A - AH1—AIRPORT HAZARD DISTRICT—HERBERT SMART[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment No. ZA94-03-02, adopted March 14, 1994, added a new ch. 20A, §§ 20A.01—20A.06, to read as herein set out. 

Section 20A.01. - Intent. 
The intent of this district is to regulate and restrict the height of structures and objects of natural growth, and to otherwise regulate the use of property in the vicinity of the Herbert Smart Airport; to prevent development of high density residential dwellings or the concentration of large numbers of persons in those areas subject to low-flying aircraft in the process of normal operation, to protect flying aircraft by limiting the height of structures and trees, and to establish noise control ones and noise regulations in the vicinity of the airport. 
(Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Section 20A.02. - Supplemental definitions. 
These definitions shall be used in addition to those in Chapter 1 of this resolution. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
[1]  Height. For the purpose of determining the height limit in all zones shown on the airspace zoning maps, the datum shall be mean sea level (MSL) unless otherwise specified. 
[2]  Primary surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway, the extended lengths and widths being shown on the airspace zoning maps. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
[3]  Zones; approach, transitional, horizontal and conical. These zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical surfaces defined in the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), Part 77, and shown on the Airspace Zoning Maps for Herbert Smart Airport, dated December, 1975. The FAR, Part 77, surfaces are also referred to as "imaginary surfaces." 
(Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Section 20A.03. - Airport zones governing height limitations. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Herbert Smart Airport. Such zones are shown on the airspace zoning map for the Herbert Smart Airport which is referenced in Section 2.03[2]. (See Section 2.03[2].) 
These zones shall be superimposed over existing use districts, and except where provided elsewhere in this section the special requirements of the hazard use district within which a specific property is located shall apply. An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. 
[1]  Establishment of zones governing height limitations. The various zones are hereby established to govern height limitations and are defined as follows: 
(a)  Approach zones. The inner edge of these zones coincides with the width of the primary surfaces, and the horizontal dimensions are the same as those shown on the airspace zoning maps for the respective approach surfaces. 
(b)  Transitional zones. Slope seven (7) feet outward for outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation which is four hundred sixty-three (463) feet above mean sea level for Herbert Smart Airport. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured at ninety-degree angles to the extended runaway centerline. 
(c)  Horizontal zones. The horizontal zone is hereby established as the area beneath the horizontal surface which is one hundred fifty (150) feet above the highest point of the airport runway system. 
(d)  Conical zones. Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation. 
[2]  Airport zone height limitation. Except as otherwise provided in this resolution, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or be maintained in any zone created by this resolution to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for each zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each zone in question as the elevation of the respective imaginary surfaces shown on the airspace zoning maps. Where an area is covered by more than one (1) height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
[3]  Variances. Any variance to this section which is desired by any person, corporation or agency under the provisions of Section 27.11 must, in addition, be submitted to the Federal Aviation Administration for review and comment prior to the issuance of any variance to the airport hazard district regulations. 
(Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Section 20A.04. - Noise control zones; restrictions on land use. 
[1]  Establishment of zones. Those land areas listed on the "Noise Zone Map" for Herbert Smart Airport as being within Zones Two (2) and Three (3) are established as noise control zones where restrictions on land use are imposed by this resolution. (See Section 2.03[3] for further description of maps.) 
[2]  Purpose of zones. Incompatibility is the principal land use problem that airports and neighboring land areas share. A major cause of this incompatibility is the objection to the high noise levels associated with aircraft operation, especially jets. The noise level, if excessive, will over spill the boundaries of the airfield and interfere with sleep, speech, and mental concentration. This subsequently creates incompatible conditions for schools, hospitals, and some businesses or industries and other uses. Accordingly, noise control zones are established to limit the impact of the noise problem. 
[3)  Land use. Except as specifically provided in Section 20.04[4] below, the following uses shall only be allowed as permitted or conditional uses in the following noise control zones: 
(a)  Residential uses—Noise Control Zone 1. 
(b)  Manufacturing—Noise Control Zones 2 and 3. 
(c)  Transportation, communication, and utilities—Noise Control Zones 2 and 3. 
(d)  Wholesale and retail trade—Noise Control Zone 2. 
(e)  Finance, insurance, and real estate services—Noise Control Zone 1. 
(f)  Personal and business services—Noise Control Zone 1. 
(g)  Contract construction services—Noise Control Zone 2. 
(h)  Governmental and educational facilities—Noise Control Zone 1. 
(i)  Indoor cultural and entertainment facilities—Noise Control Zone 1. 
(j)  Parks and other outdoor recreational facilities—Noise Control Zone 1. 
(k)  Resource production and extraction (including agriculture)—Noise Control Zones 2 and 3. 
[4]  Variances. Any variance to this section which is desired by any person, corporation, or agency under the provisions of Section 27.11 must, in addition: 
(a)  Provide proper soundproofing measures as approved by the bureau of inspection and fees, or 
(b)  If the person, corporation, or agency does not desire to install proper soundproofing measures, constructive notice shall be given in the deed for the subject property stating that a variance was sought under these regulations and proper soundproofing measures were not installed. 
(Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Section 20A.05. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited within five thousand (5,000) feet of all approach surfaces as described on the airspace zoning maps which are on file in the office of the commission: 
[1]  Churches, schools, lodges, clubs, theaters, and other places of public assembly; 
[2]  Multifamily dwellings in excess of four (4) units and/or which are in a group development; 
[3]  Hospitals and institutions; 
[4]  Noxious uses that emit electrical disturbances, smoke, large concentrations of light, and the like; and 
[5]  Any use which may attract a concentration of birds which might result in safety hazards for the air traffic. 
(Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Section 20A.06. - Obstruction marking and lighting. 
Any variance granted under Section 20.03[3] above may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this resolution and reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markings and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an obstruction to air navigation. 
(Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Chapter 20B - AH2—AIRPORT HAZARD DISTRICT—MIDDLE GEORGIA REGIONAL AIRPORT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment No. ZA94-03-02, adopted March 14, 1994, added a new Ch. 20B, §§ 20B.01—20B.05, to read as herein set out. 

Section 20B.01. - Intent. 
The intent of this district is to regulate and restrict the height of structures and objects of natural growth, and to otherwise regulate the use of property in the vicinity of the Middle Georgia Regional Airport (MGRA); to prevent development of high density residential dwellings or the concentration of large numbers of persons in those areas subject to low-flying aircraft in the process of normal operation, to protect flying aircraft by limiting the height of structures and trees, and to establish noise control zones and noise regulations in the vicinity of the airport. 
(Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Section 20B.02. - Supplemental definitions. 
These definitions shall be used in addition to those in Chapter 1 of this resolution. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
[1]  Height. For the purpose of determining the height limit in all zones shown on the airspace zoning maps, the datum shall be mean sea level (MSL) unless otherwise specified 
[2]  Primary surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway, the extended lengths and widths being shown on the airspace zoning maps. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
[3]  Zones; approach, transitional, horizontal and conical. These zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical surfaces defined in the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), Part 77, and shown on the Future Airspace Plan Map for Middle Georgia Regional Airport, dated November, 1988, respectively. The FAR, Part 77, surfaces are also referred to as "imaginary surfaces." 
(Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Section 20B.03. - Airport zones governing height limitations. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Middle Georgia Regional Airport. Such zones are shown on the airspace zoning map for Middle Georgia Regional Airport which is referenced in Section 2.03[2]. 
These zones shall be superimposed over existing use districts, and except where provided elsewhere in this section, the special requirements of the hazard use district within which a specific property is located shall apply. An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. 
[1]  Establishment of zones governing height limitations. The various zones are hereby established to govern height limitations and are defined as follows: 
(a)  Approach zones. The inner edge of these zones coincides with the width of the primary surfaces, and the horizontal dimensions are the same as those shown on the airspace zoning maps for the respective approach surfaces. 
(b)  Transitional zones. Slope seven (7) feet outward for outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation which is three hundred fifty-four (354) feet above mean sea level for Middle Georgia Regional Airport. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured. at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(c)  Horizontal zones. The horizontal zone is hereby established as the area beneath the horizontal surface which is one hundred fifty (150) feet above the highest point of the airport runway system. 
(d)  Conical zones. Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation. 
[2]  Airport zone height limitation. Except as otherwise provided in this resolution, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or be maintained in any zone created by this resolution to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for each zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each zone in question as the elevation of the respective imaginary surfaces shown on the airspace zoning maps. Where an area is covered by more than one (1) height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
[3]  Variances. Any variance to this section which is desired by any person, corporation or agency under the provisions of Section 27.11 must, in addition, be submitted to the Federal Aviation Administration and Civil Engineers Office of Robins Air Force Base for review and comment prior to the issuance of any variance to the airport hazard district regulations. 
(Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Section 20B.04. - Airport environs overlay zones. 
[1]  Intent. The airport environs overlay zone (AE) is hereby created with the following purposes: 
To protect the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating development and land use within noise sensitive areas; 
To ensure compatibility between surrounding land uses and Middle Georgia Regional Airport (MGRA); and 
To protect MGRA from encroachment by incompatible development 
The airport environs overlay zone (AE) shall serve as an overlay district that applies additional standards and requirements to properties located within an underlying zoning district. Proposed developments located within this zoning district shall comply with these requirements and the requirements of the underlying zoning district. In the case of conflicting standards and requirements, the more stringent standards and requirements shall apply. 
[2]  Supplemental definitions. These definitions shall be used in addition to those in Chapter 1 of this resolution. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
(a)  Aircraft noise contours. The geographic area that is affected by MGRA flight operations and defined on the basis of those areas immediately affected by the 65 Ldn and greater noise exposure area shown on the 1993 Ldn Contours with Full Noise Compatibility Program Implementation Map which is referenced in Section 2.03(b). 
(b)  Day-night sound level (Ldn). A cumulative aircraft noise index that estimates the exposure to aircraft noise at a certain geographic point and relates the estimated exposure to an expected community response. 
(c)  Ldn contour (noise control zones). A line linking together a series of points of equal cumulative noise exposure based on the Ldn metric. These contours are developed based on the Ldn metric, and are defined by aircraft flight patterns, the number of daily aircraft operations by type of aircraft and time of day, noise characteristics of each aircraft, and typical runway usage patterns. 
(d)  Structure. Any object, whether permanent, temporary, or mobile, including, but not limited to, a building, tower, crane, smokestack, earth formation, transmission line, flagpole, or sign. 
[3]  Noise control zones. The noise control zones for Middle Georgia Regional Airport are shown on the map referenced in Section 2.03[3]. The boundaries of the noise control zone, as adopted herein, shall be reviewed and amended whenever the City of Macon updates or amends its aircraft noise contour maps. It shall be the responsibility of the City of Macon to notify the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission of any such update or amendment and to provide a copy of same to the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. Copies of the current aircraft noise contour maps shall be on file and open to public inspection in the office of the commission. 
[4]  Application of regulations. Within the noise control zones, any proposed use or structure is subject to review as described herein and shall be evaluated relative to the standards and requirements provided for herein. 
[5]  Exemptions. The provisions of these regulations shall not be deemed applicable to the following when permitted in the underlying district: 
(a)  Existing uses. Uses existing on the effective date of these regulations shall not be required to change in order to comply with the requirements specified herein. The nonconforming use requirements of these regulations shall apply to the future applicability of the standards and requirements contained herein. 
(b)  Temporary used. Temporary uses, including but not limited to public celebrations and outdoor entertainment events, so long as the period of operation does not exceed five days in any one year period. A variance may be requested to extend the time period for a temporary use. 
(c)  Temporary structures. Temporary buildings and structures that are not used for residential purposes and that meet said applicable requirements as contained within these regulations so long as such uses and associated structures are constructed incidental to a permitted use (as per the requirements of these regulations), do not generate excessive glare or electrical emissions that could interfere with standard aircraft operations, and do not exceed the applicable height restrictions contained in these regulations. 
(d)  Agricultural structures. Bona fide agricultural buildings, structures, improvements, and associated nonresidential developments, provided such structures do not exceed the applicable height restrictions contained in these regulations. 
(e)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures incidental to a permitted principal structure or use and within the intent, purposes, or objectives of these regulations 
[6]  Development standards. The following development standards shall apply to all proposed uses and structures. 
(a)  Proposed uses and structures. Table 20B.04, Noise/Land Use Compatibility Guidelines, contained herein, identifies development standards that apply to proposed uses and structures within each noise contour. All proposed uses and structures must comply with the noise level reduction regulations of the City of Macon and Bibb County. 
(b)  Interior day-night average noise level (Ldn). All proposed uses and structures must comply with the noise level reduction (NLR) standards as provided in Table 20B.04. Compliance with NLR requirements shall be evidenced prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. 
(c)  Flammable/hazardous substance storage. Above ground storage of flammable or explosive substances within five thousand (5,000) feet of all approach surfaces as described on the Airspace Zoning Map shall be prohibited. (See Section 2.03[2]). All underground storage tanks containing flammable or explosive substances shall be approved by the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department. 
(d)  Lighting and glare. No development within five thousand (5,000) feet of all approach surfaces as described on the Airspace Zoning Map (See Section 2.03 [2] may produce or reflect light in a sufficient intensity or manner that would make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other light sources, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, or otherwise impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport. All proposed light sources that could conflict with this requirement (except structure lighting required under FAR Part 77) shall be properly shielded or directed away from a pilot's field of vision. 
(e)  Electrical emissions or interference. No development within five thousand (5,000) feet of all approach surfaces as described on the Airspace Zoning Map (See Section 2.03 [2]) may create or result in electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between MGFA and aircraft operating within the affected areas. 
(f)  Air emissions. No development within five thousand (5,000) feet of all approach surfaces as described on the Airspace Zoning Map (See Section 2.03 [2]) may emit smoke or particulate matter which, in sufficient quantities or concentrations, would impair pilot visibility in the vicinity of the airport or clog aircraft engines. 
(g)  Other navigation hazards. No development within five thousand (5,000) feet of all approach surfaces as described on the Airspace Zoning Map (See Section 2.03 [2]) may attract large flocks of birds which would constitute a hazard to air navigation in the Vicinity of the airport. No solid waste disposal facility or landfill may be cited within said five thousand (5,000) foot area. 
(h)  (Deleted November 14, 1994, ZA94-11-04) 
[7]  Notice to purchasers. The commission may provide a notice to all applicants for any development-related permit, informing the applicant that the respective property is located, either partially or wholly, within the noise control zones and may be subject to aircraft overflight. 
[8]  Plat notice. A notice shall be placed on all final subdivision plats for properties located within the noise control zones that states the following: 
Noise warning. This property, either partially or wholly, lies within the noise exposure area of MGPA and is subject to aircraft noise and potential that may be objectionable. 
[9]  Variances. Any variance to this section which is desired by any person, corporation, or agency under the provisions of Section 27.11 must, in addition: 
(a)  Provide proper soundproofing measures as approved by the bureau of inspection and fees, or 
(b)  If the person, corporation, or agency does not desire to install proper soundproofing measures, constructive notice shall be given in the deed for the subject property stating that a variance was sought under these regulations and proper soundproofing measures were not installed. 
(Added March 14, 1994) 
Section 20B.05. - Obstruction marking and lighting. 
Any variance granted under Section 20.1303[3] above may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this resolution and reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markings and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an obstruction to air navigation. (Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
TABLE 20B.04 
NOISE/LAND USE COMPATIBILITY GUIDELINES 
Land Use Compatibility* With Yearly Day-Night Average Sound Levels 

 
(Numbers in parentheses refer to notes) 
Key 

 
1 Measures to achieve outdoor to indoor Noise Level Reduction (NLR) of at least 25 dB and 30 dB should be incorporated into building code approvals 
2 Measures to achieve NLR of 25 must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas or where the normal noise level is low. 
3 Measures to achieve NLR of 30 must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of those buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas or where the normal noise level is low. 
4 Measures to achieve NLR of 35 must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of these buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas or where the normal noise level is low. 
5 Land use compatible provided special sound reinforcement systems are installed. 
6 Residential buildings require an NLR of 25. 
7 Residential buildings require an NLR of 30. 
8 Residential buildings not permitted. 
SOURCE: FAR PART 150, APPENDIX A, TABLE 1. 
(Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Chapter 20C - AH3—AIRPORT HAZARD DISTRICT—ROBINS AIR FORCE BASE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment No. ZA94-03-02, adopted March 14, 1994, added a new Ch. 20C, §§ 20C.01, 20C.02, to read as herein set out. 

Section 20C.01. - Height regulations for Robins Air Force Base. 
[1]  Intent. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the construction of objects which, because of their height, illumination or reflectivity, electrical emissions, and/or air emissions, represent an obstruction or safety hazard to air traffic operating in and out of Robins Air Force Base (RAFB) and to establish noise control zones and regulations in the vicinity of the base. 
[2]  Supplemental definitions. These definitions shall be used in addition to those in Chapter 1 of this resolution. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
(a)  Approach-departure surface: This surface is symmetrical about the RAFB runway centerline extended, begins as an inclined plane (glide angle) two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the primary surface to the centerline elevation of the runway end, and extends for fifty thousand (50,000) feet. The slope of the approach-departure clearance surface is 50:1 (one (1) foot change in elevation for each fifty feet in distance from the starting point) along the extended runway (glide angle) centerline until it reaches an elevation of five hundred (500) feet above the established airfield elevation, at which point it becomes a horizontal surface. It then continues horizontally at this elevation to a point at fifty thousand (50,000) feet from the start of the glide angle. The width of this surface at the runway end is two thousand (2,000) feet. It then flares uniformly, with an end width of sixteen thousand (16,000) feet at a distance fifty thousand (50,000) feet from both starting points. 
(b)  Conical surface: This inclined surface extends outward and upward from the outer periphery of the inner horizontal surface for a horizontal distance of seven thousand (7,000) feet. The slope of the conical surface is 20:1 (one (1) foot change in elevation for each twenty (20) feet in distance from the starting point), with an inner elevation of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airfield elevation and an outer elevation of five hundred (500) feet above the established airfield elevation. 
(c)  Clear zone surface: This surface defines the limits of the obstruction clearance requirements in the vicinity contiguous to the end of the primary surface. The length and width (for a single runway) of a clear zone surface is three thousand (3,000) feet by three thousand (3,000) feet. 
(d)  Established airfield elevation: The altitude, measured in feet above mean sea level (MSL), of the Robins Air Force Base main runway surface. This elevation is hereby declared to be two hundred ninety-five (295) feet MSL. 
(e)  Height: The true highest altitude of a structure or natural feature (including trees, protruding rocks, or natural ground surface) as measured in feet above mean sea level. 
(f)  Inner horizontal surface: This surface is a plane, oval in shape, that extends seven thousand five hundred (7,500) feet from the RAFB airfield runway centerline at a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airfield elevation. 
(g)  Obstruction: Any structure or natural feature (including trees, protruding rocks, or natural ground surface) which exceeds the height limitation defined by the primary surface, clear zone surface, approach-departure clearance surfaces, inner horizontal surface, conical surface, outer horizontal surface, or transitional surfaces established for Robins Air Force Base. 
(h)  Outer horizontal surface: This surface is a horizontal plane that begins at the outer edge of the conical surface and extends for thirty thousand (30,000) feet at a height of five hundred (500) feet above the established airfield elevation. 
(i)  Primary surface: This surface defines the limits of the obstruction clearance requirements in the immediate vicinity of the landing area. The primary surface comprises surfaces of the runway, runway shoulders, and lateral safety zones and extends two hundred (200) feet beyond the runway end. The width of the primary surface for the RAFB runway is two thousand (2,000) feet, or one thousand (1,000) feet on each side of the runway centerline. 
(j)  Structure: Any stationary or mobile object constructed or installed by man, including without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smoke stacks, earth formations, and overhead transmission lines. 
(k)  Transitional surfaces: These surfaces connect the primary surfaces, clear zone surfaces, and approach-departure clearance surfaces to the outer horizontal surface, conical surface, and other horizontal or transitional surfaces. The slope of the transitional surface is 7:1 (one (1) foot in elevation for each seven (7) feet in distance from the starting point) outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline extended. 
[3]  Application. These regulations shall apply to all lands within the City of Macon and Bibb County that are overlaid by the primary surface, clear zone surface, approach-departure clearance surfaces, inner horizontal surface, conical surface, outer horizontal surface, or transitional surfaces established for Robins Air Force Base. These boundaries of these surfaces are shown on the airspace requirements map for Robins AFB referenced in Section 2.03[4]. All development activity within these areas shall comply with the performance standards in Section 20C.01[4] below in addition to the requirements of the underlying zoning district. Where conflicting standards and requirements exist, the more stringent standards and requirements shall apply. 
[4]  Performance standards. 
(a)  Height limitation. No structure shall be built which, by virtue of its finished height, would constitute an obstruction within the meaning of these regulations. Where the development or redevelopment of land within the areas affected by these regulations will involve substantial grading and/or site preparation, the commission may require the applicant to remove any existing obstructions (either natural or man-made) on the site as a condition of development plan approval. 
(b)  Use restrictions. No use may be made of land or water located within the RAPB approach-departure surfaces that would: 
(i)  Create or result in electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between RAFB and aircraft operating within the affected areas; 
(ii)  Produce or reflect light in a sufficient intensity or manner that would make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other light sources, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the base airport, or otherwise impair visibility in the vicinity of the base. All proposed light sources that could conflict with this requirement (except structure lighting required under FAR Part 77) shall be properly shielded or directed away from a pilot's field of vision; 
(iii)  Emit smoke or particulate matter which, in sufficient quantities or concentrations, would impair pilot visibility in the vicinity of the base or clog aircraft engines; or 
(iv)  Attract large flocks of birds, which would constitute a hazard to air navigation in the vicinity of the base. No solid waste disposal facility or landfill may be sited within the areas affected by these regulations. 
[5]  Review procedures. The standard zoning compliance process for the City of Macon and Bibb County shall apply to the areas affected by these regulations. However, any applicant proposing to construct a structure that is located within the RAFB outer horizontal surface or the approach-departure horizontal surface and would exceed two hundred (200) feet in height as measured from its tallest point to the finished ground level or located within the RAFB primary surface, clear zone surface, inner horizontal surface, conical surface, approach-departure glide angle surface, or any transitional surface and would exceed one hundred (100) feet in height as measured from its tallest point to the finished ground level shall comply with the following review procedures, in addition to the normal zoning compliance process. 
(a)  RAFB civil engineer's office review. A copy of an application for zoning compliance within the affected areas, including the development plan, shall be provided, within five (5) days of submittal by the applicant, by the commission to the staff of RAFB, which will provide a written recommendation to the zoning enforcement officer within ten (10) days of receipt. 
(b)  FAA review. The applicant shall submit a copy of the application for FAA review under FAR Part 77, if applicable. A copy of the FAR Part 77 review transmittal letter and application shall be submitted to the commission to document compliance with this requirement. The commission may condition any approval upon FAA approval under FAR Part 77 review. 
[6]  Submission requirements. An applicant shall submit a preliminary plan in accordance with the applicable requirements of these regulations for any development application that satisfies the special review requirements in Section 20C.01[5] above. The zoning enforcement officer may require the applicant to submit any or all of the items specified below, if the additional information is necessary to ensure compliance with the performance standards in Section 20C.01[4] above. 
(a)  Imaginary surface boundaries. The applicant may be required to delineate on the preliminary plan the boundaries of any primary surface, clear zone surface, approach-departure clearance surfaces, inner horizontal surface, conical surface, outer horizontal surface, or transitional surfaces, if the location of the aforementioned surface boundaries with respect to the proposed development site or proposed structure locations is in question. All maps prepared to show the location of these boundaries shall be drawn to a scale designated by the zoning enforcement officer. 
(b)  Location of structures. The applicant may be required to delineate the placement of all existing and proposed buildings and structures, including any existing or proposed tree stands. 
(c)  Specification of uses. The applicant may be required to specify the proposed uses to occur within each structure or activity area on the development site. 
(d)  Surface elevation bench marks. The applicant may be required to show the surface elevation of all structures (above mean sea level) and the maximum height in feet of any structure. For residential subdivisions, the zoning enforcement officer may require the applicant to show surface elevations for the property in five-foot contours with sufficient bench marks to verify contour elevations. 
(e)  Narrative description. The applicant may be required to prepare a narrative describing the location of the site, its total acreage, existing character and use; the concept of the proposed development or use, such as proposed residential density, and the relation of the proposed development plan to the comprehensive plan. 
[7]  Variances. Any applicant wishing to erect a new structure, increase the height of an existing structure, permit the growth of any tree, or commit the property to a use that is not in compliance with the regulation prescribed in these regulations may apply to the commission for a variance. The application for variance must be submitted in the form and manner specified in these regulations, and it must be accompanied by a written determination from the Federal Aviation Administration and the RAFB civil engineer's office stating that the proposed structure will not be located within a normal aircraft flight track, that the requested height variance will not be excessive, and that all appropriate measures will be taken by the applicant to prevent any negative impacts on safe navigation within the protected air space surrounding RAFB. Such variances shall be issued only where it is duly determined that a literal application or enforcement of these regulations will result in unnecessary hardship, and the relief granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit and intent of these regulations. In addition, the commission may solicit the testimony of a qualified professional, at the expense of the applicant, to evaluate the proposed development plans and issue any professional findings or opinions that would assist the commission in reaching a decision regarding the variance request. The selection of a qualified professional shall be done by the commission. 
(Added march 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02) 
Section 20C.02. - Base environs overlay zones for Robins Air Force Base. 
[1]  Intent. The base environs overlay zone (BE) is hereby created with the following purposes: 
To protect the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating development and land use within noise sensitive areas and accident potential areas; 
To ensure compatibility between surrounding land uses and Robins Air Force Base; and 
To protect RAFB from encroachment by incompatible development. 
The base environs overlay zone (BE) shall serve as an overlay district that applies additional standards and requirements to properties located within an underlying zoning district. Proposed developments located within this zoning district shall comply with these requirements and the requirements of the underlying zoning district. In the case of conflicting standards and requirements, the more stringent standards and requirements shall apply. 
[2]  Supplemental definitions. These definitions shall be used in addition to those in Chapter 1 of this resolution. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
(a)  Accident potential zone (APZ). The geographic area that is determined by the RAFB air installation compatible use zone study (AICUZ) to possess a significant potential for aircraft crashes. 
(b)  Aircraft noise contours. The geographic area that is affected by RAPB flight operations and defined on the basis of those areas immediately affected by the sixty-five (65) Ldn and greater noise exposure area from the noise zone map that is contained within the RAFB air installation compatible use zone study. 
(c)  Airport hazard. Any structure or object of natural growth or use of land within an APZ or an aircraft noise contour that obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at any airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft. 
(d)  Day-night sound level (Ldn). A cumulative aircraft noise index that estimates the exposure to aircraft noise at a certain geographic point and relates the estimated exposure to an expected community response. 
(e)  Ldn contour. A line linking together a series of points of equal cumulative noise exposure based on the Ldn metric. These contours are developed based on the Ldn metric, and are defined by aircraft flight patterns, the number of daily aircraft operations by type of aircraft and time of day, noise characteristics of each aircraft, and typical runway usage patterns. 
(f)  Structure. Any object, whether permanent, temporary, or mobile, including, but not limited to, a building, tower, crane, smokestack, earth formation, transmission line, flagpole, or sign. 
[3]  Subzones. The base environs overlay zone (BE) is subdivided into five (5) subzones that represent the differing levels of noise impact and aircraft accident potential. The geographic location of these subzones is indicated on the base environs overlay zone map referenced in Section 2.03[4] The five (5) zones are the following: 
Subzone A. Includes the area within the sixty-five (65) Ldn to seventy (70) Ldn aircraft noise contours (BE-A). 
Subzone B. Includes the area within the seventy (70) Ldn to seventy-five (75) Ldn aircraft noise contours (BE-B). 
Subzone C. Includes the area within the seventy-five (75) Ldn and greater aircraft noise contours (BE-C). 
Subzone D. Includes the area within APZ I (BE-D). 
Subzone E. Includes the area within APZ II (BE-E). 
The boundaries of the base environs overlay zone (BE) and its subzones, as adopted herein, shall be reviewed and amended whenever RAFB updates or amends its aircraft noise contour maps and/or AICUZ study. It shall be the responsibility of RAFB to notify the commission of any such update or amendment and to provide a copy of same to the commission. Copies of the current aircraft noise contour maps and AICUZ study shall be on file and open to public inspection in the commission's office and at the RAFB civil engineer's office. 
[4]  Application of regulations. Within the base environs overlay zone (BE), any proposed use or structure is subject to review as described herein and shall be evaluated relative to the standards and requirements provided for herein. 
[5]  Exemptions and nonconformities. The provisions of these regulations shall not be deemed applicable to the following when permitted in the underlying district: 
(a)  Existing uses. Uses existing on the effective date of these regulations shall not be required to change in order to comply with the requirements specified herein. (Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
(b)  Temporary uses. Temporary uses, including but not limited to public celebrations and outdoor entertainment events, so long as the period of operation does not exceed five days in any one year period. A variance may be requested to extend the time period for a temporary use. 
(c)  Temporary structures. Temporary buildings and structures that are not used for residential purposes and that meet said applicable requirements as contained within this resolution, so long as such uses and associated structures are constructed incidental to a permitted use (as per the requirements of this resolution), do not generate excessive glare or electrical emissions that could interfere with standard RAFB aircraft operations, and do not exceed the applicable height restrictions contained in these regulations. 
(d)  Agricultural structures. Bona fide agricultural buildings, structures, improvements, and associated nonresidential developments, provided such structures do not exceed the applicable height restrictions contained in these regulations. 
(e)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures incidental to a permitted principal structure or use and within the intent, purposes, or objectives of these regulations. 
(f)  Nonconforming structures within Subzones A, B, C or E of the Robins Air Force Base Environs Overlay Zone may be extended or enlarged as long as the yard requirements of the Resolution are met or a variance is obtained from the commission from said yard requirements. (Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
(g)  Single nonconforming lots of record located within Subzone E of the Base Environs Overlay Zone for Robins Air Force Base may be built upon pursuant to Section 24.03 of the Resolution. (Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
(h)  Any existing structures located within subzones A, B, C or E of the Base Environs Overlay Zone for Robins Air Force Base may be reconstructed or replaced if destroyed and any existing manufactured home in said zones may be replaced. 
NOTE: Soundproofing requirements of the Bibb County Building Code may apply. (Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
[6]  Development standards. The following development standards shall apply to all proposes uses and structures. [2] 
(a)  Proposed uses and structures. Table 20C.02 Land Use Compatibility Standards, contained herein, identifies development standards that apply to proposed uses and structures within the base environs overlay zone (BE). All proposed uses and structures must comply with these standards. (Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
(b)  Flammable/hazardous substance storage. Above ground storage of flammable or explosive substances within Subzones D and E of the base environs overlay zone (BE) shall be prohibited. All underground storage tanks containing flammable or explosive substances shall be double-lined. (Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
(c)  Lighting and glare. No development within the base environs overlay zone (BE) may produce or reflect light in a sufficient intensity or manner that would make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other light sources, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the base airport, or otherwise impair visibility in the vicinity of the base. All proposed light sources that could conflict with this requirement (except structure lighting required under FAR Part 77) shall be properly shielded or directed away from a pilot's field of vision. (Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
(d)  Electrical emissions or interference. No development within the base environs overlay zone (BE) may create or result in electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between RAFB and aircraft operating within the affected areas. (Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
(e)  Air emissions. No development within the base environs overlay zone (BE) may emit smoke or particulate matter which, in sufficient quantities or concentrations, would impair pilot visibility in the vicinity of the base or clog aircraft engines. (Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
(f)  Noise. No development within Subzones A, B, and C of the base environs overlay zone (BE) may produce noises that would increase average day/night noise levels beyond the boundaries of the development property by more than three (3) decibels. Where field testing is necessary to determine compliance with this requirement, it shall be conducted and paid for by the applicant. (Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
[7]  Notice to purchasers. The commission may provide a notice to all applicants for any development-related permit, informing the applicant that the respective property is located, either partially or wholly, within the base environs overlay zone (BE) and may be subject to aircraft overflight. 
[8]  Plat notice. A notice shall be placed on all final subdivision plats for properties located within the base environs overlay zone (BE) that states the following: 
Noise/air hazard warning. This property, either partially or wholly, lies within the noise exposure/accident potential area of RAFB and is subject to noise and/or aircraft accident potential that may be objectionable. 
[9]  Development review. The zoning compliance process for the commission shall apply to the base environs overlay zone (BE), with the following additions. 
(a)  RAFB civil engineer's office review. A copy of an application for zoning compliance under the BE zone, including the development plan, shall be provided, within five (5) days of submittal by the applicant, by the commission to the staff of RAFB for any development located in Subzones C, D, and E. The staff of RAFB shall will provide a written recommendation to the commission within ten (10) days of receipt. Where a development application satisfies the criteria for review as a development of regional impact, the Middle Georgia Regional Development Center (MGRDC) shall be responsible for submitting a copy of the application to the RAFB civil engineer's office in accordance with Section 20C.02[9] (b) below. 
(b)  Developments of regional impact review. Any development application which exceeds the applicable threshold criteria for developments of regional impact (DRI) shall be submitted to the Middle Georgia Regional Development Center (MGRDC) for review. The commission shall submit a completed DRI request for review form and two (2) complete copies of the application to the MGRDC. Where DRI review is required, the MGRDC shall provide a copy of the application to the RAFB civil engineer's office in accordance with the DRI review procedures. No local approval of a DRI within the base environs overlay zone shall be granted prior to completion of the required regional review. 
[10]  Preliminary plan requirements. An applicant shall submit a preliminary plan in accordance with the applicable requirements of these regulations for any development application that satisfies the special review requirements in Section 20C.02[9] above. The zoning enforcement officer may require the applicant to submit any or all of the items specified below, if the additional information is necessary to ensure compliance with the performance standards in Section 20C.02[6] above. 
(a)  Ldn noise contour and APZ boundaries. The applicant may be required to delineate on the preliminary plan the boundaries of any subzone boundary of the BE zone, if the location of the aforementioned boundaries with respect to the proposed development site or proposed structure locations is in question. All maps prepared to show the location of these boundaries shall be drawn to a scale designated by the zoning enforcement officer. 
(b)  Location of structures. The applicant may be required to delineate the placement of all existing and proposed buildings and structures, including any existing or proposed tree stands. 
(c)  Specification of uses. The applicant may be required to specify the proposed uses to occur within each structure or activity area on the development site. 
(d)  Narrative description. The applicant may be required to prepare a narrative describing the location of the site, its total acreage, existing character and use; the concept of the proposed development or use, such as proposed residential density, and the relation of the proposed development plan to the comprehensive plan. 
[11]  Development review criteria. The preliminary plan described in Section 20C.02[10] shall be reviewed and evaluated using, at a minimum, the following criteria: 
(a)  Proposed uses. All elements of the proposed development shall be consistent with Table 20C.02, Land Use Compatibility Standards. 
(b)  Siting. Buildings and structures should be located the greatest distance from the noise source, taking maximum advantage of existing topographical features to minimize noise impact, and within zoning district requirements, such as required setbacks. Buildings and structures should be oriented to minimize exposure to the noise source and building openings, such as windows, should be located away from the noise source. 
(c)  Passive outdoor recreation space. The amount of passive outdoor recreational space where individuals would be subject to noticeable or severe levels of noise should be minimized. Landscaping materials should be used to deflect noise. 
[12]  Variances. Any applicant wishing to erect a new structure or construct a development that is not in compliance with the regulations prescribed in Section 20C.02 may apply to the commission for a variance. Variances for prohibited land uses are not permitted. The application for a variance must be submitted in the form and manner specified in these regulations, and it must be accompanied by a written determination from the Federal Aviation Administration and the RAFB Civil Engineer's Office stating that appropriate mitigation measures will be taken by the applicant to prevent any negative impacts on safe navigation within the protected air space surrounding RAFB. Such variances shall be issued by reason of extraordinary situations or conditions peculiar to a specific parcel of property and where it is duly determined that literal application or enforcement of these regulations will result in unnecessary hardship, and the relief granted will not be contrary to the public's interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit and intent of these regulations. In addition, the commission may solicit the testimony of a qualified professional, at the expense of the applicant, to evaluate the proposed development plans and issue any professional findings or opinions that would assist the commission in reaching a decision regarding the variance request. The selection of a qualified professional shall be done by the commission. (Added March 14, 1994, ZA94-03-02; Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
TABLE 20C.02  LAND USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS IN  BASE ENVIRONS (BE) OVERLAY ZONE 

 
All notes to this table are contained on the following page. 
Notes To Table 20C.02: 
Y Land use is permitted. 
N Land use is prohibited. 
1   Notice: The Bibb County Building Code contains certain soundproofing standards which may apply. 
2   Notice: The Bibb County Building Code contains certain soundproofing standards which may apply. 
3   Notice: The Bibb County Building Code contains certain soundproofing standards which may apply. 
4   Single-family homes and manufactured homes on lots not less than one acre in area. No additional residential uses permitted. Notice: The Bibb County Building Code contains certain soundproofing standards which may apply. 
5   Low intensity uses with low pedestrian traffic only. Average population density should not exceed twenty-five (25) persons per hour during a twenty-four (24) hour period, but not to exceed fifty (50) persons in any one (1) hour. No auditoriums or conference facilities are permitted. 
6   No more than one hundred (100) parking spaces. 
7   Agriculture/forestry and all other open spaces uses. The requirements in Note 8 below shall also apply to these uses when located within Subzone D (APZ I). 
8   No storage or office structures and no storage of explosive or flammable materials within APZ I. 
(Amended December 12, 1994, ZA94-12-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Resolution No. ZA94-12-01, adopted Dec. 12, 1994, repealed former subsection [6](b), and relettered subsections [6](c)—(g) as [6](b)—(f). 

Chapter 21 - HR-1, HR-2, HR-3, HC, AND HPD—HISTORIC ZONING DISTRICTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment No. ZA97-08-01, § 5, adopted August 14, 1997, deleted Ch. 21, §§ 21.01—21.15 in its entirety and added a new Ch. 21, §§ 21.01—21.08, to read as herein set out. 

Section 21.01. - Purpose and intent. 
Historical districts are created to protect the educational, cultural, economic, recreational and general welfare of the public, through the preservation and protection of those general areas or those individual structures and places which have or may be designated pursuant to this chapter as possessing historical or architectural significance. 
Regulations within such districts are intended to protect against destruction of or encroachment upon such areas, structures, and premises; to encourage uses which will lead to their continuance, conservation, and improvement in a manner appropriate to the preservation of the cultural, social, economic, political, architectural, or archeological heritage of Macon-Bibb County and the State of Georgia; to prevent creation of environmental influences adverse to such purposes; and to assure that new structures and uses within such districts will be in keeping with the character to be preserved and enhanced. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 21.02. - Establishment of historic zoning districts. 
Any historic site, landmark or area to be designated as an historic district shall be designated as either Historic Residential 1 District (HR-1), Historic Residential 2 District (HR-2), Historic Residential 3 District (HR-3), Historic Commercial District (HC) or Historic Planned Development District (HPD). 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 21.03. - Historic Residential 1 District (HR-1). 
[1]  Permitted uses: 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. 
(c)  Fall-out shelters, provided the requirements of Section 23.15 are met. 
(d)  Home swimming pools, provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
(e)  Home occupations, provided the requirements of Section 23.01 are met. 
(f)  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(g)  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[2]  Conditional uses: 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Places of worship and related accessory structures, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and provided that no structure is located within fifty (50) feet of a property line or a street right-of-way. 
(c)  Private and public schools and libraries, excluding business or trade schools. 
(d)  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(e)  Recreational areas: the size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to the adjacent land uses shall be a determining factor. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 21.04. - Historic Residential 2 District (HR-2). 
[1]  Permitted uses: 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings, provided the lot and area requirements for a two-family dwelling in an R-2 District set forth in Section 10.05 are met. 
(c)  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. 
(d)  Fall-out shelters, provided the requirements of Section 23.15 are met. 
(e)  Home swimming pools, provided the location is no closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
(f)  Home occupations, provided the requirements of Section 23.01 are met. 
(g)  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(h)  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[2]  Conditional uses: 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Places of worship and related accessory structures, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and provided that no structure is located within fifty (50) feet of a property line or a street right-of-way. 
(c)  Private and public schools and libraries, excluding business or trade schools. 
(d)  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(e)  Recreational areas: the size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to the adjacent land uses shall be a determining factor. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 21.05. - Historic Residential 3 District (HR-3). 
[1]  Permitted uses: 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings, provided the lot and area requirements for a two-family dwelling in an R-3 district set forth in Section 11.05 are met. 
(c)  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. 
(d)  Fall-out shelters, provided the requirements of Section 23.15 are met. 
(e)  Home swimming pools, provided the location is no closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
(f)  Home occupations, provided the requirements of Section 23.01 are met. 
(g)  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
(h)  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[2]  Conditional uses: 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Places of worship and related accessory structures, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and provided that no structure is located within fifty (50) feet of a property line or a street right-of-way. 
(c)  Private and public schools, libraries, and museums excluding business or trade schools. 
(d)  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(e)  Minimum lot sizes for new construction or conversion to multifamily dwellings shall be governed by the following table: 

 
The design and placement of dwelling units must be compatible with the historic and cultural character of the district. 
(f)  Professional offices of such character and nature as will not adversely affect adjacent and nearby residential properties or the historic character of the area. 
(g)  Recreational areas: the size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to the adjacent land uses shall be a determining factor. 
(h)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(i)  Guest quarters, provided: 
(i)  That the total number of guest quarters or rooms shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of Section 21.06[2](e), not to exceed five (5) units; 
(ii)  That approval is obtained from the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department; 
(iii)  That the permit for guest quarters is not transferable; 
(iv)  That guest quarters may not exceed the percentage of floor space devoted to the primary residence. 
(v)  Facilities described hereunder shall be allowed only in the Intown Historic District of the city as shown on the map described in Section 2.03[5] hereof. 
(j)  Antique shops provided they meet the following conditions: 
(i)  The proposed use shall be in an existing dwelling which is the primary domicile of the owner. The owner of the dwelling shall be the owner and operator of the antique shop. 
(ii)  Off-street parking required by these regulations must be existing, must be on-site and must not have been created by the demolition of an improvement within five (5) years of the application for this use. 
(iii)  The inventory for sale must consist solely of "antiques", which are defined as works of art, pieces of furniture, or decorative objects made over one hundred (100) years ago. 
(iv)  All businesses must be conducted, and all displays must be located within the main building. 
(v)  Only existing accessory buildings, attics and basements may be used for on-site storage, and such storage must be hidden from the view of the public. Any truck or van used in the operation of the antique shop shall be parked in a location so that it is not visible from any public right-of-way. 
(vi)  Any exterior signage must be attached to the facade of the main building, must be no larger that two (2) square feet in area and must not indicate that merchandise is for sale. 
(vii)  The proposed use must be located on an arterial or collector street. 
(viii)  Such operation shall be conducted in a manner that the average neighborhood, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence. 
(ix)  Such use shall not create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance to a greater or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in an average residential occupancy. 
(x)  No auction of goods may take place on the premises. 
(xi)  Conditional use permits for the operation of antique shops in HR-3 districts shall expire whenever: 
(1)  The applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the conditional use permit was issued; or 
(2)  The use of the property for an antique shop ceases for a period of six (6) consecutive months. 
(xii)  Antique shops described hereunder shall be allowed only in the in town Historic District of the city as shown on the map described in Section 2.03[5] hereof. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 21.06. - Historic Commercial District (HC). 
[1]  Permitted uses: 
(a)  Convenience food stores not to exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(c)  Professional offices. 
(d)  Beverage stores. 
(e)  The following retail shops not to exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area: 
(i)  Variety and dry goods stores. 
(ii)  Drug stores. 
(iii)  Specialty food stores. 
(iv)  Meat markets and delicatessens. 
(v)  Art and antique shops. 
(vi)  Bakeries employing not more than ten (10) employees. 
(vii)  Bicycle (not motorcycle) shops. 
(viii)  Book stationery, camera and photographic supply stores and newsstands. 
(ix)  Florists and gift shops. 
(x)  Confectionery stores. 
(xi)  Clothing and shoe shops. 
(xii)  Hardware and paint stores. 
(xiii)  Furniture stores not to exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(f)  Single-family residential uses in conjunction with commercial uses. 
(g)  All permitted uses in the HR-1, HR-2, and HR-3 districts. 
(h)  Communication antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. (Added October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
[2]  Conditional uses: 
(a)  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations and self-service laundries. 
(b)  Restaurants, ice cream parlors, and restaurants with alcohol. 
(c)  Supermarkets or grocery stores not exceeding twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
(d)  Retail establishments exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet in gross floor area which, by nature of their type and character, do not create an unfavorable impact upon adjacent properties or the historic character of the area. 
(e)  All conditional uses in the HR-1, HR-2,and HR-3 districts. 
(f)  Convenience food stores not to exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area with gasoline pumps. Criteria on-site design shall be in accordance with Section 23.11[3], [4]. 
(g)  Group personal care homes and supportive living homes. (Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
(h)  Dwelling units on upper floors of existing buildings subject to the requirements of the following table: 

 
(Added November 13, 2001, ZA01-11-01) 
Section 21.07. - Historic Plan Development (HPD) District. 
When after review of the application and hearing thereon the commission finds as a fact that the proposed use(s) is consistent with the general plan and in the public interest, the following uses may be permitted as conditional uses: 
[1]  All permitted or conditional uses allowed in HR-1, HR-2, HR-3, and HC districts. 
[2]  Hospitals, clinics, sanitariums and convalescent or nursing homes. 
[3]  Trade or business schools. 
[4]  Residential cluster developments, in conformance with the requirements of Section 23.02, provided that the design and placement are compatible with the historic character of the district. 
[5]  Any use that is appropriate to and will enhance the historic character of the surrounding area. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 21.08. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
No building, structure or landscape, including walls, fences, steps, and paving that can be viewed from the public right-of-way, shall be erected, reconstructed, altered, restored, moved or demolished within a design district, and no sign, fence, wall, or other appurtenant structure shall be erected or displayed on any lot, building, or structure located within said district unless an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been approved by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of appropriateness is not required for communications antennas permitted by Section 23.27[4](a) or (b). 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01; Amended January 28, 2002, ZA02-01-03) 
Section 21.09. - Economic and community development target areas. 
The zoning enforcement officer may reduce the minimum standards for residential properties within ECD target areas as specified in Section 23.28. 
(Added May 29, 2001, ZA01-05-01) 
Section 21.10. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet except as allowed by Section 4.03. The commission may however, allow construction and erection of buildings or structures exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that any application to exceed the maximum permitted height shall be treated as a conditional use and require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Added January 28, 2002, ZA02-01-02) 
Section 21.11. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
There shall be no minimum setback requirements, except as provided below: 
[1]  Setbacks may be required to meet design standards. 
[2]  A rear setback of thirty (30) feet is required for all new construction not subject to design review. 
[3]  The side setback for all new construction not subject to design review shall be equal to or greater than the setback to the sides of the existing structure. 
(Added January 28, 2002, ZA02-01-02) 
Section 21.12. - Lot and area requirements. 
There shall be no minimum lot or area requirements, except as provided below: 
[1]  Minimum lot and area requirements may be required to meet design standards. 
[2]  No property line may be moved, deleted, or otherwise altered if doing so will cause the property to no longer be in keeping with the neighborhood precedent, without approval of a certificate of appropriateness for the change. 
(Added January 28, 2002, ZA02-01-02) 
Chapter 21A - HISTORIC PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT—BEALL'S HILL (HPD-BH) 

Section 21A.01. - Purpose and intent. 
The HPD-BH Zoning District is intended to support the redevelopment efforts of the Beall's Hill Neighborhood within the Intown Historic District, while protecting and enhancing the historic value and character that make this neighborhood unique. One (1) goal for this redevelopment is to preserve as many existing significant structures as possible, recognizing these structures as irreplaceable assets. The addition of newly constructed homes and pockets of retail and service oriented businesses are to provide a renaissance for this community through attention to design, land use, and overall desirability. 
(Added January 10, 2005, ZA05-01-01) 
Section 21A.02. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Single-family dwellings. 
[2]  Two-family dwellings (duplexes) subject to the following density requirements: 
(a)  Minimum lot width at building line: Sixty (60) feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
(c)  Maximum lot coverage: Thirty-five (35) percent. 
[3]  Accessory buildings located on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use; Provided that the following requirements are met: 
(a)  Accessory buildings detached from the main dwelling shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to the main dwelling, nor closer than three (3) feet one (1) inch to any interior property line. The accessory building shall comply with the setback requirements from rights-of-way for the main dwelling, but in no case shall the accessory building be located between the actual building line of the main dwelling and a right-of-way located to the front or side of a parcel. 
(b)  A detached accessory building shall not exceed two (2) stories in height and shall not cover more than thirty-five (35) percent of the side or rear yard. 
[4]  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and subject to the enclosure requirements of Section 4.11[4]. 
[5]  Home occupations, provided the requirements of Section 23.01 are met. 
[6]  Garage apartment, as an accessory use to single-family dwellings only and subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  All requirements for accessory building placement are met; 
(b)  All parking requirements for the property are met, including the use of at least one (1) parking space within the garage apartment structure. 
(c)  Only one (1) garage apartment per parcel shall be allowed. 
[7]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Added January 10, 2005, ZA05-01-01) 
Section 21A.03. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Churches and other places of worship and related accessory buildings, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street. 
[2]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[3]  Select retail and service businesses within those areas identified as commercial on the approved Beall's Hill Land Use Map to be maintained by the planning and zoning commission office. Such uses are to serve the needs of the immediate surrounding population and are limited to the following: 
(a)  Retail shops not to exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area including uses for convenience food stores; variety and dry goods stores; drug stores; specialty food stores; arts, crafts and antique shops; florist and gift shops; bicycle (not motorcycle) stores; book, stationary, camera and photo supply stores; newsstands; confectionary stores; hardware and paint stores, clothing or furniture stores. 
(b)  Bakeries not employing more than ten (10) persons. 
(c)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(d)  Cafes, grills, lunch counters, ice cream parlors, and restaurants with or without alcohol. 
(e)  Self-service laundries and dry cleaning pick-up stations. 
(f)  Professional offices. 
[4]  Single-family dwellings, attached. 
[5]  Multi-family dwellings, as new construction. 
(a)  The parcel of land to be developed shall be no smaller than seventy-five hundred (7,500) square feet in size. 
(b)  The density allowed shall be that density allowed in Section 21.05 of these regulations. 
[6]  Communication towers and antennas subject to the requirements of Section 23.27. 
[7]  Student dormitory housing with occupancy not to exceed ten (10) individuals, provided that such housing is within five hundred (500) feet of the main campus of Mercer University, located on Coleman Avenue. (Added September 10, 2007, ZA07-09-01) 
(Added January 10, 2005, ZA05-01-01) 
Section 21A.04. - Development standards. 
[1]  Lot and area requirements for all uses, except two-family dwellings (duplexes) as a permitted use; 
(a)  Minimum lot area: Two thousand seven hundred (2,700) square feet. 
(b)  Minimum width at building line: Twenty-six (26) feet. 
(c)  Maximum lot coverage: Sixty (60) percent. 
[2]  Setback requirements. 
(a)  Setbacks from a street at a front or side property line are determined by area precedent. 
(b)  Setbacks from interior side property lines are five (5) feet. 
(c)  Setbacks from rear property lines are a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
[3]  Parking requirements. 
(a)  Dwelling units- a minimum of one (1) parking space shall be provided on site for each dwelling unit. A parking space shall be considered nine (9) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long. Said parking space can be located within a garage subject to accessory building requirements. 
(b)  Commercial (non-residential) uses- all parking requirements shall be met as established within Chapter 26. 
[3]  Fence requirements. 
(a)  Maximum fence height for fences located between the building line of a structure and a right-of-way is three (3) feet. 
(b)  Maximum fence height for fences located in side and rear yards not adjacent to rights-of-way is six (6) feet. 
(c)  All fences shall be constructed with the finished side exposed and the support posts placed on the inside of the property being enclosed. 
(d)  Barbed wire and razor wire prohibited. 
[4]  Signage. All signs, where allowed, shall meet the requirements for signage within an HPD District as provided in Chapter 25. 
(Added January 10, 2005, ZA05-01-01) 
Section 21A.05. - Design review. 
[1]  When visible from any public right-of-way, a certificate of appropriateness is required for any new construction, alteration, or demolition of any building, structure or site feature to include landscapes, signage, fences, walls, steps, and paving. A certificate of appropriateness is not required for communications antennas permitted by Section 23.27[4](a) or (b). A certificate of appropriateness is also needed for platting changes including combining parcels, creating parcels, or significantly moving property lines. Minor adjustment of property lines can be approved at staff level. 
[2]  All provisions for design review shall be as provided in Section 27A except as follows: 
(a)  The Beall's Hill Design Guidelines, dated May 14, 2007, shall govern all new residential construction and development of residential property within the HPD-BH Zoning District. (Amended May 14, 2007, ZA-07-01) 
(a)  The Beall's Hill Design Guidelines shall govern all new residential construction and development of residential property within the HPD-BH Zoning District. 
(b)  The Design Guidelines for Macon's Historic Zoning Districts shall govern all non-residential new construction and all modifications to existing residential and non-residential sites and structures visible from any public right-of-way. 
(c)  Staff approval may be granted for a certificate of appropriateness for new infill construction of residential dwellings and accessory buildings that conform to all development standards provided. Such new construction shall be of a design that has been previously approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, after review by the Design Review Board, for the purpose of future staff approval. The approved designs shall be maintained by the Planning and Zoning Commission within the Beall's Hill Pre-Approved Housing Designs and available for public review. Any application that does not, by determination of staff, conform to the design approved and the design guidelines for this area may not be approved at the staff level. The standard review procedure will apply to all other applications as per Chapter 27A. 
[3]  Submittal requirements: The following items must be included in any application for a certificate of appropriateness: 
(a)  Complete application form including signature from property owner. 
(b)  Site plan, to-scale that must include: 
i)  Shape of the lot. 
ii)  Location of all existing and proposed structures including setbacks to adjacent structures. 
iii)  Location of all streets, alleys, easements, signs, fences, driveways and walkways. 
iv)  Landscaping, to include all existing (to remain) and proposed trees and shrubs. Plant species and size at time of planting shall be indicated for all proposed plantings; 
(c)  Elevation and detail drawings. 
i)  An elevation drawing shall be provided for each side of any proposed structure. All materials shall be labeled. Wall and roof heights of any adjacent structures shall be shown on each applicable elevation drawing. 
ii)  An elevation drawing shall be provided for each side of an existing structure for which an alteration is proposed. 
iii)  Detail drawings shall be provided when necessary or required by staff, the design review board, or the commission; 
(d)  Photograph. A photograph(s) shall be provided of site conditions for all applications for new infill residential construction. Photographs may be required by staff, the design review board, or the commission as needed for applications for existing structures or commercial construction. 
(e)  Additional requirements for proposed pre-approved designs: 
i)  ½ scale set of plans for each design review board member (seven (7)) that includes floor plans and elevations, at a minimum. 
ii)  All required information shall be submitted for each variation proposed. (Added June 12, 2006, ZA06-06-02) 
[4]  All standard procedures for issuance of zoning compliance (Section 3.02), platting of property (Chapters 29 & 30), and sign permitting (Chapter 25) shall be followed. 
(Added January 10, 2005, ZA05-01-01) 
Section 21A.06. - Economic and community development target areas. 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer may reduce the minimum standards for residential properties within ECD target areas as specified in Section 23.28 to allow for development compatible and similar to the existing streetscape. 
(Added January 10, 2005, ZA05-01-01) 
Chapter 22A - MHR—MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. ZA99-11-02, § 4, adopted November 22, 1999, deleted Ch. 22A, §§ 22A.01—22A.08, in its entirety and added a new Ch. 22A, §§ 22A.01—22A.08 to read as herein set out. Formerly said chapter pertained to similar subject matter. 

Section 22A.01. - Intent. 
Recognizing that there exist areas which have developed with a mixed form of housing, that is, both conventional built homes and manufactured home housing, and further recognizing that the need exists for continued development of this mixed type of housing, this district is established to not only encourage the continued development of existing areas in a coordinated and orderly manner, but also to provide additional areas for the mixture of housing types allowed in this district. Regulations in this district are designed to permit manufactured homes on single lots as permitted use and also to encourage the development of manufactured home subdivisions. 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
Section 22A.02. - Permitted uses. 
[1]  Single-family dwellings. 
[2]  Manufactured homes provided the requirements of Section 23.09[1] are met. 
[3]  Accessory buildings and uses located either on the same lot or parcel of land as the main structure or an adjoining lot or parcel of land under the same ownership and customarily incidental to the permitted or conditional use, provided that the requirements of Section 4.07 are met. 
[4]  Fall-out shelters provided the requirements of Section 23.15 are met. 
[5]  Home swimming pool, provided the location is not closer than ten (10) feet to any property line and the pool is enclosed by a wall or fence at least four (4) feet in height. 
[6]  Gardening and small plot farming (less than five (5) acres in size) on land on one (1) acre or less. (No permit required). 
[7]  Agriculture, forestry, livestock, and poultry production, provided that the operation is conducted on tract of land greater than five (5) acres in area and that no structure containing poultry or livestock and no storage of manure or odor or dust producing substance or use shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of a property line. 
[8]  Home occupations, provided the requirements in Section 23.01 are met. 
[9]  Manufactured home subdivisions provided that the requirements of Section 23.23 are met. 
[10]  Day care home, provided the requirements of Section 23.30 are met. (Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
Section 22A.03. - Conditional uses. 
[1]  Churches and related accessory buildings, provided they are located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street and are placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
[2]  Kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers, provided the requirements in Section 23.13 are met. (Amended July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
[3]  Public and private schools and libraries, excluding business or trade schools. 
[4]  Public utility structures and buildings provided that the installation is property screened and serves the immediate area. No office shall be permitted, and no equipment shall be stored on the site. 
[5]  Golf, swimming, tennis, or country clubs, public and private community clubs or associations, athletic fields, parks, and recreation areas, provided that no building for such proposed use is located within one hundred (100) feet of any property line. 
[6]  Reserved. (Deleted June 26, 2006, ZA06-06-04) 
[7]  Single-family cluster developments in conformance with the requirements of Section 23.02[4]. 
[8]  Manufactured homes used as temporary office buildings. 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
Section 22A.04. - Lot and area requirements. 
The lot and area requirements set out in this section shall be met for all construction and land uses: 
[1]  Minimum lot area: 
(a)  With septic tank and well (square feet) ..... 43,500 
(b)  With septic tank (square feet) ..... 20,000 
(c)  With public sewer (square feet) ..... 20,000 
[2]  Minimum lot width at building line: 
(a)  With septic tank and well ..... 150 feet 
(b)  With septic tank ..... 100 feet 
(c)  With public sewer ..... 100 feet 
[3]  Maximum lot coverage (percentage) ..... 25% 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
Section 22A.05. - Yard requirements (building setback distance). 
The following minimum building setback distance requirements shall be provided for all buildings or structures as measured from: 
[1]  Arterial and collector street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 60 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 60 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 60 feet 
[2]  Minor street right-of-way lines: 
(a)  Front yard ..... 50 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 50 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 50 feet 
[3]  Interior lot lines: 
(a)  Front yard (where applicable) ..... 50 feet 
(b)  Rear yard ..... 50 feet 
(c)  Side yard ..... 10 feet 
[4]  Special setbacks. See Section 32.09. 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
Section 22A.06. - Building height requirements. 
The maximum permitted height for buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided for in Section 4.03. 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
Section 22A.07. - Off-street parking and loading space requirements. 
Spaces for off-street parking and provisions for loading and unloading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26. 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
Section 22A.08. - Signs. 
Signs as allowed in this zoning district shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 25. 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
Chapter 22B - RP—RIVER PROTECTION DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment No. ZA96-11-01, adopted Nov. 12, 1996, added Ch. 22B, §§ 22B.01—22B.08, to read as herein set out. 

Section 22B.01. - Intent. 
The purpose of the RP district is to implement the criteria for river corridor protection developed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (Section 391-3-16-.04 of the Criteria for River Corridor Protection) as they apply to the areas along the Ocmulgee River in Bibb County. These criteria are designed to help preserve those qualities of the Ocmulgee River that made it suitable for a habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. 
(Amended November 12, 1996, ZA96-11-01) 
Section 22B.02. - Area covered. 
The RP district shall include all areas in Bibb County adjacent to the Ocmulgee River that are located within one hundred (100) feet on both sides of the river as measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river bank, usually marked by a break in the slope. The district also includes all areas located between the top of the river bank and the edge of the river. Any plat or site plan submitted to the commission for approval shall indicate the boundary of the RP overlay zone on the plat or site plan. There is excepted herefrom that portion of the Ocmulgee River commencing at the Spring Street Bridge, running south to the northern boundary of Central City Park. These areas are excepted from these regulations because they lay adjacent to the central business district of downtown Macon and many of the parcels included in this excepted area are already developed. 
(Amended November 12, 1996, ZA96-11-01) 
Section 22B.03. - Supplemental definitions. 
These definitions shall be used in addition to those in chapter 1 of this Resolution. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, certain terms and words are defined as follows: 
[1]  Hazardous waste. Any solid waste which has been defined as hazardous waste in the regulations, promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. § 261.3. 
[2]  Land disturbing activity. Any grading, scraping, excavating, or filling of land; clearing of vegetation and any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure. Land disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, and the cutting of firewood for personal use. 
[3]  Land uses existing prior to the promulgation of a river corridor protection plan. Any land use or land disturbing activity, including all human endeavors directly associated with such use or activity, which, prior to the promulgation of the river corridor protection plan falls within one (1) of the following categories: 
(a)  Is completed; 
(b)  In under construction; 
(c)  Is fully approved by the commission; 
(d)  All materials have been submitted for approval by the commission; or 
(e)  Is zoned for such use and expenditures in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) have been made in preparation for construction in accordance with such zoning. 
[4]  Natural vegetative buffer or buffer area. A river corridor containing the flora native to that area. The natural floras for specific areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, "The Natural Environments of Georgia." Habitats for endangered and threatened species may require human management of the river corridor in order to maintain those species. 
[5]  Perennial river. A river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year. 
[6]  Protected river. Any perennial river or water course with an average annual flow of at least four hundred (400) cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. However, those segments of rivers covered by the Metropolitan River Protection Act or the Coastal Marshland Protection Act are specifically excluded from the definition of a protected river. 
[7]  Public utility or utilities. A service or services provided by a public utility company or a private entity which provides such service or services, and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services. 
[8]  River bank. The rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the river to the natural channel during normal course of flow. 
[9]  River corridor. All land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river and being one hundred (100) feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. The one hundred-foot buffer shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river bank, usually marked by a break in slope. Although not within the measured one hundred-foot wide buffer, the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river shall be treated by local governments in the same manner as the river corridor and shall be included within the river corridor protection plan. Because stream channels move due to natural processes such as meandering, river bank erosion, and jumping of channels, the river corridor may shift with time. For the purposes of these standards, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for local comprehensive plans. Any shift in the location of the protected river after the start of the review period will require revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next review by the department of community affairs. 
[10]  Sensitive natural areas. Any area, as identified now or hereafter, by the department of natural resources, which contains one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(b)  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(c)  Significant land forms, hydroforms, or geological features; or 
(d)  Other areas so designated by the department of natural resources; and which is sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
(Amended November 12, 1996, ZA96-11-01) 
Section 22B.04. - River protection overlay zone; general protection criteria. 
[1]  Existing vegetation within the RP overlay zone may be disturbed during construction as long as said disturbance activities are done in compliance with a plan approved by the city or county engineer pursuant to the soil erosion and sedimentation rules and regulations of the city and county. Additionally, any person engaging in a land disturbing activity within the RP overlay zone shall submit a landscaping plan to the commission showing how the applicant will restore the disturbed areas to their natural state. The individual requirements of each plan shall be as determined by the zoning enforcement officer. 
[2]  All development activity within the RP overlay zone shall comply with these required conditions and the applicable requirements of the underlying zoning district and any other overlay districts that apply to lands within this zone. Where conflicts between the requirements of this district and other applicable zoning district exist, the more restrictive or stringent requirements shall govern. 
[3]  The minimum lot size for new development within the RP overlay zone shall be the minimum lot size prescribed in the underlying zoning district except for single-family dwellings or manufactured homes which shall be a minimum of two (2) acres. All other performance standards required in the underlying zoning district within a RP overlay zone shall be adhered to by the applicant. Land located between the river banks, including the area from the top of the river bank and edge of the river, may be included in a lot, but shall not be considered as part of the two-acre minimum area. 
[4]  Septic tank drain fields shall not be located within the RP overlay zone. Private septic tanks serving one (1) residential dwelling per lot may be located within the RP overlay district. Septic tanks for other uses are not permitted within the overlay district. Each applicant who desires to include a septic tank within the RP overlay district must provide a copy of their permit issued by the Macon-Bibb County Health Department for the septic tank. 
[5]  Road and utility construction within the RP overlay zone shall be allowed, provided that the construction of such facility complies with all applicable requirements of the soil erosion and sedimentation rules and regulations of the city and/or county. 
[6]  Industrial and commercial uses constructed prior to the adoption date of these regulations shall be exempt from these criteria, unless it is demonstrated that: 
(a)  The uses as constructed will not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(b)  The uses as constructed comply with all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
[7]  Impervious surfaces shall not occupy more than twenty (20) percent of the land area of any lot within the RP overlay zone, excluding any land on the lot that lies between the top of the river bank and the edge of the river. 
(Amended November 12, 1996, ZA96-11-01; Amended October 23, 2000, ZA00-10-01) 
Section 22B.05. - Prohibited uses. 
Within the RP overlay zone, the following uses shall be prohibited: 
[1]  No industrial or commercial uses shall be allowed within the RP overlay zone, except as provided for in Section 22B.07[3] below. 
[2]  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited within the RP overlay zone. Port facilities are exempt from this criteria and provided that: 
(a)  Port facilities shall meet all federal and state laws and regulations for the handling and transport of hazardous waste. 
(b)  Port facilities handling hazardous waste shall perform the operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak protection systems as prescribed by the department of natural resources. 
[3]  Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills are prohibited within the RP overlay zone. 
[4]  Wastewater treatment facilities. 
(Amended November 12, 1996, ZA96-11-01) 
Section 22B.06. - Permitted uses. 
Within the RP overlay zone, the following uses as allowed by the underlying zoning district shall be permitted: 
[1]  Single-family dwellings and manufactured homes; 
[2]  Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Such forestry activity shall comply with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(b)  Such forestry activity shall not impair the drinking water quality of the river as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
[3]  Wildlife fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
[4]  Passive outdoor recreational activities that do not require construction of new structures. 
[5]  Natural water quality treatment or purification facilities. 
[6]  Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Such agricultural activities shall comply with the best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
(b)  Such agricultural activities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(Amended November 12, 1996, ZA96-11-01) 
Section 22B.07. - Conditional uses. 
Within the RP overlay zone, the following conditional uses, as allowed in the underlying zoning district, shall be permitted with the approval of the commission: 
[1]  Recreational activities which require the construction of new structures shall be permitted if they are determined by the commission to be consistent with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river dependent recreation. 
[2]  Other uses that are permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or are allowed under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Prior to the issuance of any permit for such a use by the commission, the applicant must submit a letter from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources stating that the proposed use is permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
[3]  Any use allowed by the underlying zoning district and which is not allowed in Section 22B.06 above as a permitted use and which will occupy a site for a nonconforming use existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations may be approved by the commission provided that the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Such use shall comply with the soil erosion and sedimentation rules and regulations promulgated by the City of Macon and/or Bibb County. 
(b)  Such use shall not impair the drinking water quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(Amended November 12, 1996, ZA96-11-01) 
Section 22B.08. - Buffer areas. 
Within the RP overlay zone, a buffer area must be reconstructed for all portions of the site not covered by buildings, parking lots, or other impervious areas. 
A plan depicting the restoration, showing plant materials and other natural features, must be submitted to and approved by the zoning enforcement officer. 
Replacement materials shall be compatible with the environment and flora native to that portion of the river corridor that has been disturbed. 
(Amended November 12, 1996, ZA96-11-01) 
Chapter 23 - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS GOVERNING CERTAIN USES 

Section 23.01. - Home occupations. 
Home occupations are accessory uses in residential districts, and shall be governed by the standards set out in this section. These standards are intended to ensure compatibility with the residential character of the neighborhood and to emphasize the clearly secondary or incidental status of the home occupation in relation to the residential use of the main building. 
[1]  Standards. The following standards must be met for all home occupations: 
(a)  Such occupation shall be located and conducted in such a manner that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence. 
(b)  Such occupation shall be conducted solely by occupants at the residence. 
(c)  No alteration of the residence, accessory buildings, or the property shall be made, and no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area shall be utilized. 
(d)  The applicant must be the owner of the property on which the home occupation is to be located; or, if applicant is a tenant, he must have written approval of the owner of the property. 
(e)  No stock in trade (except articles produced by the members of the immediate family residing on the premises) shall be displayed or sold upon the premises. 
(f)  No outside storage related to the home occupation shall be permitted. 
(g)  The use may increase vehicular flow and parking by no more than one (1) additional at a time. 
(h)  No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance to a greater or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in an average residential occupancy. 
(i)  One (1) commercial vehicle is permitted in connection with the home occupation, provided the provisions of Section 26.08 are met. (Amended January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
[2]  Home occupations, allowed. Home occupations include but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Telephone and office use: 
(i)  Applicant's business activities at the residence shall be confined to telephone and office use; 
(ii)  No employees or jobbers shall meet or congregate at the applicant's residence; 
(b)  Artists, sculptors, authors, or composers; 
(c)  Dressmakers, seamstresses, or tailors; 
(d)  Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, and lapidary work; 
(e)  Office facility for a minister, rabbi, or priest; 
(f)  Office facility for a salesman, sales representative, or manufacturer's representative, provided that no retail or wholesale transactions are made on the premises; 
(g)  Tutors and musical instructors; and 
(h)  Professional offices. (Added January 13, 1986, ZA86-01-03) 
(i)  Barber and beauty shops. (Added November 27, 1995, ZA95-11-01) 
(j)  Private investigator upon proof certification from the Professional Licensing Board Division of the Georgia Secretary of State Office. 
[3]  Home occupations not allowed. Home occupations allowed shall not, in any event, be deemed to include the following: 
(a)  Reserved. (Amended August 12, 1985, ZA85-08-01; Deleted November 27, 1995, ZA95-11-01) 
(b)  Funeral chapels or funeral homes; 
(c)  Antique shops; 
(d)  Gift shops; 
(e)  Nursery schools, kindergartens, day care homes or centers; 
(f)  Private clubs; 
(g)  Restaurants; 
(h)  Tourist homes; 
(i)  Stables or kennels; 
(j)  Auto repair, auto sales, auto brokerage or similar establishments. 
(k)  Printing establishments; 
(k.1)  Reserved. (Deleted November 13, 2017, ZA17-003) 
(l)  Reserved. (Deleted January 13, 1986, ZA86-01-03) 
(m)  Any other occupation that the Commission finds incompatible with the purposes and intent of this section. 
[4]  Expiration. A zoning permit for home occupations shall expire: 
(a)  Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the home occupation permit was issued. No subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any home occupation until proper application has been made, and a new permit issued. 
(b)  Whenever the holder of such permit fails to carry on the occupation for which the permit was issued for any period of six (6) consecutive months. (Amended October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02; Amended September 23, 2002, ZA02-09-03) 
[5]  Violation of permit. If the Commission finds that a home occupation is being conducted in violation of this or any other provisions of these regulations, then such permit may be suspended or rendered void, provided that a regular hearing shall be conducted prior to any such suspension or voiding. 
(Amended October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02) 
Section 23.02. - Residential cluster development. 
[1]  Purpose. The purpose of cluster development is to permit a procedure for development which will result in improved living environments; which will promote more economic subdivision layout; which will encourage a variety of types of residential dwellings; which will encourage ingenuity and originality [1] in total subdivision and individual site design; and which can preserve open space to serve recreational, scenic, and public service purposes, and other purposes related thereto within the densities established for the cluster net tract area. To achieve these goals: 
(a)  Variations in lot area are permitted; 
(b)  A greater variety of building types is permitted; 
(c)  Procedures are established to assure adequate maintenance and restricted use of open space areas for the benefit of the inhabitants of the subdivisions or for dedication to public use; and 
(d)  Procedures are established to assure adequate protection of existing and potential development adjoining the proposed planned unit and/or cluster development. 
[2]  Cluster development; general requirements: 
(a)  All types of attached, detached, and multifamily residential dwellings may be permitted in cluster developments. 
(b)  Cluster developments shall consist of at least ten (10) dwelling units, except those cluster developments that are found by the Commission to be a logical extension of an existing or approved cluster development may contain fewer dwelling units. 
(c)  Proposed street rights-of-way shall meet the requirements of Section 30.03. 
(d)  The Commission may require buffer areas or screening in conformance with Section 4.08. 
(e)  All units in a cluster development under condominium ownership shall meet all applicable regulations of the "Georgia Condominium Act" (Georgia Code Annotated, Section 85-16E). 
(f)  All cluster developments shall be approved for service by public water and public sewage disposal systems prior to final approval of the project. 
(g)  All cluster developments shall be approved by the Macon Bibb County Fire Department. 
[3]  Subdivision and site plan requirements for cluster developments: 
(a)  Where a cluster development involves the subdivision of land, the platting requirement set forth in Chapter 29 shall be met. 
(b)  Where a cluster development involves site plan approval, the requirements set forth in Section 19.10 shall be met. 
(c)  Cluster developments shall be constructed in accordance with the preliminary subdivision plan or site plan as approved by the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
[4]  Requirements for single-family detached subdivisions: 
(a)  All single-family detached developments shall meet the following requirements: 

 
* At the discretion of the Commission. 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
[5]  Requirements for single-family attached cluster developments: 
(a)  All single-family attached developments shall meet the following requirements: 

 
*At the discretion of the Commission. 
(b)  The Commission may impose such setback and buffer requirements for this Section 23.02 as it finds necessary to allow for consistent uses with adjacent property and the improvements thereon. (Amended March 14, 1988, ZA88-03-02) 
[6]  Requirements for multifamily cluster developments: 
(a)  All multifamily developments shall meet the following requirements: 

 
*At the discretion of the Commission. 
(b)  Open space between units and buildings: The front or rear face of a dwelling unit shall be not less than fifty (50) feet from the front or rear face of another dwelling unit. The unattached side face of a single-family attached building shall be not less than twenty (20) feet from the side face of another such building. 
(c)  Alignment: No dwelling unit shall be situated so as to face the rear of another dwelling unit within the subdivision unless terrain differences or vegetation will provide effective visual separation. 
(d)  (Deleted March 14, 1988, ZA88-03-02) 
[7]  Rear and side yard requirements (building setback distances). Modification and variation of rear and side yard setback requirements may be permitted by the Commission. Such modifications must be shown on any preliminary cluster subdivision plan or site plan. Rear and side yard setback requirements may be modified by the Commission. 
[8]   Open space requirements for all cluster developments. The balance of land, not contained in buildings, roads, service areas, parking lots, and the like, shall be in such condition, size, and shape as to be readily usable for recreation or conservation. Such land shall be reserved by one (1) of the following means: 
(a)  Deeded to the City of Macon or Bibb County, whichever is applicable; 
(b)  Held in corporate ownership by the owners of the land and such other nearby landowners who may wish to become members of the corporation. However, membership in said corporation shall be mandatory for all residents of the proposed development. In the case of corporate ownership, the developer shall include in the deed to the owners of the development the membership stipulation and the beneficial right in the use of open land; 
(c)  Held in ownership by the development, subject to a legal agreement with the City of Macon or County of Bibb regarding the developer's responsibility for maintenance of the balance of the land as noted above; 
(d)  Governed by a special tax district; 
(e)  Covenants or other legal arrangements specifying ownership of the cluster open space, method of maintenance, responsibility for maintenance, maintenance taxes and insurance, compulsory membership and compulsory assessment provisions; or 
(f)  A combination of the above. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The word "originality" was substituted for "originally." 
 --- (2) --- 
Editor's note— This subsection, originally designated as [7], was redesignated as [8] by the editors. 

Section 23.03. - Two-family dwellings (duplexes) to be located in R-1A and R-1 Single-Family Residential Districts. 
Such dwellings are allowed only in new subdivisions for which the initial plat, which has been approved according to the requirements of Chapter 29, designates the location of all two-family dwellings to be located in the subdivision. The following criteria shall govern: 
[1]  Lot quantity. The new subdivision must contain twenty-five (25) or more lots with the lots designated for duplexes being contiguous. 
[2]  Lot location. The lots designated for duplexes in new subdivisions shall not be located adjacent to any neighboring subdivision or group development, and must not adversely affect other adjacent residential areas. 
[3]  Lots, maximum number. In no case shall the total number of lots designated for duplexes be greater than twenty (20) percent of the total lots in the new subdivision, nor shall the total be less than three (3) lots. 
[4]  Lots, standards conformity. The lots designed for duplexes must conform to the development standards set out for each district in which the duplexes are to be located. 
[5]  Designation of lots. The lots designated for duplexes must be indicated and included in the deed restrictions for the subdivision and they must be indicated, by use of the word "duplex," on the final recorded subdivision plat. 
[6]  Duplex entrance. The duplex shall not have more than one (1) entrance facing the street on which the lot fronts. 
Section 23.04. - Multifamily dwellings. 
The following requirements shall apply to multifamily dwellings: 
[1]  General requirements: 
(a)  Reserved; (Deleted March 14, 1988, ZA88-03-03) 
(b)  The site to be developed shall be under one (1) ownership; 
(c)  The parcel of land need not be subdivided into the customary streets and lots; 
(d)  The arrangement of buildings is such that access of fire fighting equipment to the buildings is maintained, as certified by the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department; 
(e)  The development is located on public sewer; and 
(f)  At least one and one-half (1½) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each unit. These spaces shall be within three hundred (300) feet of the dwelling unit. All off-street parking spaces shall be designed and located so that vehicles will not be required to back into a public street. 
[2]  Requirements for R-2 and R-2A districts: 
(a)  Developments shall be no smaller than ten (10) units. 
(b)  The density allowed shall be fourteen and one-half (14.5) units per acre. 
[3]  Requirements for R-3 district: 
(a)  The parcel of land to be developed shall be no smaller than seventy-five hundred (7,500) square feet in size. 
(b)  The density allowed shall be that density allowed in Section 11.06 of these regulations. 
Section 23.05. - Condominium developments. 
Condominium developments must meet all applicable regulations of the "Georgia Condominium Act" 
(Georgia Code Annotated, Section 85-16E). 
Section 23.06. - Travel trailer parks. 
Travel trailer parks, when permitted as a conditional use in any district, must meet the following conditions. 
[1]  Access. No travel trailer park shall be located in any district, unless it has district access to a county, state, or federal highway and has a minimum lot width of not less than fifty (50) feet for the portion used for entrance and exit. No entrance or exit shall be through a residential district, or require movement of traffic from the park through a residential district. 
[2]  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area per park shall be three (3) acres. 
[3]  Use of spaces. Spaces in travel trailer parks may be used only by travel trailers, and are subject to all applicable laws and ordinances of the City of Macon and Bibb County. Spaces shall be rented by the day or week only, and an occupant of such space shall remain in the same trailer park for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
[4]  Accessory buildings and uses. Management headquarters, recreational facilities, toilets, showers, laundry facilities, and other uses and structures customarily incidental to operation of a trailer park are permitted as accessory uses in any district in which trailer parks are allowed, provided: 
(a)  Such establishments and the parking area primarily related to their operation shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the area of the park; 
(b)  Such establishments shall be restricted in their use to occupants of the park; and 
(c)  Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of their commercial character which would attract customers, other than occupants of the park. 
[5]  Space location. No space shall be so located that any part intended for occupancy for sleeping purposes shall be within fifty (50) feet of the right-of-way line of any freeway, expressway, or collector street or within twenty-five (25) feet of the right-of-way line of any minor street. 
[6]  Health department approval. In addition to meeting the above requirements, the travel trailer park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department. 
Section 23.07. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— ZA06-06-04, adopted June 26, 2006, repealed § 23.07 which pertained to manufactured home community. See also the Comparative Table. 
Section 23.08. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Amendment No. ZA99-11-02, § 7, adopted November 22, 1999, deleted § 23.08 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to temporary permits for mobile homes. 
Section 23.09. - Manufactured homes. 
The use and location of manufactured homes shall be governed by the following requirements: 
[1]  Except where located in Manufactured Home Communities, manufactured homes located in MHR Manufactured Home Residential Districts shall comply with the following conditions. 
(a)  The lot area and dimensions must meet the requirements of the MHR Manufactured Home Residential District; 
(b)  In no case shall the manufactured home be located within twenty (20) feet of any building. 
(c)  Manufactured homes shall meet the following conditions; unless the applicant has obtained a variance therefrom in accordance with Section 23.09[1](e): 
(i)  The roof must be double pitched and covered with material that is residential in appearance, including, but not limited to, wood, asphalt composition, or fiberglass shingles, but excluding corrugated aluminum, corrugated fiberglass, or metal roofs; 
(ii)  Exterior siding cannot have a high-gloss finish and must be residential in appearance, including, but not limited to, clapboards, simulated clapboards, such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes or similar material, but excluding smooth, ribbed, or corrugated metal or plastic panels; 
(iii)  The manufactured home must have permanent steps at all exits. 
(iv)  The manufactured home must be placed on permanent foundation that complies with Chapter 120-3-7, Rules and Regulations of the Office of Commissioner of Insurance Safety Fire Division; 
(v)  The exterior foundation material must consist of continuous concrete or masonry suitable for outer portion of a finished residence; 
(vi)  The hitch, axles and wheels must be removed; 
(vii)  The manufactured home must be oriented on the lot so that long axis is parallel with the street. A perpendicular or diagonal placement may be permitted if there is a building addition or substantial landscaping so that the narrow dimension of the unit, as so modified and facing the street is no less than fifty (50) percent of the unit's long dimension; 
(viii)  The manufactured home must be at least twenty (20) feet in width; 
(ix)  A minimum of eighteen inches of crawl space must be maintained under the entire manufactured home; 
(x)  The property owner shall declare the manufactured home as real property and must so record with the Bibb county tax assessor; and 
(xi)  The manufactured home must be manufactured after June 15, 1976. 
(e)  An applicant may request a variance from the Commission as to any standard mandated in Section 23.09[1](d) where the granting of such variance will not have a negative impact on the manufactured home's compatibility with other residences in the same neighborhood. 
[2]  Manufactured homes located in agricultural districts shall comply with the following conditions: 
(a)  The lot area and dimensions must meet the requirements for a single-family dwelling unit in the agricultural districts; 
(b)  In no case shall the manufactured home be located within twenty (20) feet of any building. 
(c)  If a manufactured home is located in a manufactured home community, a tax decal must be obtained from the Bibb County Tax Commissioners. 
(d)  The Commission, in reviewing an application for a manufactured home, shall determine if the proposed site is an appropriate location by: 
(i)  Reviewing the existing residential development pattern for adjacent tracts; 
(ii)  Evaluating the effect that the proposed location of a manufactured home would have upon the Comprehensive Land Development Plan; 
(iii)  Determining whether the proposed use will be of such type and character that it would be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the adjacent area; and 
(e)  When allowed, manufactured homes in agricultural districts, except where located in Manufactured Home Communities, shall meet the following conditions: 
(i)  The roof must be double pitched with said pitch being at least 3/12 and covered with material that is residential in appearance, including, but not limited to, wood, asphalt composition, or fiberglass shingles, but excluding corrugated aluminum, corrugated fiberglass, or metal roofs. 
(ii)  Exterior siding cannot have a high-gloss finish and must be residential in appearance, including, but not limited to, clapboards, simulated clapboard such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes or similar material, but excluding smooth, ribbed, or corrugated metal or plastic panels. 
(iii)  The manufactured home must be placed on permanent foundation that complies with Chapter 120-3-7, Rules and Regulations of the Office of Commissioners of Insurance Safety Fire Division; 
(iv)  The hitch, axles and wheels must be removed; 
(v)  The manufactured home must be oriented on the lot so that long axis is parallel with the street. A perpendicular or diagonal placement may be permitted if there is a building addition or substantial landscaping so that the narrow dimension of the unit, as so modified and facing the street is no less than fifty (50) percent of the unit's long dimension; 
(vi)  The manufactured home must be at least twenty (20) feet in width; 
(vii)  The exterior design, size and configuration of the manufactured home must be compatible with nearby or surrounding dwellings; 
(viii)  A minimum of eighteen inches of crawl space must be maintained under the entire manufactured home; 
(ix)  The exterior foundation material must consist of continuous concrete or masonry suitable for the outer portion of a finished residence; 
(x)  The manufactured home must have a front porch and have permanent steps at all exists; 
(xi)  The property owner shall declare the manufactured home as real property and must so record with the Bibb county tax assessor; and 
(xii)  The manufactured home must be manufactured after June 15, 1976. 
(xiii)  An applicant may register a variance from the Commission as to any standard mandated in 29.09[2](e) where the granting of such variance will not have a negative impact on the manufactured home's compatibility with other residences in the same neighborhood. 
[3]  Manufactured homes located in manufactured home communities are governed by the requirements of Section 23.07. 
[4]  As set out in Section 23.24, mobile homes and manufactured homes are not allowed within a floodway except in existing manufactured home (mobile home) parks or subdivisions. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision providing standards contained in the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinances of the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia are met. 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
Section 23.10. - Additional single-family dwellings on a single lot. 
The Commission, after a review of an application and public hearing thereon, may permit, as a conditional use, additional single-family dwellings on the same lot or parcel of land as that of the main single-family dwelling without requiring subdivision of land within certain zoning districts based on the following requirements: 
[1]  The main single-family dwelling is located in RR-Rural Residential, R-1AAAA, R-1AAA, R-1AA, R-1A, R-1, R-2A, R-2, or R-3 Residential District. 
(a)  The lot area and lot width shall be a minimum of twice the required lot area and lot width for a single-family dwelling for the district in which it is located. 
(b)  The additional dwelling shall be placed in the rear yard of the main dwelling. The rear yard is defined as the area extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main dwelling, projected to the side lines of the lot. There shall be a distance of not less than twenty (20) feet between the two structures. 
(c)  The additional dwelling shall not exceed nine hundred (900) square feet and shall be limited to one (1) bedroom. 
(d)  The additional dwelling shall not exceed two (2) stories in height nor cover more than thirty (30) percent of the rear yard. 
(e)  The additional dwelling shall meet the front, rear and side yard setback requirements for the district in which it is located. 
(f)  A to scale site plan, building elevations and floor plan shall be submitted at the time an application is made. 
(g)  The arrangement of such additional single-family dwelling shall be in such a manner that, if the lot or parcel of land is ever subdivided, no substandard lots or nonconforming buildings are created. 
(h)  No more than two (2) single-family dwellings on a single lot shall be permitted. 
(i)  One (1) additional off-street parking space shall be required. 
(j)  The Commission shall determine whether the proposed additional single-family dwelling will be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony with the surrounding development and will not be a detriment to adjacent properties. 
(k)  Variances to the requirements of lot area, lot width or maximum square footage of the proposed additional dwelling shall be prohibited. 
(l)  All additional single-family dwellings shall meet applicable building codes and sewerage disposal methods as required by the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia. 
[2]  The main single-family dwelling is located in A-Agricultural District. 
(a)  No more than two (2) dwelling units shall be permitted on a single lot. 
(b)  The lot are and lot width shall be a minimum of twice the required lot area and lot width for a single-family dwelling for the district in which it is located. 
(c)  The additional dwelling shall meet the front, rear and side yard setback requirements for the district in which it is located. 
(d)  The arrangement of such additional single-family dwelling shall be in such a manner that, if the lot or parcel of land is ever subdivided, no substandard lots or nonconforming buildings are created. 
(e)  All additional single-family dwellings shall meet applicable building codes and sewerage disposal methods as required by the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia. 
(Amended April 28, 2008, ZA08-04-02) 
Section 23.11. - Automobile service stations. 
Within the districts permitting automobile service stations, the following requirements shall apply: 
[1]  Location. The property on which an automobile service station is located shall not be within one hundred (100) feet of any residential district or any property containing a school, public library, or institution for children or dependents. 
[2]  Site requirements. An automobile service station shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of one hundred twenty (120) feet and a minimum area of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. All buildings shall be set back forty (40) feet from all street right-of-way lines, and all canopies shall be set back fifteen (15) feet from all street right-of-way lines. 
[3]  Access to site. Vehicular entrances or exits at an automobile service station: 
(a)  Shall not be provided with more than two (2) curb cuts for the first one hundred twenty (120) feet of frontage along any one (1) street, and shall not have more than one (1) additional curb cut for each additional one hundred fifty (150) feet of street frontage or fraction thereof; 
(b)  Shall contain an access width along the curb line of the street of not more than forty (40) feet, as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point, and shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to the adjoining property; and 
(c)  Shall not have any two (2) driveways or curb cuts any closer than twenty (20) feet at both the right-of-way line and the curb or edge of the pavement along a single street. 
[4]  Gasoline pump islands. All gasoline pump islands (of which any canopies shall be deemed a part thereof, if applicable) shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line, or where a future widening lane has been established, the setback line shall be measured from such line, and where pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the right-of-way line, the pump island shall be located not less than thirty (30) feet back of the right-of-way. (Amended July 23, 1990, ZA90-07-02) 
[5]  Off-street parking. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces are required, with an additional off-street parking space for each lubrication and wash bay. 
[6]  Other site improvements. In addition to the above requirements, the following additional site improvements shall be adhered to: 
(a)  A raised curb of at least six (6) inches in height shall be erected along the street property lines, except for driveway openings; 
(b)  A solid fence or wall six (6) feet in height shall be erected along all property lines adjacent to a residential zone; 
(c)  Exterior lighting shall be arranged so that it is deflected away from adjacent properties; 
(d)  No sign, whether permanent or temporary, shall be placed within the public right-of-way and said signs shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians; and 
(e)  All drives, parking, storage, and service areas shall be paved and curbed and a good stand of grass shall be maintained on the remainder of the lot. 
[7]  Storage of inflammable products. Outside aboveground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil, or other inflammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited at any automobile service station in all zoning districts. 
[8]  Rental trucks and trailers (conditional use): 
(a)  Applications for such use must be made by the operator of a gasoline service station to store and rent units allowed by this section and such application shall be accompanied by a site plan of the station which shall show: 
(i)  The entire service station site dimensions, street designations, location of buildings, pump islands, ingress and egress drives, proposed storage area for such rental units (including dimensions) and a display area designation; and 
(ii)  Application must be accompanied by a sufficient number of photographs showing the location of said site to accurately present the site showing in such photographs the location of said rental units. 
(b)  No more than [3] ten (10) trailer and/or truck units may be maintained on any service station site for rental purposes, except as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  The trailer and/or truck storage area shall be located behind the existing front service station building line and shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the rear property line, five (5) feet from an interior side property line, and ten (10) feet from a side street property line. If a barrier in the form of a wall or hedge exists, the units may be set up to the barrier, notwithstanding the location designated above. It is the intent of this Section to prevent visibility problems that could arise with the uncontrolled storage of such units, as well as to prevent the possibility of blocking the view of the adjoining property owners. 
(d)  One (1) small trailer unit may be used for display purposes and, as such, many be located in front of the existing service station building line, so long as this unit does not block ingress and egress to the service station and this unit is set back at least ten (10) feet from the front property line. 
(e)  All rental units will be supported by tongue stands and will be arranged in an orderly, straight-line fashion within the storage area, and the plan, as approved, will be complied with by said station at all times. 
(f)  Application may be made by the operator of a service station to store and rent units, exceeding the number permitted by this section, but in no instance shall an application be granted exceeding more than twenty (20) trailer and/or truck units. This Commission shall give due consideration to the overall zoning plan in the immediate vicinity of the site location, seeking such approval, as well as the size of the service station lot involved. 
(g)  All applications must be signed by the applicant and cosigned by the rental company concerned, if any. Upon approval, a copy of the authorized plan will be sent to the applicant and a copy of such plan must be kept at the service site for inspection purposes. 
(h)  When it has been determined that a violation of this section has occurred, upon notification to the rental company or, if no rental company is involved, to the owner of the rental units, said rental company or owner will remove all units from the station in question within ten (10) days of such notice. 
[9]  Convenience stores. Only those requirements set out in Section 23.11[4] shall be applicable to convenience stores with pump islands. 
(Amended July 23, 1990, ZA90-07-02) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The word "than" was substituted for "that." 

Section 23.12. - Shopping center design criteria. 
[1]  Purpose for Criteria. Shopping centers are intended to provide for the grouping of commercial buildings on a single parcel of land in such a manner as to create a harmonious, efficient, and convenient retail shopping environment. Such a center also should assure safety and convenience of traffic movement, both within the development and in relation to adjacent access thoroughfares and should foster a compatible land use and design relationship within the center and with contiguous developments. It is further the intent of such centers to encourage innovation in building design and land development techniques so that the growing demands of the community may be met, while at the same time providing for the most amenable use of such lands. 
[2]  Design Criteria. The following criteria shall control the design and development of all shopping centers: 
(a)  General criteria. Development proposals shall be consistent with the following design criteria: 
(i)  Planned exterior design compatibility of all commercial buildings; 
(ii)  Provision for adequate but unobtrusive parking areas, well related to the uses served and to adjoining thoroughfares; and 
(iii)  Convenient customer walkways, separated and protected from vehicular movements. 
(b)  Specific building design criteria: 
(i)  Both new construction and rehabilitation of existing structures shall be designed in harmony with the entire center, as to height, bulk, location, and use of exterior materials; 
(ii)  The location of individual buildings not planned as part of the original project (i.e., spin-off sites) shall be determined in relation to the overall center design such that the established character of the entire project will be cohesively tied together; 
(iii)  Sides of all buildings viewed from the public right-of-way shall be given treatment comparable in attractiveness to their principal frontage. Off-street loading and waste storage areas shall be adequately screened; and 
(iv)  Appurtenances to both new and existing structures, such as signs, canopies, and exterior lighting, shall be carefully designed with respect to size, graphics, color, and material in order to provide an attractive atmosphere. 
(c)  Specific design criteria for pedestrian walks and open spaces: 
(i)  Pedestrian walks, plazas, and open spaces shall be located to provide maximum accessibility among the various buildings in the shopping center. Conflicts in pedestrian and vehicular movements shall be avoided to the greatest practicable extent. All walks shall be appropriately lighted in an attractive manner. 
(ii)  Open spaces shall be located so as to provide for maximum usability by customers and so as to create a harmonious relationship between buildings and exterior spaces throughout the center. 
(iii)  All pedestrian walks and open spaces shall be appropriately landscaped and/or paved. Materials for paving, retaining walls, fences, curbs, benches, etc., shall be attractive, durable, and easily maintained. 
(d)  Specific design objectives for interior drives and parking areas: 
(i)  Interior drives shall be designed only for access to buildings, parking, and loading areas, and shall not be so situated as to invite through traffic or to interfere with pedestrian movements. 
(ii)  Parking areas shall be designed with careful regard to their relationship to uses served, ease of access to and from traffic arteries, and the topography of the site. 
(iii)  Parking areas shall be made unobtrusive by appropriate screening and landscaping, and large parking areas shall be subdivided into smaller areas by landscaped divider strips or landscaped pedestrian walkways. Any lighting to be provided shall be directed away from property lines so that no glare will extend to adjacent properties. 
(e)  Specific landscape design objectives: 
(i)  Landscaping of all sites in the center shall be coordinated to provide an integrated treatment of all open spaces, pedestrian walkways, plazas, and parking areas. 
(ii)  Primary landscape treatment shall consist of shrubs, ground cover, and trees as appropriate to the site. 
(f)  Parking layout criteria: The following space dimensions at various parking angles shall be required: 

 
(g)  Reduction of stall sizes. Upon approval by the Commission, twenty-five (25) percent of the spaces may be reduced to eight (8) feet by sixteen (16) feet stall sizes to accommodate small cars; and shall be designated as a small car parking area. 
Section 23.13. - Development standards for kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers. 
(Day care homes shall meet the development standard requirements for the district in which located.) 

 
[4]  Screening requirements. The Commission may require buffers, fencing or screening to protect adjacent uses. 
[5]  Drop-off and pick-up provisions. Provisions shall be made for off-street drop-off and pick-up of children. 
[6]  Reduction of minimum standards: The Commission may reduce the minimum standards contained in Sections 23.13[1], [2], and [3] in R-3, HR-3, HC and in all commercial, industrial, and planned development districts, provided that: 
(a)  The proposed use is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the use does not impact unfavorably on adjoining property; and 
(b)  Other state or local approvals have been obtained. 
(Added March 25, 1991, ZA91-03-03) 
Section 23.14. - Sanitary landfills. 
No sanitary landfill shall be allowed, unless it complies with all laws, rules, and regulations of the city, county, state, and federal governments. 
Section 23.15. - Fall-out shelters. 
Fall-out shelters are permissible as principal or accessory uses and structures in any district; subject to the following conditions: 
[1]  Aboveground portions. If any portion of the structure extends above the ground, that portion above the ground must comply with yard and lot coverage regulations of the distinct in which it is located, and the site plan for such shelter must be approved by the zoning enforcement officer. 
[2]  Underground structure. If the structure is completely underground, it need not comply with yard requirements or percentage of lot coverage requirements. 
[3]  Location. A fall-out shelter, underground or aboveground, shall be confined to a side or rear yard and the same shall not be located in the front yard, between the main building and the street on which it fronts. 
[4]  Construction styles. Fall-out shelters may contain or be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately. 
[5]  Uses. Fall-out shelters may be used for any permissible use in the district where situated or, upon approval by the Commission, may be used for uses which are conditional in the district where situated. 
Section 23.16. - Cemeteries. 
Within the districts permitting cemeteries as a conditional use, the following requirements shall apply: 
[1]  The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare; 
[2]  Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than twenty-five (25) acres; 
[3]  All structures shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or street right-of-way line; 
[4]  All graves or burial plots shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way line and not less than fifty (50) feet from any collector, arterial, expressway, or freeway right-of-way line; and 
[5]  The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. 
(Amended July 24, 2000, ZA00-07-02) 
Section 23.17. - Development of natural resources. 
Within the districts permitting development of natural resources, including the removal of minerals and natural materials, such activity shall be governed by the following requirements: 
[1]  A plan of development shall be submitted to the Commission. Such plan shall show the proposed development as planned and staged, in relation to all adjacent property within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed mining area, including topographic surveys, indicating present conditions (e.g., topography, drainage, and soils) and the conditions of the mined area at the end of the exploitation phase. 
[2]  The plan of development shall also show that the proposed mining activity will not create hazardous conditions for other property by reason of increased flooding or rise in groundwater levels, erosion caused by increased run-off, deposition of debris from flood or erosion, or for other reasons. 
[3]  The plan shall show the location of all proposed buildings and how traffic flow to and from the mining area will be handled. 
[4]  The site shall be a minimum of five (5) acres with no building mining activity within fifty (50) feet of the property line. 
[5]  The location of the mining activities shall not place any undue hardship on adjoining property owners, and the operations in the location proposed should not create unusual traffic hazards or the need for special public streets, bridges, or any other facilities unless the developer assumes full cost of such improvements. 
[6]  All activities shall meet air and water quality standards of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
[7]  The plan for re-use and reclamation shall meet the requirements and be approved by the State Surface Mine Land Use Board. 
[8]  Any extension of quarrying operations beyond the property lines actually being quarried at the effective date of this Resolution shall be considered as a new operation and shall obtain a certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit, such permit to be renewed every [4] two (2) years or at such longer interval as may be specified by the Commission. 
[9]  Quarry areas being excavated shall be entirely enclosed with a six-foot high fence located at least ten (10) feet back from the edge of any excavation. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— The word "every" was substituted for "ever." 

Section 23.18. - Temporary uses or events. 
Temporary uses or events shall be allowed as a permitted use provided the following regulations are met; 
[1]  Temporary tent for private use. Temporary tent on residentially zoned property or property used for residential purposes is exempt from zoning permit requirements provided the tent is for private use by the owner and the placement of the tent does not interfere with traffic flow or traffic vision. 
[2]  Temporary tent for business, institutional or place of assembly use. Temporary tent shall be allowed as a permitted use in conjunction with an existing land-use which has received approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission and the tent is being utilized for the business, institution, or place of assembly located at that site provided the following criteria are met; 
(a)  The placement of the tent does not interfere with traffic flow or traffic vision. 
(b)  The placement of the tent shall meet the front yard setbacks requirement for the district in which it is located. 
(c)  The proposed location of the tent shall receive prior approval from the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department and the Traffic Engineering Department. 
(d)  The use shall be limited to thirty (30) consecutive days. 
(e)  Application shall include a diagram/sketch showing tent location, parking, driveways, and principal structure(s). 
(f)  P.A., loud speakers, and/or stage shall be located entirely within the tent. 
(g)  Lighting shall be directed so as not to reflect glare into residential dwellings or districts or any public right-of-way. 
(h)  Health Department approval shall be required if any food or beverages will be served. 
(i)  Signage shall be regulated by requirements of Chapter 25. 
[3]  Temporary outdoor sales or events with or without a tent. Temporary outdoor sale of seasonal items such as fireworks, Christmas trees, fruits and vegetables and temporary outside sales, carnivals, circuses, and tent revivals shall be allowed as a permitted temporary use in all commercial and industrial districts and planned development districts PDI, PDC and PDE, provided the following criteria are met; 
(a)  The sale or event shall not be in conjunction with the primary land use on the site. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide written permission from the property owner at the time of application. 
(c)  The site for the proposed use shall be located on a lot fronting an arterial or collector street. 
(d)  The placement of the tent or display area shall not interfere with traffic flow or traffic vision. 
(e)  The tent or display area shall meet the front yard setbacks requirement for the district in which it is located. 
(f)  The proposed location of the tent shall receive prior approval from the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department and the Traffic Engineering Department. 
(g)  The use shall be limited to sixty (60) consecutive days. 
(h)  Application shall include a diagram/sketch showing tent location, display/sales location parking, driveways, and any existing structure(s). 
(i)  Lighting shall be directed so as not to reflect glare into residential dwellings or districts or any public right-of-way. 
(j)  Health Department approval shall be required if any food or beverages will be served. 
(k)  Signage shall be regulated by requirements of Chapter 25. 
(Added March 23, 2009, ZA09-03-01) 
Section 23.19. - Office in the home. 
Office in home is conditional use in a rural residential or agricultural district and shall be governed by the standards set out in this section. These standards are intended to ensure compatibility with the existing character of the area. 
[1]  Standards. The following standards must be met for all businesses conducted by offices located in the home. 
(a)  Such business shall be allowed to employ one (1) additional employee who is someone other than an occupant at the residence. 
(b)  Each residence [5] on which such a business shall be conducted shall be situated on at least five (5) acres of land with a minimum setback of fifty (50) feet from the side and rear property line, and shall be located on an arterial or collector street or road. 
(c)  No alteration of the residence, accessory building, or the property shall be made and no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross area shall be utilized. 
(d)  The applicant must be the owner of the property on which the office is to be located; or, if applicant is a tenant or a proposed owner, he must have written approval of the owner of the property. 
(e)  No stock in trade shall be sold on the premises, except such sales may be made by telephone or mail orders. 
(f)  No outside storage related to the business shall be permitted. 
(g)  The use may increase vehicle traffic flow and parking by no more than one additional vehicle at a time. 
(h)  No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance to a greater or more frequent extent than the usual experience in an average residential occupancy. 
(i)  One (1) commercial vehicle is permitted in connection with the business conducted, provided the provisions of Section 26.08 are met. (Amended January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
[2]  Office in homes not allowed. Businesses conducted in the home shall not in any event be deemed to include the following: 
(a)  Barber or beauty shops, except in R-3 multifamily district. 
(b)  Funeral chapels or funeral homes. 
(c)  Antique shops. 
(d)  Gift shops. 
(e)  Nursery schools, kindergartens, day care homes or centers. 
(f)  Private clubs. 
(g)  Restaurants. 
(h)  Tourist homes. 
(i)  Stables or kennels. 
(j)  Auto repair or similar establishments. 
(k)  Printing establishments. 
(l)  Any other occupation that the Commission finds incompatible with the purposes and intent of this section. 
[3]  Expiration. A special zoning permit for businesses conducted in the home shall expire: 
(a)  Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the permit was issued. No subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any such business until proper application has been made and a new permit issued. 
(b)  Whenever the holder of such permit fails to carry on the occupation for which the permit was issued for any period of six (6) consecutive months. 
[4]  Voidance of permit. If the Commission finds that a business is being conducted in violation of the provisions of this section, it may void the special zoning permit. 
(Amended May 13, 1985, ZA85-05-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The word "residence" was substituted for "resident." 

Section 23.20. - Sidewalk cafes. 
Sidewalk cafes shall be in all cases regulated and governed according to the ordinances of the City of Macon, Georgia within the corporate limits of the City of Macon. Where authorized and permitted by the City of Macon, Georgia, they will be exempt from the provisions of the Comprehensive Land Development Resolution for the City of Macon and County of Bibb. 
(Amended July 22, 1985, ZA85-07-01) 
Section 23.21. - Satellite earth station. 
Satellite earth stations greater than one (1) meter (39.37 inches) in diameter are regulated under the terms of this Resolution only in residential districts where they shall be treated as accessory uses and in such districts the following performance standards shall apply: 
[1]  Satellite earth stations may be ground-mounted (capable of screening) in either the back yard or side yard if properly screened by landscaping and shrubbery or opaque fencing from adjacent view of public right-of-way. In the event this Section causes (1) unreasonable delays or prevents installation, maintenance or use, (2) unreasonably increases the cost of installation, maintenance or use, or (3) precludes reception of an acceptable quality signal, the Commission may grant a variance to the above regulations provided that the applicant demonstrates that one or more of the above conditions exist satisfactorily to the Commission. A variance will not be granted for the placement of a satellite earth station in any area that would impair public safety or impair the line of site for the traveling public. 
[2]  The maximum permitted height for a ground-mounted satellite earth station shall be twelve (12) feet. 
[3]  Satellite earth stations can be pole-mounted in the back yard only at a height not to exceed the roof ridge line of the dwelling which the satellite dish is to service. 
[4]  Satellite earth stations may be rooftop-mounted so long as the height does not exceed the roof ridge line of the dwelling which the satellite earth station services. 
[5]  Satellite earth stations in residential districts may not be used for any commercial or advertising purpose. 
[6]  Satellite earth stations shall be located as designated and specified above in either rear yards or side yards and shall be set back at least five (5) feet from any lot line and shall not be placed across the front building line or be closer to a public street than [6] the primary structure being served when placed in side yard. 
[7]  Visual screening, either by landscaping and shrubbery or opaque fencing is required on any ground-mounted satellite earth station located in either the side yard or rear yard. 
(Added May 27, 1986, ZA86-05-01; Amended October 13, 1997, ZA97-10-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— As enacted by ZA97-10-01, this subsection read " . . . public street that . . . ". 

Section 23.22. - Public utility structures and buildings. 
The Commission shall determine the lot and area requirements, building setback distances, and off-street parking and loading space for public utility structures and buildings. Size and intensity of the proposed use as it relates to adjacent land uses shall be a determinative factor. 
(Added February 27, 1989, ZA89-02-02) 
Section 23.23. - Manufactured home subdivisions. 
Manufactured home subdivisions shall conform to the following requirements. 
[1]  Subdivision requirements: 
(a)  The lot area and dimensions must meet the requirements of Section 6.04 for manufactured home subdivisions located in a Agricultural District and Section 22.04 for manufactured home subdivisions located in a Manufactured Home Residential district. 
(b)  Proposed streets rights-of-way shall meet the requirements of Section 30.03. 
(c)  The Commission may require buffer areas of screening in conformance with Section 4.08. 
(d)  Platting requirements as set forth in Chapter 29 shall be met. 
(e)  Manufactured home subdivisions shall be constructed in accordance with the preliminary subdivision plat as approved by the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
[2]  Cluster subdivisions subject to the requirements of Section 23.02. 
[3]  Individual manufactured homes within manufactured home subdivision shall conform to the regulations contained in Section 23.09. 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
Section 23.24. - Mobile or manufactured homes not allowed in floodways.[7] 
Mobile homes and manufactured homes are not allowed within a floodway except in existing manufactured home (mobile home) parks or subdivisions. A replacement manufactured home (mobile home) may be placed on a lot in existing manufactured home (mobile home) parks or subdivisions provided the standards contained in the flood damage prevention ordinances of the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia are met. 
(Added March 25, 1991, ZA91-03-02) 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— This section was originally enacted as § 23.23, and included herein as § 23.24 at the direction of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 

Section 23.25. - Special performance standards for adult entertainment establishments. 
[1]  Adult entertainment establishments may not be established, operated, or maintained within one thousand (1,000) feet of a church and other place of worship; public or private park or recreation area; school meeting all the requirements of the compulsory requirement laws of the state; day care center, kindergarten, or playschool; public or private library; or orphanage. 
[2]  No adult entertainment establishment shall be established, operated, or maintained within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a dwelling unit (single-family, two-family, multi-family); college or university; any bar, tavern, saloon, nightclub, restaurant serving alcohol or any place where alcohol is sold for consumption on the premises; liquor store, package store, or any other establishment where alcohol sales is the primary source of revenue, but not consumed on the premises; hospital or other medical care facility including doctors' offices; and grocery store. 
[3]  No adult entertainment establishment shall be established, operated, or maintained within five hundred (500) feet of any historic district, CBD-1, or CBD-2 district. 
[4]  No adult entertainment establishment shall be established, operated, or maintained within two hundred fifty (250) feet of another adult entertainment establishment in SC Special Commercial districts, where such uses are permitted uses. 
[5]  No adult entertainment establishment shall be established, operated, or maintained with seven hundred fifty (750) feet of another adult entertainment establishment in C-4 Highway Commercial districts, M-2 Heavy Industrial districts, M-3 Heavy Industrial districts, and PDI Planned Development Industrial districts, where such uses are special exceptions. 
[6]  All distances established in Section 23.25 and shall be radial distances determined by a straight line and not street distance, measured from property line to property line. 
[7]  [ Reserved. ] 
[8]  Buildings and structures shall not be painted or surfaced with colors or textures or any design that would simulate a sign or advertising message. 
[9]  Any performance or displays of merchandise or any other exhibit depicting adult entertainment activities shall be conducted within the interior of buildings or premises and shall be arranged or screened to prevent public viewing from outside such buildings or premises. 
[10]  No hawker or outside loudspeakers or other outdoor sound equipment advertising or directing attention to an adult entertainment use is allowed. 
[11]  Distances, when required by these regulations, shall be established by a survey performed by a survey or licensed in the State of Georgia. Said survey shall be provided at the time a petition for a change to the official zoning maps is filed and when an application is made for a special zoning permit. 
(Added March 22, 1993, ZA93-03-01; Amended September 27, 1993, ZA93-09-02; Amended July 22, 2002, ZA02-07-04) 
Section 23.26. - Distance requirements for alcoholic beverage sales. 
No bar, tavern, saloon, nightclub, restaurant serving alcohol or any place where alcohol is sold for consumption on the premises may be established, operated or maintained within one thousand (1,000) feet of an adult entertainment establishment. The distance established by this Section shall be radial distances determined by a straight line and not street distance, measured from property line to property line. This distance shall be established by a survey performed by a surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia. Said survey shall be provided at the time a petition for a change to the official zoning maps is filed and when an application is made for a special zoning permit. 
(Added September 27, 1993; ZA93-09-01) 
Section 23.27. - Communication towers and antennas. 
[1]  Intent. The regulations and requirements of this section are intended to: 
(a)  protect the welfare, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for communication carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of fictionally equivalent services and shall not prohibit or have the affect of prohibiting the provision of such services, so as to promote the City of Macon and Bibb County as a proactive community in the availability of communications services; 
(b)  provide for the appropriate location and development of communication towers or antennas to serve the residents and business of the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia; 
(c)  minimize adverse visual effects of towers or antennas through careful design, siting and vegetative screening; 
(d)  avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna failure through careful siting of tower or antenna structures; 
(e)  maximize use of any new or existing communication tower or antenna to reduce the number of towers or antennas needed; and 
(f)  encourage and promote the location of new communication facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
[2]  Supplemental definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall be used. 
(a)  Antenna. An arrangement or array of wires, dishes, or metal rods, used in transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves. 
(b)  Communication tower. A guyed, monopole, lattice or self support tower, constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, containing one (1) or more antennas intended for transmitting or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication. This definition does not include a satellite earth station as regulated by Section 23.21 of these regulations and a structure used for amateur or recreational purposes such as a ham radio, a citizens band radio or home television antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height. 
(c)  Guyed tower. A guyed tower can be either a lattice or monopole tower which has cables attached to the tower and ground to provide stability to the tower. 
(d)  Lattice tower. A lattice tower is a communication tower that generally has three (3) or four (4) support steel legs and holds a variety of antennas. 
(e)  Monopole tower. A monopole tower consists of a single self supporting pole which is generally wider in diameter at the base and narrows at the top and may support any combination of whip, panel or dish antennas. 
(f)  Stealth structure. A communication tower which is a man-made tree, or similar natural or man-made alternative design mounting structure that camouflages or conceals the presence of antennas or towers. 
[3]  General provisions. 
(a)  Land-use compatibility. Communication towers shall be located, constructed, and buffered to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. To help ensure such compatibility each application for a proposed communication tower shall include the following information: 
(i)  the exact location of the proposed tower shown on an official zoning map; 
(ii)  the maximum height of the proposed tower; 
(iii)  the color or colors of the proposed tower; 
(iv)  the location, type, and intensity of lighting for the proposed tower; 
(v)  drawings showing type of tower, accessory buildings, landscaping, or other features pertinent to the application prepared in professionally acceptable manner; and 
(vi)  such other additional information as may be required by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to fully review and evaluate the potential impact of a proposed tower. 
(b)  Additional uses permitted onsite. In any residential district where freestanding communication towers or antennas are allowed, such towers or antennas may not be located on a lot containing a residential structure, except antennas may be located on a multi-family dwelling which is sixty-five (65) feet or greater in height. In all other districts, all communication towers or antennas may be located on sites containing another principal use. 
(c)  Shared use of communication towers. If the application is for a separate tower, then the applicant shall provide an affidavit from an appropriate professional verifying with written documentation why co-location is not possible. 
(d)  Additional users on existing communication towers. Any additional users co-locating on existing communication towers shall require review and approval in accordance with these regulations. 
(e)  Measurement of setbacks. Tower setbacks shall be measured from the perimeter of the tower base to the property or lease line of the lot on which it is located. 
(e)  Measurement of setbacks. Tower setbacks shall be measured from the perimeter of the tower base to the property line for the property on which the tower is located. When property is leased for locating a tower, new structures located on the host property shall require a setback equal to the height of the tower from any communication tower located on the host property. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-03; Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(f)  Measurement of tower height. Measurement of tower height shall include antennas, base pad, and other appurtenances and shall be measured from the natural grade of the site. 
(g)  Time limit on project completion. Once a communication tower or antenna is approved, a permit shall be obtained within one (1) year and the project shall be completed within one (1) year of approval by the Commission. 
(h)  Abandonment. All obsolete or unused facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of cessation of operation at the site. 
(i)  Signs and advertising. No signs or advertising shall be allowed on any tower or antenna, except for a warning sign relating to the public safety which is no greater than two (2) square feet in size and placed on the base of the tower at a height no greater than ten (10) feet above the ground. 
(j)  Historic zoning districts. Towers and antennas shall not be permitted within the boundaries of any historic zoning district except as provided for in Section 23.27 [4](a) or (b). A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required. 
(k)  Any communication facility located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City of Macon or Bibb County provided a license or lease authorizing the communication facility has been approved by the governing authority of the City or County shall be exempt from these regulations. 
(l)  Regulatory compliance. All communication facilities must meet or exceed the current standards of the Federal Aviation Administration and Federal Communication Commission and any other agency of the State or the Federal Government with authority to regulate these facilities. In the event an applicant discovers, after receiving approval from the Commission, the Federal or State regulations are in conflict with the Commission approval then the applicant must come back to the Commission and file an amended application requesting that the Commission change his permit to be compatible with the State or Federal regulations. 
(m)  Security. All communication facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device or other similar protection device to prevent unauthorized access to the facility. 
(n)  Engineer's certification for structural integrity. A registered structural engineer's certification shall be required for all new towers stating that said tower can support the loads on the structure including any antennae located thereon. The same certification shall be provided when antennae are added to a tower or any other conforming or legal non-conforming structure. (Added October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(o)  Engineer's certification for fall zones. A registered structural engineer's certification shall be required for all new towers stating that said tower, if failure occurs, will fall within the designated setbacks for the proposed tower. The same certification shall be provided when antennae are added to a tower or any other conforming or legal non-conforming structure. (Added October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(p)  Additional antennae on legal non-conforming structures and towers. Additional antennae may be added as a permitted use to a legal non-conforming tower or structure as long as the total number does no exceed six (6) antennae. The addition of more than six (6) antennae shall be treated a conditional use. (Added October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(q)  Adding additional height to legal non-conforming structures and towers. When a legal non-conforming structure or tower is used or proposed to be used as a communication tower or it is proposed to add antennae to such structure, the height of the structure or tower may be increased as a conditional use. Pursuant to Sections 23.27 [3](n) and 23.27 [3](o), certifications shall be provided to the zoning enforcement officer stating that the tower, if failure occurs, will fall within the designated setback distance and/or that said tower or structure can support the loads on the structure including any antennae located or proposed to be located thereon. (Added October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(r)  Computer generated simulations for each proposed tower or antenna, which shall accompany the application for a certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit. The computer simulation shall be a to-scale representation and be eight and one-half (8½) inches by eleven (11) inches in size. Said simulation shall show the representation from all four (4) sides of the proposed site. The Commission or zoning enforcement officer may require additional simulations. (Added October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(s)  Additional certifications for communication towers. When a communication tower is proposed, a certification shall be provided that no other tower is available that will accommodate the service area for the provider. Further, as a condition of approval, a certification shall be provided guaranteeing subsequent co-locations on the proposed tower. If the owner of the communication tower denies co-location, the Commission may revoke the zoning permit as provided for in Section 27.19 of this Resolution. (Added October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
[4]  Communication towers and antennas allowed as permitted uses. 
(a)  Residential and agricultural districts. Communication antennas shall be allowed as a permitted use in all residential and agricultural districts, except for Planned Development Residential Districts which shall be a conditional use, provided the following requirements are met: 
(i)  Communication antennas may be located on existing buildings, poles, communication towers or other existing support structures, provided that no more than six (6) users are located on the existing building, pole, communication tower or other existing support structure. More than six (6) users co-locating on an existing building, pole, communication tower or other existing support structure shall be a conditional use as provided for in Section 23.27[10]. Antennas shall not project more than twenty (20) feet above the roofline, parapet, or top of the structure. (Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(ii)  Communication antennas shall not project more than twenty (20) feet above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. 
(iii)  The structure on which the antennas is placed shall not be a residential structure or on a lot containing a residential structure, except antennas may be located on a multifamily dwelling which is sixty-five (65) feet or greater in height. 
(iv)  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports communication facilities shall be concealed from public view, integrated into the architecture of the structure, made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Where landscaping is required to conceal the structure from public view, then the uses shall no longer be considered a permitted use and such application shall be handled as a conditional use. 
(v)  An equipment shelter or cabinet shall not be greater than three hundred and thirty (330) square feet nor higher than ten (10) feet. 
(vi)  An aboveground equipment shelter or cabinet shall not be located in a front yard. If an equipment shelter or cabinet is placed under ground, the air conditioning unit must be screened from public view and approval of such screening shall be subject to approval by the Commission as a conditional use if the air conditioning unit is in the front yard. 
(vii)  Antennas shall have either a galvanized finish or shall be painted a non-contrasting color. 
(viii)  Where lighting is required, dual lighting mode (red at night/strobe during the day) shall be allowed. 
(b)  Commercial districts. Communication antennas shall be allowed as a permitted use in all commercial district, except for planned development commercial which shall be a conditional use, provided the following requirements are met: 
(i)  Communication antennas may be located on existing buildings, poles, communication towers or other existing support structures, provided that no more than six (6) users are located on the existing building, pole, communication tower or other existing support structure. More than six (6) users co-locating on an existing building, pole, communication tower or other existing support structure shall be a conditional use as provided for in Section 23.27[10]. Antennas shall not project more than twenty (20) feet above the roofline, parapet, or top of the structure. (Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(ii)  Communication antennas shall not project more than twenty (20) feet above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. 
(iii)  The structure on which the antenna is placed shall not be a residential structure or on a lot containing a residential structure, except antennas may be located on a multifamily dwelling which is sixty-five (65) feet or greater in height. 
(iv)  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports communication facilities shall be concealed from public view, integrated into the architecture of the structure, made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Where landscaping is required to conceal the structure from public view, then the use shall no longer be considered a permitted use and such application shall be handled as a conditional use. 
(v)  An equipment shelter or cabinet shall not be greater than three hundred and thirty (330) square feet or higher than ten (10) feet. 
(vi)  An aboveground equipment shelter or cabinet shall not be located in a front yard. If an equipment shelter or cabinet is placed under ground, the air conditioning unit must be screened from public view and approval of such screening shall be subject to approval by the Commission as a conditional use if the air conditioning unit is in the front yard. 
(vii)  Antennas shall have either a galvanized finish or shall be painted a non-contrasting color. 
(viii)  Where lighting is required, dual lighting mode (red at night/strobe during the day) shall be allowed. 
(c)  Industrial districts. Communication towers and antennas shall be allowed as a permitted use in all industrial districts, except for Planned Development Industrial Districts which shall be a conditional use, provided the following requirements are met: 
(i)  Communication antennas may be located on existing buildings, poles, communication towers or other existing support structures, provided that no more than six (6) users are located on the existing building, pole, communication tower or other existing support structure. More than six (6) users co-locating on an existing building, pole, communication tower or other existing support structure shall be a conditional use as provided for in Section 23.27[10]. Antennas shall not project more than twenty (20) feet above the roofline, parapet, or top of the structure. (Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(ii)  Communication towers may be allowed as a permitted use provided that the tower is designed to accommodate only one user and does not exceed a height of one hundred (100) feet, or designed and intended to accommodate at least two (2) users and does exceed one hundred and twenty (120) feet in height, or designed and intended to accommodate at least three (3) users and does not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) feet in height. Communication towers within two hundred (200) feet of a Residential District shall be a stealth structure. 
(iii)  Setback for towers. The minimum setback shall be thirty percent (30%) of the towers height for freestanding mono poles or the distance as measured from the base of the tower to the place were the guide wire is anchored to the ground for guided towers. A certification shall be provided to the zoning enforcement officer in accordance with Section 23.27[3](o). No tower, however, shall be located closed than the height of the tower to any residential district or structure. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-03; Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(iv)  Guyed towers shall have their guy wire anchors located on the tower site, and guy wires shall not cross any adjoining property, rights-of-way or public easements. 
(v)  Minimum setbacks for equipment shelters or cabinets constructed in conjunction with a tower shall be as established by the zoning district for principal buildings or be at least twenty-five (25) feet when no setback is required by the district. 
(vi)  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially illuminated except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission. Dual lighting mode (red at night/strobe during the day) shall be allowed. 
(vii)  Color. Tower or antennas shall have either a galvanized finish or be painted a non-contrasting color. 
(viii)  Equipment shelters and cabinets. Equipment shelters and cabinets may not include offices, vehicles storage or broadcast studios; no outside storage of equipment shall be allowed. An equipment shelter or cabinet shall not be greater than three hundred fifty (350) square feet not higher than twelve (12) feet. 
(ix)  Fencing. The facility shall be ally secured. A chain link fence or a wall not less than eight (8) feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each tower or antenna and all accessory structures. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate. Guy wire anchors shall be contained within the security fence. 
(x)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be as required in Section 23.27[5](i). 
[5]  Freestanding communication towers and antennas allowed as conditional uses in residential districts. 
(a)  Residential districts. This section will govern the location of towers and antennas in the following Residential Districts: RR-Rural Residential Districts; MHR-Mobile Home Residential Districts, R-1AAAA, R-1AAA, R-1AA, R-1A, and R-1 Single-family Districts; R-2 and R-2A Two-family Residential Districts, R-3 Multifamily Residential Districts, and PDR-Planned Development Districts. 
(b)  Type of construction. Towers must be monopoles and antennas used must be of the least visually obstructive design available at the time of the application. No more than two (2) users shall be allowed; the Commission may require a stealth structure when a monopole would not be an appropriate structure for the intended site. (Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(c)  Height. Tower heights shall not exceed eighty (80) feet and antenna heights shall not exceed twenty (20) feet above the height of the tower. 
(d)  Locations and setbacks. Communication towers or antennas shall not be located on a residential structure or on a lot containing a residential structure, except antennas may be located on a multi-family dwelling which is sixty-five (65) feet or greater in height. Setbacks for towers from all property lines shall be the height of the tower and the setback for accessory structures shall be the same for principal structures in the district. Certifications required by Sections 23.27[3](n) and Sections 23.27[3](o) shall accompany any application submitted under this section. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-03; Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(e)  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially illuminated except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or Federal Communication Commission. Where lighting is required, dual lighting mode (red at night/strobe during the day) shall be allowed. 
(f)  Color. Towers or antennas shall have either a galvanized finish or shall be painted a non-contrasting color. 
(g)  Equipment shelters and cabinets. Equipment shelters and cabinets shall be constructed so as to be compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood by virtue of their design, materials, textures, colors, and size; shall be unmanned with no outside storage of equipment or vehicles, and shall not be greater than ten (10) feet in height nor three hundred and thirty (330) square feet in size. 
(h)  Fencing. A black or non-obtrusive vinyl clad chain link fence or wall not less than eight (8) feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each communication tower or antenna. Barbed wire shall not be used along the top of the fence or wall. Access to the tower or antenna shall be through a locked gate. 
(i)  Landscaping. The visual impacts of a communication tower or antenna shall be mitigated for nearby viewers through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower or antenna and ancillary structures. The following landscaping and buffering shall be required around the perimeter of the tower or antenna and accessory structures; except that the standards may be waived by the Commission for those sides of the proposed tower or antenna that are located adjacent to undevelopable lands and lands not in public view. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of fences. Further, the use of existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute of or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements. 
(i)  A row of evergreen trees a minimum of six (6) feet tall and a maximum often (10) feet apart shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence; 
(ii)  A continuous evergreen hedge at least thirty (30) inches high at planting capable of growing to a least thirty-six (36) inches in height within eighteen (18) months shall be in front of the tree line referenced above; 
(iii)  All landscaping shall be xeriscape tolerant or irrigated and properly maintained to ensure good health and viability. 
[6]  Freestanding communication towers and antennas allowed as conditional uses in commercial districts. 
(a)  Districts. This section shall govern the location of communication towers in C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Districts, C-2 General Commercial Districts, CBD-1 and CBD-2 Central Business Districts, C-4 Highway Commercial Districts, C-5 Neighborhood Convenience Center Districts, and PDC Planned Development Commercial Districts. 
(b)  Type of tower construction. Only monopole towers are allowed; however, alternate types of construction may be allowed by the Commission in C-2 General Commercial Districts for radio and television broadcasting studios. The Commission may require a stealth structure where a monopole or alternate structure would not be an appropriate structure for the intended site. 
(c)  Height. The following height requirements shall apply: (Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(i)  Towers up to a height of eighty (80) feet and intended to accommodate two (2) users, or (Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(ii)  Towers up to a height of one hundred (100) feet and intended to accommodate four (4) users, or (Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(iii)  Towers up to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet and intended to accommodate six (6) users. (Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(d)  Setbacks. 
(i)  The minimum setback shall be thirty percent (30%) of the towers height for freestanding mono poles and the radius length as measured from the base of the tower to the place were the guide wire is anchored to the ground for guided towers. A certification shall be provided to the zoning enforcement officer stating that the tower is designed to fall with in the designated setback distance. Said certification shall be provided by a registered engineer in the State of Georgia qualified to give such certifications. No tower, however, shall be located closed than the height of the tower to any residential district or structure. (Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(ii)  Minimum setbacks for equipment shelters and cabinets constructed in conjunction with a tower shall be as established by the zoning district for principal buildings or be at least twenty-five (25) feet when no setback is required by the district. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-03) 
(e)  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially illuminated except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission. When lighting is required dual lighting mode (red at night/strobe during the day) shall be allowed. 
(f)  Color. Colors shall be as required in Section 23.27 [5](f). 
(g)  Equipment shelters and cabinets. Equipment shelters and cabinets may not include offices, vehicle storage or broadcast studios; no outside storage of equipment shall be allowed. Equipment's shelters and cabinets shall not be greater than three hundred and thirty (330) square feet in size nor greater than ten (10) feet in height. 
(h)  Fencing. The facility shall be fully secured. A chain link fence or a wall not less than eight (8) feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each tower or antenna and all accessory structures. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate. 
(i)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be as required in Section 23.27[5](I). 
[7]  Freestanding communication towers and antennas allowed as conditional uses in industrial districts and agriculture districts. 
(a)  Industrial Districts and Agricultural Districts. This section shall govern the location of communication towers and antennas located in A Agricultural Districts, M-I Wholesale and Light Industrial Districts, M-2 Heavy Industrial Districts, M-3 Heavy Industrial Districts and PDI Planned Development Industrial Districts. 
(b)  Type of construction. All types of towers are allowed provided that the visual impact of the structures will not have a negative impact on adjoining properties or views. The Commission may require a stealth structure where the proposed structure would not be appropriate for the intended site. 
(c)  Height. The height of all towers shall be approved by the FAA. 
(d)  Setbacks. 
(i)  The minimum setback shall be thirty percent (30%) of the towers height for freestanding mono poles and the radius length as measured from the base of the tower to the place were the guide wire is anchored to the ground for guided towers. A certification shall be provided to the zoning enforcement officer stating that the tower is designed to fall with in the designated setback distance. Said certification shall be provided by a registered engineer in the State of Georgia qualified to give such certifications. No tower, however, shall be located closed than the height of the tower to any residential district or structure. (Amended October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(ii)  Guyed towers shall have their guy wire anchors located on the tower site, and guy wires shall not cross any adjoining property, rights-of-way, public easements or lease lines. 
(iii)  Minimum setbacks for accessory buildings and equipment shelters or cabinets constructed in conjunction with a tower shall be as established by the zoning district for principal buildings or be at least twenty-five (25) feet when no setback is required by the district. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-03) 
(e)  Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially illuminated except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission. Dual lighting mode (red at night/strobe during the day) shall be allowed. 
(f)  Color. Towers two hundred (200) feet or less in height shall be as required in Section 23.27 [5](f); however, any regulation of the FAA or FCC that contradicts this requirement shall govern. 
(g)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings may include offices, vehicle storage or broadcast studios; however, no outside storage of equipment shall be allowed. The use of the accessory building shall be an allowed use in district that it is located. 
(h)  Fencing. The facility shall be fully secured. A chain link fence or a wall not less than eight (8) feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each tower or antenna and all accessory structures. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate. Guy wire anchors shall be contained within the security fence. 
(i)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be as required in Section 23.27[5](I). 
(j)  Parking. One space shall be provided for each three hundred (300) square feet of occupied building area. 
[8]  Separation distances between freestanding communication towers. Separation distances between communication towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and those towers that are existing and/or have received land use or permit approval. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as follows: 
EXISTING TOWERS—TYPE 

 
[9]  Distances required by Section 23.27[8] of these regulations shall be established by a survey performed by a surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia. Said survey shall be provided at the time an application is made for the use. 
[10]  Structure or roof mounted communication towers or antennas over twenty (20) feet in height allowed as conditional uses. 
(a)  Structure or roof mounted towers or antennas are allowed: 
(i)  In R-3—Multifamily Residential Districts when located on a multifamily dwelling which is sixty-five (65) feet or greater in height; and 
(ii)  In non-residential districts. 
(b)  Towers attached to the roof or supporting structure on a roof top, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten (10) foot high antenna and supporting structure requires a ten (10) foot setback from the edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
(c)  No commercial advertising shall be allowed on a tower or antenna. 
(d)  Where lighting is required, dual lighting mode (red at night/strobe during the day) shall be allowed. 
(e)  Towers or antennas mounted on a structure or roof must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna, tower or related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof mounted antennas or towers shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air condition units, stairs, elevators towers or other background. 
(f)  Accessory buildings, equipment shelters or cabinets shall be constructed so as to be compatible with surrounding development by virtue of their design, materials, textures, colors, and size; accessory buildings shall be unmanned in a R-3 multifamily district and there shall be no outside storage of equipment in any district where these accessory buildings are allowed. 
(g)  If an accessory building, equipment shelter or cabinet is located on the roof of a building, the area of the accessory building and other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total roof area of the building. Accessory buildings, equipment shelters or cabinets located on the ground shall meet the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(h)  Where feasible communication facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
[11]  Variances. Communication towers or antennas not in conformance with the regulations listed above may only be built after approval of a variance by the Commission in accordance with Section 27.11 of the Resolution. 
[12]  Cell tower on wheels (COW). The location of a COW shall be considered a conditional use. The proposed height, minimum setbacks, security fencing, accessory structures, landscaping, and lighting shall be determining factors in approving or denying the application. The COW shall be considered a temporary structure and must be removed from the site six (6) months from placement on the property. (Added October 22, 2001, ZA01-10-01) 
(Added October 13, 1997; ZA97-10-01) 
Section 23.28. - Economic and community development target areas. 
Within the areas of the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia, which are designated as economic and community development target areas for Pleasant Hill, Intown, East Macon, South Macon, Bellevue, Cherokee Heights, Unionville, Montpelier, Village Green, Lynmore and Tindall Heights, any in-fill development consisting of the subdivision of land and/or new construction shall be compatible/similar to the existing streetscape. The zoning enforcement officer may reduce the minimum standards for residential properties within these areas as they pertain to required lot area, lot width, setbacks, and lot coverage. 
(Added May 29, 2001, ZA01-05-01) 
Section 23.29. - Self service ice machines. 
Where allowed, self service ice machines shall meet the following standards: 
[1]  Self service ice vending machines shall only be located on property where a principal structure, building or use already exist. 
[2]  Signage on the unit shall be limited to 55 square feet, excluding graphics; no freestanding sign shall be allowed. 
[3]  If a self service ice machine becomes inoperable or is not in use for a period of ninety (90) days, it shall be removed from the property within thirty (30) days. 
[4]  Approval from the Fire Department, Water and Sewerage Authority, and Health Department and/or Department of Agricultural [Agriculture] shall be required prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. All requirements of the Bureau of Inspection and Fees Department shall be followed. 
(Added July 9, 2007, ZA07-07-01) 
Section 23.30. - Day care home. 
Where allowed, a day care home shall meet the following requirements: 
[1]  The day care home shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and conducted in such a manner that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of the day care home's existence. 
[2]  The use of accessory buildings in connection with the day care home shall be prohibited. 
[3]  The operator of a day care home shall be the owner of the property or as a renter have written permission from the property owner. The operator shall reside in the dwelling as their permanent residence. 
[4]  No more than six (6) children under the age of seventeen (17) may be cared for at any one (1) time, including those that are permanent residents of the dwelling where the day care home is located. 
[5]  Outdoor play area shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed and shall not include driveways, parking areas or land unsuited for children's play area. Outdoor play area shall not be allowed in the front or side yards of the dwelling. 
[6]  Hours of operation shall be limited to Monday thru Friday from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
[7]  No signage, other than such signs allowed in Chapter 25 of this resolution, shall be permitted. 
[8]  No part-time or full-time employees shall be allowed except as required by State of Georgia Day Care Licensing for emergency situations. 
[9]  The location must meet all performance and development standards for the district in which the day care home is located. 
[10]  Day care homes shall only be allowed within single family detached dwellings. 
[11]  All local, state and federal requirements that pertain to the use and operation of a day care home shall be met. 
(Added July 23, 2007, ZA07-07-03) 
Section 23.31. - Donation container. 
Donation containers may be allowed as a conditional or permitted use in C-1, C-2, C-4, C-5, PDC, PDE, M-1 and M-2 districts provided the following requirements are met: 
[1]  Supplemental definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following supplemental definitions shall be used: 
(a)  Donation container—Conditional use: Any structure or container which may have enclosing walls, a roof and a floor, not to exceed the dimensions of 24 feet in length, 8 feet in width and 7 feet in height, used for the collection of items to be donated to a charitable organization as defined by these regulations; such structure or container may be mobile or a vehicle meeting the size requirements of this section. 
(b)  Donation container—Permitted use: Any structure or container which may have enclosing walls, a roof and a floor, not to exceed the dimensions of six (6) feet in length, six (6) feet in width and six (6) feet in height, used for the collection of items to be donated to a charitable organization as defined by these regulations. 
(c)  Charitable organization: An organization which is registered in the State of Georgia as a non-profit (501c3) corporation which is located and doing business in Bibb County, Georgia. 
[2]  Structure requirements. 
(a)  The structure or container must be built substantially enough as to not pose any public threat or to withstand typical weather conditions as to not be moved. 
(b)  The structure or container must be painted or finished in a way that is visually coherent and conducive to the primary structure on the property. 
(c)  The visual and structural integrity must be maintained continuously. 
[3]  Location requirements. 
(a)  The placement of a donation container shall nor impede traffic not visually impair any motor vehicle operation within a parking lot or from a public street. 
(b)  The donation container may not be located on a vacant parcel or on a parcel containing a vacant building. 
(c)  No required parking spaces shall be occupied by the facility. 
(d)  Donation containers may not be located in a required building setback, buffer yard, access easement, driveway, parking lane, and/or fire lane. 
[4]  Required Site Conditions: 
(a)  The site of the facility shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. 
(b)  No retail sales shall be conducted at the donation container. 
(c)  No sorting or distribution of collected materials may occur on-site. 
(d)  All collected materials shall be picked up from the center at least once a week. 
(e)  Illegally dumped items shall be picked up nightly, seven days a week, or as required to maintain a neat and orderly appearance. 
[5]  Prohibited Materials and Donations. 
(a)  The donation containers may only be used as a collection container for non-food and non-perishable items which are of a size that can be placed inside of the container. No items shall be left on the outside of the container at any time. 
(b)  No hazardous materials, autos or auto parts, bathroom or kitchen fixtures, large appliances, mattresses and box springs, carpeting, construction materials, office equipment or similar items shall be accepted for donation. 
[6]  Signage. 
(a)  The maximum sign area shall be 16 square feet inclusive of informational requirements and operational instruction. 
(b)  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify "Clothing and other Small Item Donations Only"; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the enclosure or container. 
[7]  The applicant must provide written authorization from the business owner, on whose property the donation container will be placed. 
[8]  Violation of any of the requirements of these regulations may result in the permit being revoked. 
[9]  The organization owning and placing each donation container must be an organization registered in the State of Georgia as a non-profit (501c3) corporation which is located and doing business in Bibb County, Georgia. 
[10]  All donation containers existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations, whether a permit has been issued or not, shall be considered a nonconforming use and/or structure and shall be allowed to exist in accordance with Chapter 24 of this resolution. 
(Added January 12, 2009, ZA09-01-01) 
Chapter 24 - NONCONFORMING LOTS, NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND, NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, AND NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES 

Section 24.01. - Intent. 
Within the zoning districts established by this resolution or amendments that may later be adopted, there may exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this resolution was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this resolution or future amendments. It is the intent of this resolution to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this resolution to be incompatible with allowed uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this resolution that nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, extended or be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
A nonconforming use of a structure, nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this resolution by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved. 
Section 24.02. - Avoidance of undue hardship. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this resolution shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun and for which a valid permit was obtained prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution. (Section 27.21 governing expiration of permits shall apply.) Actual construction shall include both substantial site preparation and demolition or removal of an existing building. 
Section 24.03. - Single nonconforming lots of record. 
A single lot of record which does not meet the requirements for area or width, or both, of this resolution may be used or sold for the erection of those buildings and accessory buildings necessary to carry out the allowed uses in that district, provided (Amended February 24, 1986, ZA86-02-02): 
[1]  Yard requirements and maximum lot coverage requirements of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located or a variance for yard requirements and maximum lot coverage requirements shall be obtained only through action of the commission as provided for in Section 27.11, except, however, the side yard requirements for substandard lots of record may be reduced for each side yard at the rate of one (1) foot for each four (4) feet by which the lot width lacks fifty (50) feet, provided that such side yard shall not be reduced to less than five (5) feet on each side; 
[2]  Locational requirements of accessory buildings and uses as provided for in Section 4.07 are met; 
[3]  Parking space requirements for all districts as provided for in Chapter 26 are met; and 
[4]  Such lot does not have continuous frontage with other vacant lots in the same ownership. 
Section 24.04. - Nonconforming lots of record in combination. 
If two (2) or more lots or a combination of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are [1] of record at the time of passage or amendment of this resolution and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this resolution and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this resolution nor shall any division of any parcel be made which would create a lot with a width or area below the requirements stated in this resolution. Except that this section shall not apply to nonconforming lots of record where such lots existed as part of a neighborhood with similar size lots at the time of the adoption of this resolution. 
(Amended February 10, 1986, ZA86-02-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The word "are" was added by the editors. 

Section 24.05. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution, lawful use of land which exists and that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this resolution as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful and is subject to the following provisions: 
[1]  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land that was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution; 
[2]  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution; and 
[3]  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this resolution for the district in which such land is located. 
Section 24.06. - Nonconforming structures. 
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution that could not be built under the terms of this resolution by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following conditions: 
[1]  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; 
[2]  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this resolution; 
[3]  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
Section 24.07. - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
If a lawful use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this resolution that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this resolution, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following conditions: 
[1]  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this resolution in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which is located; 
[2]  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this resolution, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
[3]  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restrictive nature, provided that the zoning enforcement officer determines that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the zoning enforcement officer may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this resolution; 
[4]  When a nonconforming use of a structure or a structure and land in combination is replaced with a conforming use, such structure or land may not later revert to a nonconforming use; 
[5]  When a nonconforming use of a structure or structure and premises in combination is discontinued or abandoned for two (2) years, the structure or structure and premises in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located; however, if the commission determines that the structure cannot be adapted to an allowable use, then the commission may approve the continuance of the nonconforming use or other nonconforming use of the same or more restrictive nature; 
[6]  Where a nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of land. 
(Amended May 22, 1995, ZA95-05-01) 
Section 24.08. - Repairs and maintenance. 
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the current replacement value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this resolution shall not be increased. 
Nothing in this resolution shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
Chapter 25 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. ZA17-005, § IV, adopted January 22, 2018, deleted the former Ch. 25, §§ 25.01—25.16, and enacted a new Ch. 25, §§ 25.01—25.12, as set out herein. The former Ch. 25 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Res. No. ZA06-01-02, adopted January 9, 2006; as subsequently amended by ZA06-06-03, June 26, 2006; ZA07-05-02, May 29, 2007; ZA07-10-01, Oct. 22, 2007; ZA07-11-01, Nov. 13, 2007; ZA07-11-02, Nov. 13, 2007; ZA08-03-01, March 10, 2008; ZA10-09-01, Sept. 27, 2010; ZA11-002, April 25, 2011; ZA13-003, Sept. 24, 2012; ZA13-005, Nov. 13, 2012; and ZA13-006, March 25, 2013. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Section 25.01. - Findings, purpose and intent. 
The commission finds that the number, size, design characteristics and locations of signs in Macon-Bibb County directly affect the public health, safety and welfare. The commission further finds that signs can become excessive and that many signs are distracting and dangerous to motorists and pedestrians, and substantially detract from the beauty and appearance of the county. The commission finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. 
The intent of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public by establishing standards for the design, size, number, location, illumination and maintenance of all signs and sign structures. Signs, by their very nature, are intended to draw attention to the message being displayed and, thus, distract and draw attention. The commission determines that such distractions represent substantial public safety risks, related to traffic and other matters. 
The commission's intentions and purposes in enacting these regulations are to permit signs compatible with their surroundings, prevent sign congestion and to create a comprehensive and balanced system of sign control that accommodates the need for a well-maintained, safe and attractive community. These regulations are intended to maintain an aesthetically attractive county in which signs are compatible with the use patterns of established zoning districts, to maintain an aesthetically attractive environment and to advance the aesthetic interest of Macon-Bibb County, while at the same time recognizing the commission's obligation to allow free speech under state and federal law. The commission finds that these regulations directly advance the stated purposes for these regulations and that such regulations are narrowly tailored to serve the commission's interests. 
These regulations are not intended to, and do not, restrict the content of sign messages and do not apply to signs located on public property, including rights-of-way. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.02. - Supplemental definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be used: 
[Note: As non-exclusive examples of particular types of signs defined in this section, pictures of such signs are provided in Appendix A to this chapter. Such pictures are for illustrative purposes only, and are not intended to in any way limit the meaning of any terms defined herein.] 
[1]  A-frame sign. A portable sign constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or tent-like shape, which is readily moveable, and is not permanently attached to the ground or any structure. 
[2]  Animated sign. A sign containing animation. 
[3]  Animation. Images designed to create the appearance of action or life-like movement, including flickering of candles, waving of flags, bursts from fireworks, or any other simulation of life-like or action-like movement or qualities. 
[4]  Balloon sign. See Inflatable device. 
[5]  Banner. A temporary sign other than a flag or feather flag hanging from a building wall or other structure constructed of paper or fabric of any kind, provided that this classification shall not include any signs which are permanently attached to a structure within a rigid frame. 
[6]  Billboard. A sign which is larger than two hundred eighty-four (284) square feet and not greater than six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet, provided that signs permitted under Section 25.06 shall not be considered billboards, regardless of size. 
[7]  Blade flag or Blade sign. See Feather flag. 
[8]  Building frontage. When used as a term regarding the calculation of sign area, building frontage shall mean the linear footage of that portion of the building on the ground floor that fronts along a street. 
[9]  Building sign. A wall sign or projection sign. 
[10]  Business. When used as a term in this chapter, a business shall mean a commercial, professional, retail, wholesale, warehouse, industrial or nonprofit activity or organization. 
[11]  Business park. A group of businesses, stores, professional offices, warehouses or other commercial or industrial properties on one property, exceeding in the aggregate seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of gross leasable area, planned and developed as a unit, with common off-street parking provided on the property. 
[12]  Canopy sign. A sign affixed, painted or otherwise attached to a canopy. A canopy sign is a type of projection sign. 
[13]  Changeable copy sign. A sign other than a billboard which changes the message or other display on the sign electronically, digitally or otherwise automatically. Changeable copy signs include images or messages with the above-described characteristics that are projected onto buildings or other objects. A television or similar electronic device installed and oriented to be viewed by patrons in or on a business premises, and not from a public area, shall not be considered a changeable copy sign. In addition, a sign that otherwise falls within the definition of changeable copy sign shall not be considered a changeable copy sign if it meets all of the following requirements: 
(a)  the sign changes its message or copy no more frequently than once every twelve (12) hours; 
(b)  the sign changes are accomplished without scrolling, fading or dissolving; and 
(c)  any electronic or digital portion of the sign is no larger than twelve (12) square feet. 
[14]  Cube-shaped or Cube-type sign. A sign in the shape of a cube, with four sign faces. 
[15]  Dissolve. A mode of electronic or digital message or display transition on a changeable copy sign or multiple message billboard accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message or display gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and increasing legibility of the second message or display. 
[16]  Double-faced sign. A sign with two separate faces that are back-to-back to each other. 
[17]  Double-stacked billboards. Billboards with two separate faces that are stacked vertically to each other, supported by the same structure. 
[18]  Establishment. A place of business. 
[19]  Fade. A mode of electronic or digital message or display transition on a changeable copy sign or multiple message billboard accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message or display gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and a subsequent message or display gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
[20]  Feather flag . Any cloth, fabric, plastic or similar lightweight, nonrigid material, designed for advertisement, display, identification, description, illustration, or conveying a message or information, visible from any public place or exposed to the general public, and attached to a vertical or near-vertical pole mounted into the ground or on a portable structure such that the material is not free to furl and unfurl as a flag would do. The term "feather flag" shall also include similar devices or terms, such as blade, teardrop or shark fin signs or flags, and sign flags. A feather flag may or may not exhibit a text message or symbol of any kind, and may be a single color or multiple colors. 
[21]  Flag . Any cloth, fabric or other flexible material designed for advertisement, display, identification, description, illustration, or conveying a message or information, more than two square feet in size and visible from any public place or exposed to the general public, attached on one side to a flagpole at an angle of 45 degrees or more from the ground, hanging freely such that it remains free to furl and unfurl. The term "flag" does not include banners or feather flags. A flag may or may not exhibit a text message or symbol of any kind, and may be a single color or multiple colors. 
[22]  Freestanding sign. Any permanent, non-portable sign that is supported by an independent structure placed on or anchored in the ground and not attached to any building or secondary structure. 
[23]  Height. Height of a sign shall refer to the distance from the top of the sign, including any extension, to the ground on which it is located, provided that, if the sign is on ground below street grade based on the portion of the street closest to the sign, height shall be measured from the level of that portion of the street. 
[24]  Illuminated sign. A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting (including electronic displays) either by lights on or in the sign or directed toward the sign. 
[25]  Inflatable device. A device or sign that is an air or gas-inflated object, which may be of various shapes, made of flexible fabric or similar material, resting on, or tethered to, the ground or a structure, visible from any public place or to the general public, and designed for display or to attract attention from the public. Also known as or includes balloon signs, air dancers and inflatable dancers. Such device may or may not contain any message, text or symbol of any kind. Balloons less than two feet in diameter, if spherical or approximately spherical, or four (4) cubic feet if not such shape, shall not be considered inflatable devices. 
[26]  Luminance. Measure of the brightness of a sign face. Measured by nits or candelas per square meter. 
[27]  Multiple message billboard. A billboard which changes the message or other display on the sign electronically, digitally or otherwise automatically. 
[28]  Nit. A luminance unit equal to one (1) candela per square meter. 
[29]  Pennants and streamers. Generally long, tapering, lightweight, flag-like plastic, fabric or similar materials that are mounted or tethered to a pole(s), building or other structure by a rope, wire, string or similar device, in series (i.e., more than two on a string), and that is designed to move in the wind (i.e., flutter) to attract attention. A pennant or streamer may or may not exhibit a text message or symbol of any kind, and may be a single color or multiple colors. 
[30]  Portable sign. Any sign designed to be transportable (moveable), including but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, A-frame and T-frame signs, menu board signs and sandwich board signs. A portable sign does not include a sign on an operable vehicle actually used as a vehicle and not left permanently or indefinitely on a property. 
[31]  Projection sign. Any sign affixed to a building wall in such a manner that its leading edge is extended more than twenty-four (24) inches beyond the surface of the building wall or any canopy sign regardless of how far the sign face extends from the surface of the building. 
[32]  Roof sign. Any sign erected and constructed on and/or over the roof of the building which supports the sign. 
[33]  Scrolling. A mode of message or display transition on a changeable copy sign or multiple message billboard where the message or display appears to move, without fading or dissolving, across, or up and down, the display surface. 
[34]  Side-by-side billboards. Billboards whose faces are placed side-by-side, supported by the same sign structure. 
[35]  Sign. Any structure, object or device designed for description, illustration, conveying information or a message, advertisement or identification, which is visible from any public place or exposed to the general public. A sign shall also include any painting, writing, display, emblem or symbols painted or drawn on, or affixed to, an outside wall, fence or other structure designed to advertise, identify or convey information and visible from any public place. A mural shall not be considered a sign except to the extent any portion of the mural would be considered a sign under the immediately prior sentence. House or street numbers shall not be considered signs for the purposes of these regulations. 
[36]  Sign area. The smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof encompassing the entire area of the sign, excluding architectural trim and structural support. For the purpose of these regulations, the sign area shall include the aggregate of all letters, graphics and background area. 
[37]  Sign flag. See Feather flag. 
[38]  Sign structure. Any structure which supports, has supported or is capable of and intended to support a sign, including decorative cover. 
[39]  Standard billboard. A billboard that is not a multiple message billboard. 
[40]  Subtle. Not immediately obvious or comprehensible; difficult to detect. 
[41]  T-frame sign. A portable sign which is ordinarily in the shape of an upside down "T" or some variation thereof, which is readily moveable, and is not permanently attached to the ground or any structure. 
[42]  Teardrop flag or teardrop sign. See Feather flag. 
[43]  Temporary sign. A non-illuminated sign, including but not limited to those mounted on a stake or metal frame, that by its design or construction is intended to be used for a limited time period, and is not permanently mounted or anchored into the ground or onto a structure. The term "temporary sign" shall not include portable signs but shall include, among other things, feather flags and banners. 
[44]  Traffic control sign. A sign, usually erected and maintained by a city, county or state, that is erected pursuant to uniform regulations governing the erection and maintenance of traffic control devices, including signs, signals, markings, or other similar devices on public roads of Georgia. 
[45]  Transition. The method and/or visual effect used on an electronic or mechanical changeable copy sign or multiple message billboard to change from one message to another. 
[46]  V-shaped sign. Any sign which has an interior angle between two faces of 60 degrees or less. 
[47]  Wall sign. Any permanent sign painted on, or attached to and not more than twenty-four (24) inches from, the exterior wall of any building or structure. 
[48]  Window sign. A sign painted or affixed directly on the glass or window of a building wall. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.03. - General provisions. 
All signs shall conform to the following standards: 
[1]  All provisions and regulations governing signs shall bind any applicant for a sign permit, or any person erecting or maintaining a sign, unless and except to the extent exempted under these regulations or applicable law. 
[2]  No sign or sign structure shall be erected without a permit unless such sign is exempted from permitting requirements pursuant to §25.04 or elsewhere in these regulations, and no sign shall be erected that is prohibited pursuant to these regulations. Any permit for a sign shall become null and void six months after issuance if the sign is not erected by then. An applicant may apply for an extension of such permit for up to six additional months. 
[3]  For the purpose of computing sign area, only the largest side of a V-shaped or double-faced sign shall be considered. In the case of a cube-shaped sign, the two largest sides shall be considered. 
[4]  For the purpose of measuring distance of signs from property in any zoning districts in this chapter, such distance shall be measured from the nearest portion of the sign to the property in such zoning district closest to the sign provided that street and highway right-of-ways shall not be considered as being property in such districts. 
[5]  Any sign as to which regulation under this resolution is prohibited under state or federal law, or elsewhere in this resolution, shall be exempt from regulation under this resolution to the extent of such prohibition. 
[6]  All applications for sign permits shall be in the name of, and issued only to, the owner or tenant of the property on which the sign is located, or the authorized agent of such owner or tenant, except for billboard permits, which shall be in the name of, and issued only to, the owner of such property. Permits shall authorize signage only for the person or entity to whom the permit was issued. Any change in ownership, or tenancy, as applicable, shall require a new permit. 
[7]  All signs except billboards and temporary signs must be located on property on which a permit has been issued, and remains valid, for a use of land or a structure, or on property containing a legal nonconforming use. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.04. - Signs or similar display materials not requiring a permit. 
The following shall not require a permit, and shall not be counted as part of any maximum signage under any permit, but are otherwise subject to any applicable requirements in this resolution: 
[1]  Window signs or any signs or displays on the inside of a building, regardless of whether such signs or displays are visible from outside the building. 
[2]  Any sign or notice posted, erected by, or at the direction of, county, state, or federal government. 
[3]  Flags, subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  In residential and historic districts, flagpoles shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height; 
(b)  In nonresidential districts that are non-historic, flagpoles shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height; 
(c)  Each lot or parcel may have a maximum of two flagpoles, with up to two flags on each pole; 
(d)  On flagpoles up to twenty-nine (29) feet in height, flags may be a maximum of thirty-five (35) square feet; and 
(e)  On flagpoles more than twenty-nine (29) feet in height, flags may be up to a maximum of seventy (70) square feet. 
[4]  Temporary signs for each lot or parcel, subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  In all residential districts and historic districts (and on any property used for a single family dwelling or duplex regardless of the district), up to three temporary signs, with the maximum height of such signs that are freestanding being three (3) feet and the maximum size of any such signs being five (5) square feet, provided that, where the use is multifamily residential or at the entrance to a residential subdivision, the maximum height of any such sign that is freestanding shall be eight (8) feet and the maximum size of any such sign shall be twenty (20) square feet. 
(b)  In commercial, industrial, PDE and agricultural districts (excluding historic districts and properties used as single family dwellings or duplexes), up to three temporary signs, provided that the maximum height of such signs that are freestanding shall be eight (8) feet and the maximum size of temporary signs shall be thirty-two (32) square feet for one such sign and sixteen (16) square feet for the others, and provided further that any such signs that are feather flags may be a maximum of twelve (12) feet high and no more than three (3) feet in width. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the above, in all commercial, industrial, agricultural and PDE (nonresidential areas only) districts, on all properties abutting an interstate highway where the signs face the interstate, the maximum height of temporary signs that are freestanding shall be up to twelve (12) feet and the maximum size of temporary signs shall be up to sixty-four (64) square feet. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above, any temporary sign that is a banner shall be allowed in addition to other temporary signs, subject to the following requirements: 
(i)  The banner shall be attached only to a building wall, and shall not extend above the building wall. 
(ii)  The banner shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. 
(iii)  The banner shall not be attached to, or between, telephone poles, fences, fence poles, utility poles, public or private light poles, trees, vehicles, or any other apparatus other than a building wall. 
(iv)  The banner shall not be placed on the roof of any building. 
(v)  The banner shall be maintained in a neat and attractive condition. 
(vi)  Banners shall be allowed only on nonresidential properties. 
(vii)  The banner shall extend no more than twenty-four (24) inches from (but not above) a building wall. 
(viii)  Only one banner per establishment shall be allowed. 
[5]  Permanent (i.e. nontemporary) signs located on property used for residential purposes where a single family dwelling or two family dwelling (duplex) is located, up to one (1) sign per residential unit, with each sign being up to two (2) square feet in size and, if freestanding, up to three (3) feet in height. 
[6]  A-frame and T-frame signs, on property with commercial uses only, which meet the following requirements: 
(a)  are non-illuminated; 
(b)  do not exceed eight (8) square feet in size; 
(c)  number no more than one (1) per establishment; 
(d)  are not in a parking lot or driveway; and 
(e)  either: (i) meet any setback requirements for structures on the property they are located, or (ii) are within ten (10) feet of a building wall. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.05. - Prohibited signs and other devices. 
The following are prohibited, in any zoning district: 
[1]  Any sign painted on or attached to natural features such as trees, rocks, utility poles and fence posts. 
[2]  Any sign or sign structure which by reason of its size, location, coloring or illumination impedes the vision of drivers, or obstructs or detracts from the visibility of any traffic control sign or device on public streets and roads. 
[3]  Any sign which obstructs free ingress or egress from a building, door, window, fire escape, or other exit way required by any government agency or code regulating public safety. 
[4]  Any sign that imitates traffic control signs (but is not one) or creates a safety risk to the traveling public. 
[5]  Any roof sign. 
[6]  Portable signs, except for A-frame or T-frame signs that meet the requirements of Section 25.04[6]. 
[7]  Pennants and streamers. 
[8]  Any signs on or over public property except where specifically allowed by the entity with control over such property and except for projection signs in the central business districts which may overhang public sidewalks, provided that no traffic hazard is created thereby and subject to disapproval by the entity with control over such sidewalks. 
[9]  Any billboard greater than six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet in size, and/or, if freestanding, any sign greater than seventy (70) feet in height except pursuant to Section 25.06[4]; and any sign (other than a billboard) larger than two hundred (200) square feet, except as allowed under Section 25.06. 
[10]  Animated signs. 
[11]  Inflatable devices. 
[12]  Signs using audio capabilities. 
[13]  Flags, except as allowed under Section 25.04[3]. 
[14]  Temporary signs, except as allowed under Section 25.04[4]. 
[15]  Permanent signs located on property used for residential purposes where a single family dwelling or two family dwelling (duplex) is located, except as allowed under Section 25.04[5]. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.06. - Permitted use standards for selected signs. 
[1]  This section shall not apply to billboards, which are governed by Section 25.07. 
[2]  When determining maximum allowable sign size based on building or street frontage of a given property, such frontage shall be counted only once, regardless of the number of entities owning and/or leasing the property with such frontage. 
[3]  The following uses, where allowed, shall be granted permitted use signs not otherwise prohibited in the following zoning districts as described below: 
(a)  Residential districts (excluding historic residential but including residential areas of PDE districts), for the following uses: 
(1)  Schools and places of assembly, up to three signs, one of which may be freestanding with a maximum height of ten (10) feet, with the maximum size of any one sign being fifty (50) square feet and the total aggregate sign area being fifty (50) square feet; 
(2)  Multifamily developments and entrances to residential subdivisions, one sign, freestanding or building, up to thirty-two (32) square feet, with any freestanding sign having a maximum height of eight (8) feet; and 
(3)  Businesses, one freestanding sign on each street frontage of a property up to twelve (12) square feet in size and up to six (6) feet in height, and one building sign per establishment up to four (4) square feet in size. 
(b)  In historic residential districts, for the following uses: 
(1)  Schools and places of assembly, up to two signs, one of which may be freestanding with a maximum height of six (6) feet, with the maximum size of any one sign being ten (10) square feet; 
(2)  Multifamily developments and entrances to residential subdivisions, one sign, freestanding or building, up to ten (10) square feet, with any freestanding sign having a maximum height of six (6) feet; 
(3)  Businesses, one freestanding sign on each street frontage of a property up to twelve (12) square feet in size and six (6) feet in height and one building sign per establishment up to two (2) square feet in size; and 
(4)  Guest quarters, one sign, freestanding or building, up to eight (8) square feet in size, with any freestanding sign being up to six (6) feet in height. 
(c)  In historic commercial and historic planned development districts, for the following uses: 
(1)  Schools and places of assembly, up to two signs, one of which may be freestanding with a maximum height of six (6) feet, and with the maximum size of any one sign being ten (10) square feet; 
(2)  Multifamily developments and entrances to residential subdivisions, one sign, freestanding or building, up to ten (10) square feet in size and with any freestanding sign being up to six (6) feet in height; 
(3)  Businesses, one freestanding sign on each street frontage of a property up to sixteen (16) square feet in size and up to eight (8) feet in height and one building sign per establishment up to four (4) square feet in size; 
(4)  Guest quarters, one sign, freestanding or building, up to eight (8) square feet in size and with any freestanding sign being up to six (6) feet in height; and 
(5)  Business parks, one freestanding sign on each street frontage of a property up to eighty (80) square feet and twelve (12) feet in height, and one building sign per establishment up to sixteen (16) square feet. 
(d)  In nonresidential districts (excluding historic districts but including nonresidential areas of PDE districts), for the following uses: 
(1)  Multifamily developments and entrances to residential subdivisions, one sign, freestanding or building, up to thirty-two (32) square feet, with any freestanding sign having a maximum height of ten (10) feet; 
(2)  Businesses (other than business parks), schools and places of assembly: 
(i)  one freestanding sign on each street frontage of a property, with the sign area being up to two (2) square feet per linear foot of street frontage, up to a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet [one hundred twenty (120) square feet in CBD-1 and CBD-2] and with a maximum height as follows: 
(AA)  twenty-five (25) feet in Agricultural, CBD-1, CBD-2, C-1, C-5, PDC, PDI and PDE and SC districts; and 
(BB)  thirty-five (35) feet in C-2, C-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts; and 
(ii)  building signage, up to two (2) square feet per linear foot of building frontage leased or owned by an establishment (on the side of the building with such frontage), provided that each establishment in a building shall be entitled to at least four (4) square feet of signage regardless of frontage. 
(3)  business parks: 
(i)  one freestanding sign on each street frontage of a property, with the sign area being up to a maximum size of three hundred twenty (320) square feet, and a maximum height of: 
(AA)  twenty-five (25) feet in Agricultural, CBD-1, CBD-2, C-1, C5, PDC, PDI, PDE and SC districts; and 
(BB)  thirty-five (35) feet in C-2, C-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts; and 
(ii)  building signage allowed for any building or portion of a building shall be up to two (2) square feet per linear foot of building frontage leased or owned by an establishment (on the side of the building with such frontage), provided that each establishment in a building shall be entitled to at least four (4) square feet of signage regardless of frontage. 
[4]  Notwithstanding the above height restrictions, in A, C-2, C-4, M-1, M-2, M-3, PDE, PDI and PDC districts, freestanding signs (other than billboards) located on commercial property and within one thousand (1,000) feet of the midpoint of intersecting streets of an interstate interchange may be up to no more than one hundred (100) feet in height. 
[5]  Miscellaneous signs. In addition to the other signs permitted in each zoning district under this section, the following miscellaneous signs shall be allowed as a permitted use for any multifamily or nonresidential use as follows: 
(a)  Within the minimum setback from right-of-way for principal buildings, miscellaneous signs may be located at entrance or exit driveways to the property. There shall be no more than two (2) such signs per driveway and each such sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in sign area nor be more than two and one-half (2½) feet in height. 
(b)  Other miscellaneous signs may be allowed (provided such signs shall be located farther from the street than the minimum required setback from right-of-way for principal buildings) as follows: 
(i)  In nonresidential districts (other than CBD-1 and CBD-2) and nonresidential areas of PDE districts, one (1) miscellaneous sign may be allowed for each principal building on the lot provided said sign does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area or eight (8) feet in height; 
(ii)  In residential districts, CBD-1, CBD-2 and residential areas of PDE districts, one (1) miscellaneous sign per building may be located on property used for multifamily or where the primary use is nonresidential, provided that each such sign is no more than six (6) square feet in sign area or more than four (4) feet in height; and 
(iii)  For drive-through traffic establishments, up to two (2) signs may be allowed at each drive-through lane provided that the aggregate sign area does not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height for each drive-through lane. No more than four (4) such signs shall be allowed per drive-through establishment, and no one sign may exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(c)  Miscellaneous signs allowed under this subsection shall not count toward the maximum number of signs or the aggregate square footage for signs allowed in this section. 
[6]  Freestanding signs permitted under this section shall not be considered billboards for purposes of this chapter, regardless of their size. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.07. - Special requirements for billboards. 
[1]  General provisions. 
(a)  All applications for billboards shall be made in the name of the property owner and all permits for billboards shall be issued to the property owner. 
(b)  Billboards shall be allowed only in C-2, C-4, M-1, M-2, M-3, PDC, PDI and PDE districts provided that, in PDE districts, billboards shall be allowed only in nonresidential areas. 
(c)  Billboards shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another billboard on either side of the same street, regardless of which direction the sign is viewed, as measured along the right-of-way from the nearest edge of the sign. Further, a billboard shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of another billboard as measured by the radius around the billboard. 
(d)  The maximum size of a billboard shall be six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet and the maximum height shall be seventy (70) feet. A billboard shall be more than two hundred eighty-four (284) square feet in size. 
(e)  No billboard may be closer than one hundred (100) feet from residentially zoned property. 
(f)  No billboard larger than three hundred eighty-four (384) square feet or having a maximum height of more than forty (40) feet above ground level, and no multiple message billboard, may be within two hundred (200) feet of residentially zoned property. 
(g)  No billboard shall be located inside, or within five hundred (500) feet in any direction of, a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, that such sign may be located within five hundred (500) feet of such an area when the sign is separated by a building(s) or other obstruction(s) so that the sign located within the five hundred (500) foot zone is not visible from such area. 
(h)  No billboard structure shall be located inside or within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property line of a historic zoning district, national register historic district or any legally recognized historic site or monument. 
(i)  Distances and sign heights, when required by these regulations, shall be established by a survey performed by a surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia. Said survey shall be provided at the time an application is made. 
(j)  The following billboards are prohibited: Double-stacked or side-by-side billboards and billboards located on walls, rooftops or canopies, as well as billboards with flashing, intermittent or moving light except as allowed for multiple message billboards under subsection [7] of this section. 
(k)  Where allowed as a permitted or conditional use, billboards, including multiple message billboards, may be an additional sign to those allowed under Section 25.06. 
(l)  In addition to the spacing and setback standards provided elsewhere in this section, billboards shall meet all setbacks for front, side, and rear yards as required for principal buildings in the same zoning district. 
[2]  Permitted use areas for standard billboards. Subject to the general provisions in Subsection [1] of this section, in C-2, C-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts, standard billboards not otherwise prohibited may be constructed and maintained as a permitted use, as follows: 
(a)  Standard billboards located adjacent to either an interstate highway or Eisenhower Parkway, located at least two hundred (200) feet from the nearest residentially zoned property; and 
(b)  Standard billboards which do not exceed three hundred eighty-four (384) square feet in size and forty (40) feet in height above ground level if located at least one hundred (100) feet from the nearest residentially zoned property. 
[3]  Conditional use areas for standard billboards. Subject to the general provisions in subsection [1] of this section, and except as provided in subsection [2], above, standard billboards not otherwise prohibited shall be allowed only as a conditional use in C-2, C-4, M-1, M-2, M-3, PDE (nonresidential areas only), PDC and PDI districts. 
[4]  Permitted use areas for multiple message billboards. Subject to the general provisions in subsections [1] and [7] of this section, in C-2, C-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts, multiple message billboards may be constructed and maintained as a permitted use where they are adjacent to an interstate highway or Eisenhower Parkway. 
[5]  Conditional use areas for multiple message billboards. Subject to the general provisions in subsections [1] and [7] of this section, and except as provided in subsection [4], above, multiple message billboards shall be allowed only as a conditional use in C-2, C-4, M-1, M-2, M-3, PDE (nonresidential areas only), PDC and PDI districts, and only in the following locations within such districts: 
(a)  Signs adjacent to an interstate highway or Eisenhower Parkway; 
(b)  Signs located on property not adjacent to an interstate highway but that can be read by the traveling public on such highway; and 
(c)  Signs located on property fronting an arterial street having a grass or raised median. 
[6]  Criteria for conditional use. The commission, in determining whether to allow any billboard as a conditional use, in addition to considering any applicable criteria under Section 3.03 of this resolution, shall be guided by the following criteria: 
(a)  Whether the size of the site and the size and height of the sign are suitable, considering the relationship of the proposed sign to adjacent parcels of land and development patterns in the area; 
(b)  The impact which the proposed sign may have on the view of significant features of the landscape as seen by motorists and adjacent property owners, the proposed location and setback of the sign on the site, and its aesthetic impact on surrounding properties; 
(c)  The effect the proposed sign will have on traffic and highway safety; 
(d)  Any accompanying or unique feature of the proposed sign, including plans for illumination and landscaping; and 
(e)  Any other factor that is related to the suitability of the proposed sign for the proposed site, including any conditions or limitations offered by the applicant. 
Notwithstanding the above criteria, content of the sign shall not be considered by the commission. 
[7]  Additional criteria for multiple message billboards. In addition to the above requirements and provisions for multiple message billboards and all billboards, multiple message billboards shall be subject to the following additional requirements and provisions: 
(a)  Location. Multiple message billboards shall not be placed within a five thousand (5,000) foot radius of another multiple message billboard or within two hundred (200) feet of residentially zoned property. 
(b)  Mode of Transition. Multiple message billboards using electronic or digital transition shall only contain messages changed through either: (i) instantaneous transition, with no visible intermittent elements; (ii) subtle transitions such as fading, dissolving or similar transitions that do not have the appearance of moving text or images; or (iii) scrolling. 
(c)  Display and transition time. Each message shall remain static for a minimum of ten (10) seconds. If the message is changed mechanically, transition shall occur in less than three (3) seconds. If the message is changed electronically or digitally, transition shall occur in less than two (2) seconds. 
(d)  Flashing, intermittent and moving lights. Other than as described in (b) and (c) immediately above, flashing, intermittent and/or moving lights are not allowed on multiple message billboards. 
(e)  Freestanding. Multiple message billboards shall only be freestanding signs. 
(f)  Dimmers. All multiple message billboards must have photocell dimmers in good working condition to achieve the requirements for brightness of all illuminated signs under Section 25.09[5]. 
(g)  Default mechanism. All multiple message billboards shall be equipped with a properly functioning default mechanism that will stop the sign in one position should any malfunction occur. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.08. - Standards for changeable copy signs. 
[1]  Zoning districts. 
(a)  Permitted use. Subject to Section 25.06, changeable copy signs not otherwise prohibited shall be allowed as permitted uses in C-2, C-4, M-1, M-2, M-3, PDE (nonresidential areas only), PDI and PDC Districts. 
(b)  Conditional use. Changeable copy signs not otherwise prohibited on property associated with a land-use that is a nonresidential conditional use in non-historic residential or agricultural districts shall be a conditional use. Any changeable copy sign in C-1 or C-5 districts not otherwise prohibited shall be a conditional use. 
(c)  Prohibited. Changeable copy signs are prohibited in all historic, SC, CBD-1, and CBD-2 districts and on all residential properties. 
[2]  Area. No changeable copy sign shall exceed fifty (50) square feet or the size allowed for such sign under Section 25.06, whichever is less. 
[3]  Mode of transition. Changeable copy signs using electronic or digital transition shall only contain messages changed through either: (i) instantaneous transition, with no visible intermittent elements; (ii) subtle transitions such as fading, dissolving or similar transitions that do not have the appearance of moving text or images; or (iii) scrolling. 
[4]  Display and transition time. Each message shall remain static for a minimum of six (6) seconds. If the message is changed mechanically, transition shall occur in less than three (3) seconds. If the message is changed electronically or digitally, transition shall occur in less than two (2) seconds. 
[5]  Flashing, intermittent and moving lights. Other than as described in subsections [3] and [4] of this section, flashing, intermittent and/or moving lights are not allowed on changeable copy signs. 
[6]  Location: 
(a)  Changeable copy signs are prohibited on a building or any structural or architectural element of a building. Changeable copy signs located within a building shall be oriented to be viewed by patrons within the building or on the premises. 
(b)  Except signs located and readable at drive-through areas of drive-through traffic establishments, signs permitted by Section 25.06[5] (miscellaneous signs) are prohibited from being changeable copy signs. 
(c)  No part of a changeable copy sign shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of a structure with a residential use, or in or within five hundred (500) feet of a design review district as defined under Section 27A.02 of this resolution. 
(d)  Any sign permitted under this section shall be located on an arterial or collector street or have frontage on an Interstate Highway. Placement of changeable copy signs must be adjacent to the arterial, collector, or Interstate Highway when property has frontage on multiple rights-of-way. 
[7]  Dimmers. All changeable copy signs must have photocell dimmers in good working condition to achieve the requirements for brightness in Section 25.09[5]. 
[8]  Default Mechanism. All changeable copy signs shall be equipped with a properly functioning default mechanism that will stop the sign in one position should any malfunction occur. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.09. - Special requirements for illuminated signs. 
[1]  Illuminated signs are prohibited on single or two family residential properties located in residential or historic zoning districts. Where illumination is allowed on signs in residential or historic zoning districts, only remote source illumination may be used and no visible bulbs, neon tubing, luminous paints or plastics shall be permitted as a part of any signs or sign structures in said districts. 
[2]  The source and design of the light or illumination emanating from a sign, including any electronic displays or other devices, shall be installed and/or shielded so that no light or illumination is angled or directed into a residential structure, or hinders the operation of motor vehicles. 
[3]  No revolving beam or beacon of light resembling any emergency vehicle light shall be permitted as part of a sign display. 
[4]  No sign shall be operated so as to create a flashing or pulsing of light or light intensity or color, or intermittent or moving light, except as permitted for changeable copy signs or multiple message billboards in this chapter. 
[5]  Illuminated signs shall not exceed 5,000 nits during daylight hours. Brightness from dusk until dawn shall not exceed 500 nits. All illuminated signs which are capable of complying with any future regulations under this Resolution regarding illumination without removal or physical alteration of the sign shall comply with such future regulations. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.10. - Setbacks and vision clearance. 
[1]  No part of a sign shall be located closer than two (2) feet to a public right-of-way. All other setbacks shall be as required in the district in which the sign is located. 
[2]  There shall be no sign or other obstruction to vision permitted to protrude in the space between the heights of two and one-half (2½) feet and ten (10) feet above ground level within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two (2) or more streets or railroad lines, of a street intersection with a railroad line, or of a curb cut with a street. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.11. - Master signage plan. 
[1]  No permit, whether for a permitted use sign or otherwise, shall be issued for a sign located in a planned development district, which was created after January 10, 2006, unless and until the commission has approved a master signage plan for such district. 
[2]  A master signage plan shall contain: 
(a)  An accurate site plan at a scale the zoning enforcement officer may reasonably require; 
(b)  Computation of maximum sign area, maximum size of individual signs, height of signs and location of freestanding signs; 
(c)  An accurate location of each sign on the site plan and/or facade of proposed buildings; and 
(d)  A detailed description of lighting and materials. 
[3]  The master signage plan may contain such other restrictions as the commission determines to be necessary to enhance the visual environment and public safety. 
[4]  The master signage plan may be amended by the applicant after review and approval by the commission of the proposed amended changes. 
[5]  No sign shall be erected, placed, painted or maintained that is not in conformance with the master signage plan. 
[6]  In reviewing any master signage plan for approval, the commission shall not consider the content of any sign. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Section 25.12. - Maintenance and removal of signs. 
[1]  All signs must be properly maintained and kept in good repair. 
[2]  For signs not otherwise regulated by Georgia Law, any legally established nonconforming sign or sign structure existing prior to the effective date of any provision of this resolution prohibiting such sign shall be permitted without alteration in size or location. Nothing herein shall prevent the maintenance or repair of legally established nonconforming signs. 
[3]  Nonconforming signs, which must be or were removed because of road widening, other public improvement or destruction by an act of God, may be relocated on the parcel of property so long as the size, height and type of such sign are the same as (provided that content of the sign shall not be considered in such determination) the sign removed or destroyed and provided that the sign shall be located as close to the original location as is lawful and feasible. If the nonconforming billboard is removed by the owner of the property or the owner of the sign at his or her own will, said sign, if replaced, must be replaced in compliance with these regulations. 
(Added January 22, 2018, ZA17-005) 
Chapter 26 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 

Section 26.01. - Intent. 
Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any permitted or conditional use is established in accordance with this Resolution. 
Section 26.02. - General requirements for off-street parking. 
For the purpose of this Resolution the following general requirements are specified: 
[1]  The term "off-street parking space" shall mean a space at least nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length with a minimum net area of one hundred and eighty (180) square feet; 
[2]  Parking spaces for a dwelling shall be located on the same lot with the main building to be served; 
[3]  If an off-street parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, the Commission may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided such space lies within seven hundred (700) feet of the property line of such principal use. Such vehicle parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner; 
[4]  The required number of parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that portion of the parking space required for an existing church whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays, may be assigned to a use which will be closed at nights or Sundays; 
[5]  Area reserved for off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this Resolution shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which it serves is discontinued or modified except where equivalent parking space is provided to the satisfaction of the Commission; and 
[6]  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this Resolution in connection with the operation of an existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 
[7]  Where access to a parking area is from a curbed street, access to such area must be provided through a curb cut on such street. Access to any parking area from any public street must be through a delineated driveway. (Added December 11, 2017, ZA17-004) 
Section 26.03. - Parking space requirements for all districts except CBD-1—Central Business District. 
Off-street, automobiles, storage or parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in or to at least the minimum requirements for the specific land use set forth. 

 
(Added April 13, 1998, ZA98-01-01) 
Section 26.04. - Parking space requirements for CBD-1—Central Business District. 
All provisions set forth in Sections 26.02 and 26.03 shall apply to the CBD-1 Central Business District except as follows: 
[1]  Any commercial building existing on the effective date of this Resolution may be reconstructed, remodeled, or enlarged without increasing the existing off-street parking spaces, provided such reconstruction, remodeling, or enlargement does not exceed more than ten percent (10%) of the original gross commercial floor area. Additional off-street parking must be provided for that portion of the additional gross commercial floor area in excess of ten percent (10%) in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Resolution. 
[2]  For new construction or enlarging an existing building by more than ten percent (10%) of the original gross commercial floor area, off-street automobile storage or parking spaces shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the following specific land uses. For those land uses not covered by the following, the parking requirements are to be set at a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the parking required under Section 26.03. 

 
(Amended January 28, 2002, ZA02-01-01) 
[3]  Where an existing nonresidential commercial building is to be converted, in whole or part, to a residential use, no additional space shall be provided for each residential unit, except for the uses set out in Section 26.03 [1](c—g), which uses shall be subject to the minimum requirements outlined in Section 26.03[1]. 
(Added August 14, 1997, ZA97-08-01) 
Section 26.05. - Parking lot site requirements. 
Whenever the required off-street parking requires the building of a parking lot, and whenever a parking lot is built, such parking lot shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
[1]  Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that light is reflected away from adjacent properties. 
[2]  The parking lot shall be adequately drained. 
[3]  Along lot lines of a parking area which abut a residential district, a dense planting of trees and shrubs shall be established on a strip of land not less than eight (8) feet in width adjacent to the districts, and such planting shall not be less than six (6) feet in height and a substantial bumper rail of wood, metal, or concrete shall be installed on the inside of the planting strip except where topography or other conditions would make the bumper rail unnecessary. 
[4]  A raised curb of at least six (6) inches shall be erected along all property lines, except for driveway openings and those lot lines abutting residential districts where the requirements in Section 26.05[3] shall prevail. 
[5]  No sign, whether permanent or temporary, shall be placed within the public right-of-way. Signs and planting strips shall be arranged so that they do not obstruct visibility for drivers or pedestrians. 
[6]  Landscaping for any parking lot of twenty (20) or more spaces shall be provided with interior landscaping covering not less than five (5) percent of the total area of the parking lot. The primary landscape material should be trees and the landscape areas should be reasonably dispersed throughout the site. 
Section 26.06. - Commercial parking lots in residential districts. 
Where a boundary line of a commercial or industrial district abuts a residential district, the Commission may permit, within a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet to the boundary and within the residential district, a private or public parking lot used for the parking of passenger vehicles related to the commercial or industrial establishment abutting such parking area subject to the provisions of Section 26.02 and the following: 
[1]  No lighting or signs shall be allowed; 
[2]  The parking lot shall be adequately drained; and 
[3]  A dense planting of trees and shrubs ten (10) feet in width, six (6) feet in height, and at least seventy-five (75) percent opaque shall be established along the property line abutting the residential district (use). A substantial bumper rail of wood, metal, or concrete shall be erected on the inside edge of the planting strip except where topography or other conditions would make the bumper rail unnecessary. 
Section 26.07. - Off-street loading. 
Where off-street loading space is required, one (1) or more loading berths or other space shall be provided for standing, loading, and unloading operations either inside or outside a building and on the lot of the building which they are intended to serve or on an adjacent lot when shared with the use occupying the adjacent lot, all to be in accordance with the requirements listed below: 
[1]  Size of off-street loading spaces. Each space shall have minimum plan dimensions of twelve (12) feet in width by fifty (50) in length and fourteen (14) feet overhead clearance. The zoning enforcement officer may approve a smaller area, provided such smaller area is sufficient in size to allow normal loading and unloading operations of a kind and magnitude appropriate to the property served thereby, except, however, where such smaller space is approved, no change in nature and magnitude of operations requiring larger parking areas may be made without provision for adequate off-street loading spaces. 
[2]  Connection to street or alley. Each required off-street loading space shall have direct access to a street or alley or have a driveway which offers satisfactory ingress and egress for trucks. 
[3]  Floor area over ten thousand (10,000) square feet. There shall be provided for each hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial building, or similar use requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise and having a floor area of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, at least one off-street loading space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor space or fraction thereof. Such space shall be so located as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street, or alley. 
[4]  Floor area less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. There shall be provided for each commercial or industrial building requiring the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise and having a floor area of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet sufficient off-street loading space (not necessarily a full space if shared by an adjacent establishment) so located as not to hinder the free movement of pedestrians and vehicles over a sidewalk, street, or alley. 
[5]  Bus and trucking terminals. There shall be provided sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loaded at the terminal at any one time. 
[6]  Permanent reservation. Areas reserved for off-street loading in accordance with the requirements of this Resolution shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which is served is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent loading space is provided and approved by the Commission. 
[7]  Location. All required off-street loading space shall be located on the same lot as the building which it is intended to serve or on an adjacent lot when shared with the use occupying said adjacent lot. 
Section 26.08. - Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles. 
Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping, and hauling shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following requirements: 
[1]  No more than one (1) commercial vehicle per dwelling shall be permitted, and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline, or liquified petroleum products be permitted; 
[2]  A commercial vehicle shall be of a size no greater than ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight; 
[3]  Travel trailers, hauling trailers, or boat trailers shall be permitted if parked or stored behind the front yard building line; and 
[4]  A travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except a travel trailer park authorized under this Resolution. 
Chapter 27 - ZONING ADMINISTRATION 

Section 27.01. - Establishment of the administrative agency. 
The Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby designated as the administrative agency for administering and enforcing the provisions of this Resolution. 
Section 27.02. - General policy goals. 
The general policy goals of the Commission in administering their regulations are as follows: 
[1]  To keep abreast of changes in the community and to develop ideas and principles in order to make decisions based on good and up-to-date planning principles; 
[2]  To make decisions in accordance with any future plan adopted by the Commission or any public agency (city council, county Commissioners, board of education, public housing authority, Macon-Bibb County Water and Sewerage Authority, Macon-Bibb County Health Department) to ensure the proper developmental growth of the community; 
[3]  To weigh each case on its own merit, and in doing so, attempt to be flexible rather than rigid in making a decision; 
[4]  To attempt to centralize commercial areas with adequate off-street parking rather than to allow congested strip development; 
[5]  To not spot zone, thereby looking more favorable, on extensions of existing zoning districts rather than creating isolated zoning districts, unless such isolated areas are large enough to warrant the rezoning; and 
[6]  To encourage traffic circulation within new subdivisions to be designed to connect adjoining subdivisions and to promote traffic safety at intersections. 
Section 27.03. - Powers and duties. 
The Commission, composed of five (5) members, selected pursuant to the ordinances of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia, shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by law and by this Resolution, which are more particularly specified as follows, provided that none of the following provisions shall be deemed to limit any power of said Commission that is conferred by law: 
[1]  The Commission shall hear and decide questions as to interpretation of any provision of this Resolution referred to the Commission by any interested party. 
[2]  To conduct such meetings as may be required by law or the provisions of this Resolution in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. Except as otherwise provided by opening meetings law or provided herein, all meetings shall be open to the public. (Amended July 25, 1988, ZA88-07-01) 
[3]  Authorize the issuance of certificates of appropriateness and special zoning permits for variances and conditional uses or other exceptions to the terms of this Resolution as may be allowed. 
[4]  Amend, supplement, or change the "Comprehensive Land Use Resolution" for the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia or the official zoning maps. (See Chapter 28 for amendment procedures.) 
[5]  Upon application for land development, issue land use only approvals. (See Section 27.10.) 
[6]  Hear and decide petitions for rehearing and appeal of administrative decisions. 
[7]  To enforce the provisions of this Resolution and to take such action, authorized by law or this Resolution, as may be required to remedy any violation. 
[8]  In exercising all its powers and duties, the Commission shall adhere to the following guidelines: 
(a)  Not less than three (3) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum; 
(b)  In public meetings, all parties affected by the actions and decisions of the Commission in enforcing the provisions of this Resolution shall be afforded the right to be heard. Procedures shall follow those of a public hearing as set out in Section 27.12; 
(c)  Actions and decisions shall be by motion made and seconded. All actions or decisions shall require the affirmative vote of at least three (3) members of the Commission; however, where only three (3) members of the Commission constitute a quorum, then any action by the Commission will be deferred if there is a dissenting vote by any of the three (3) members of the Commission present. Also, where only four (4) members of the Commission constitute a quorum, then any action by the Commission will be deferred if there is a dissenting vote by any two (2) of the members of the Commission present. Where there are five (5) members of the Commission present there shall be no automatic deferral of any item, however, the Commission may defer an item by an affirmative vote of three (3) members of the Commission. Except as set out herein, if the occurrences of the necessary total affirmative votes shall fail to be achieved for any reason, then the matter being voted upon shall be held to be denied; and 
(d)  All regular meetings of the Commission shall be held on the second and fourth Mondays of each month. Notice of such meetings shall be posted in a conspicuous place, available to the public at the regular meeting place of the Commission. In the event that it is necessary to reschedule a regular meeting, the Commission shall, when possible, give the public twenty-four (24) hours' advance notice, or, when such notice is not possible, the Commission shall give that notice which is reasonable under the circumstances. (Amended July 25, 1988, ZA88-07-01) 
[9]  The Commission shall keep minutes of its meetings and such records of the public meetings shall be open to public inspection once approved as official as provided by the open records law. Said minutes shall include the names of the members of the Commission present at the meeting, a description of each motion or proposal made, and a record of all votes. When any meeting is closed, the specific reasons for such closure shall be entered upon the official minutes. In addition, the Commission shall make available to the public within two (2) business days of the adjournment of the meeting an agenda of the subjects acted on and those members of the Commission present at a public meeting of the Commission. (Amended February 27, 1984, ZA84-02-01; Amended July 25, 1988, ZA88-07-01) 
[10]  For assistance in reaching decisions relative to amendments, conditional uses, variances, and other exceptions, the Commission may request technical advice and assistance, data, or factual evidence from the staff of the Commission, other governmental bodies or from other sources. The Commission may, at anytime during the proceeding, call witnesses on its own motion. 
[11]  To set fees for all applications for zoning permits and subdivision plat approval in such amount as the Commission may determine as necessary to partially defray administrative expenses and the cost for legal advertising. 
[12]  To enter into agreements with applicants, owners, or their authorized agents, specifying conditions and/or restrictions for the issuance of permits, which agreements may require a financial guarantee as provided in Section 27.22. In the event of a forfeiture of any financial guarantee, the Commission shall have the authority and responsibility to ensure completion of any work for which the guarantee was forfeited. 
(Amended April 28, 1997, ZA97-04-03) 
Section 27.04. - Duties and powers of the zoning enforcement officer. 
The executive director of the Commission shall designate a member of the staff of the Commission as the zoning enforcement officer who shall exercise such powers and duties as conferred by this Resolution to include specific duties as follows and such other duties as may be from time to time conferred by the Commission. 
[1]  Processing of applications. It shall be the duty of the zoning enforcement officer to assist applicants and to examine all applications for certificates of zoning compliance and special zoning permits, and to determine if the application and the plan submitted conform to all the provisions of this Resolution. In determining whether there is conformity, the zoning enforcement officer is authorized to confer with employees of the staff, city and county agencies, or others. Applications not complying with the provisions of this Resolution shall be rejected by the zoning enforcement officer. (Amended May 14, 1984, ZA84-05-01; Amended March 25, 1991, ZA91-03-02) 
[2]  Make staff studies. It shall be the duty of the zoning enforcement officer to cause studies to be made of those matters submitted for action by the Commission as he deems advisable or as may be requested by the Commission to ensure that all relevant material on the matter to be considered is before the Commission. 
[3]  Issue certificates of zoning compliance. The zoning enforcement officer shall issue certificates of zoning compliance. (See Section 27.06.) 
[4]  Issue special zoning permits. The zoning enforcement officer shall issue special zoning permits upon final approval by the Commission or as provided for in Sections 27.04[5] and 27.04[12]. 
[5]  Approval of variances. The zoning enforcement officer may grant variances from the development standards of this Resolution, by issuance of special zoning permits, where in his opinion the applicant meets all requirements of Section 27.11, limited to the following: 
(a)  Variances involving structural additions to nonconforming buildings where there is no encroachment on the affected property line(s); 
(b)  Variances to yard requirements (except to planned development districts): 
(i)  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street not to exceed five (5) feet; 
(ii)  Side yard not to exceed three (3) feet; and 
(iii)  Rear yard not to exceed five (5) feet; 
(c)  Variance on distances between buildings connected by common roof or walkway on same lot, with fire department approval; 
(d)  Variances in the location of bona fide accessory buildings provided that the following conditions are met: 
(i)  No safety hazards are created by the location or use of the structure; and 
(ii)  The applicant provides a written statement from adjacent property owner(s) that they have no objection to the location of the structure. 
(e)  Parking variance not to exceed five (5) percent of that required. 
(f)  No variance for density and use shall be granted pursuant to this section. 
(g)  Variances to the general provisions of the sign regulations to allow for subdivision markers located on public rights-of-way if such location has been approved by the respective city or county engineer and the traffic engineer. (Amended October 25, 1982, ZA82-10-02) 
[6]  Approvals of special zoning permits subject to ratification. The zoning enforcement officer may issue a special zoning permit as required by Section 27.07 of this Resolution except for those uses as described in Section 27.09, or he may issue a certificate of appropriateness required by Chapter 21 of this Resolution, whenever he determines that the issuance of such permit or certificate complies with the terms and intent of this Resolution, subject to ratification of the issuance of such permit by the Commission at its next regularly scheduled public hearing. Such permit shall not be valid until after ratification by the Commission. Nothing contained in this subsection shall prevent the right of any person to object to the issuance of the permit or to appear and be heard at the public hearing on any matter approved by the zoning enforcement officer for ratification. Nothing herein shall be construed to waive any requirement for public notice where such requirement exists. Any public notice given of a matter approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for ratification will indicate that it has been approved for ratification. (Amended October 28, 1985, ZA85-10-02; January 8, 1990, ZA90-01-03) 
[7]  Subdivision plat approval. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue approval of plats of proposed subdivisions where the plat is in conformity with Chapter 29 of this Resolution. 
[7.1]  Approval of certificate of appropriateness. The Zoning Enforcement Office may grant certificate of appropriateness, where in his or her opinion, the application meets all requirements set forth by the applicable design guidelines. Such approvals are at staff discretion and limited to the following: 
(a)  Wall signage that is within the parameters of the applicable sign regulations, or replacement of freestanding signage, for properties in which the previous signage was issued a certificate of appropriateness and no variance from the applicable sign regulations is required. 
(b)  Fences that are to be located behind the front building line of a structure and in compliance with all applicable fencing regulations. 
(c)  Alterations to rear yards including the addition of decks and demolition of dilapidated, non-historic accessory structures. 
(d)  Minor landscape and minor site features including driveways, walkways, and the removal of small, dead or diseased trees. 
(e)  Changes to side and rear elevations limited to alterations of windows and doors with the addition of storm windows or screens, or replacement of windows and doors in which the opening size is not altered and the change is not substantially visible from any public right-of-way. (Added January 28, 2002, ZA02-01-05) 
(f)  Replacement of existing deteriorated octagonal or diamond-shaped asphalt Staple-loc shingles or asphalt French Scallop roofing shingles with 3-tab asphalt or architectural roofing shingles. (Added April 10, 2006, ZA06-04-01; Amended June 12, 2006, ZA06-06-01) 
[8]  Maintain Commission zoning records. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall keep records of any and all permits, certificates of zoning compliance, special zoning permits, and certificates of appropriateness issued with notation of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be made a public record. 
[8a]  Staff studies. 
[a]  Whenever the Zoning Enforcement Officer receives an application for a proposed use of land that in his/her opinion may have a substantial adverse impact upon adjoining properties, the neighborhood or the community, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may initiate a land use study of the proposed use and gather information necessary to develop a complete and adequate record for the Commission to utilize in making its decision as to whether or not such adverse impact exists, and, if the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that such adverse impact does exist, to recommend either denial or remedial measures, if any, that could lessen or eliminate the adverse impact allowing approval of the use. 
[b]  The study will be performed by the Commission staff. The staff may call upon others in the community, including professionals, to provide information that would assist in preparation of the study. 
[c]  If, in the opinion of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the required date for hearing, as mandated by Sections 27.03[3]and 27.07[6] and Section 28.06[1], does not allow sufficient time to complete the study, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may request the Commission to grant an extension of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days or the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting following the expiration of thirty (30) days. 
[d]  Prior to the hearing on the application, the applicant may request a copy of the study that has been performed and all supporting materials. The applicant should do so in writing to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The applicant may add additional information in support of its application following the completion of the study, but must do so no later than ten (10) days prior to the scheduled hearing. 
[e]  The Commission may also determine that a land use study is required an may direct the Zoning Enforcement Officer to conduct such study and provide appropriate time limits in which the study must be completed. 
[8.1]  Deferral of Application for Special Zoning Permit, or amendments to Comprehensive Land Use Resolution or Official Zoning Maps. Upon the written request of an applicant for a special zoning permit, or amendment to the Comprehensive Land Development Resolution for the City of Macon and Bibb County or Official Zoning Maps, filed five (5) business days prior to the date scheduled for hearing, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or his designee, may defer such application until a succeeding meeting of the Commission. A deferral fee shall be paid by the applicant, as may be required by the Commission. Deferral by the staff does not initiate the time limits for action by the Commission as provided by § 27.12[10] and § 28.06[1]. (Added January 13, 2003, ZA03-01-01) 
[9]  Temporary mobile home permits. The zoning enforcement officer may issue certificates of zoning compliance for the temporary use of single mobile homes for temporary banking facilities pursuant to the provisions of Sections 23.08[3](a) through (c). 
[10]  Reserved. (Deleted October 9, 1995, ZA95-10-02). 
[11]  Enforcement of Resolution. The enforcement of the provisions of this Resolution shall be the responsibility of the zoning enforcement officer. The zoning enforcement officer may cause any building, structure, place, or premises to be inspected and examined and to order the remedying of any condition found to exist in violation of any provision of this Resolution. Upon failure of any person, firm, or corporation to immediately remedy any such violation, the zoning enforcement officer may initiate proceedings pursuant to Chapter 33 of this Resolution. In the case of repeated violations of this Resolution by any person, firm, or corporation, the zoning enforcement officer may initiate such proceedings without first providing such person, firm, or corporation an opportunity to remedy the violation. 
[12]  Granting of conditional uses for structural changes and changing use(s) in existing buildings: 
(a)  If a conditional use has been approved by the Commission, and the applicant or his successor therefor [1] later wishes to make structural additions to such use, the zoning enforcement officer may grant a special zoning permit for such structural addition without a public hearing if such addition does not cause the premises to otherwise be in violation of this Resolution. 
(b)  Whenever an existing building located in a C-4 or PDC district, in which district commercial uses are allowed, becomes vacant and an application is made for a new or different use to the Commission, the zoning enforcement officer may, without a public hearing, issue a special zoning permit for any use of the premises that would be a permitted use in a C-1 Neighborhood Commercial Zone. 
[12.1]  Reserved. (Amended May 14, 1984, ZA84-05-01; Deleted March 25, 1991, ZA91-03-02) 
[12.2]  Land use only site plan approval. The zoning enforcement officer will approve all site plans submitted pursuant to Section 27.10 except where specific approval authority has been reserved by the Commission upon granting land use only approvals. (Added March 23, 1987, ZA87-03-05) 
[13]  Duties and powers. The zoning enforcement officer shall have such other powers and duties as may be imposed by other provisions of this Resolution or as may be conferred upon such officer from time to time by the Commission. 
[14]  The zoning enforcement office shall make a determination as to whether or not a proposed residential facility is covered by the provisions of 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq. as a residential facility for handicapped persons. 
(Added April 22, 1996, ZA96-03-01; Amended April 14, 2003, ZA03-04-02) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The word "therefor" was substituted for "therefore." 

Section 27.05. - Certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit required. 
A permit (certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit) shall be required for any proposed use of land(s), building(s), structure(s), or any construction, modification, or alteration of an existing building(s) or structure(s). This requirement shall include any grading, site preparation, or removal of trees incidental to, or preparatory for, any use of land(s), building(s), structure(s), or construction, alteration, or modification of an existing building. 
Note: Before any building, structure, or land for which a permit has been obtained can be occupied or used for the purpose(s) specified in the permit, a certificate of occupancy must first be obtained pursuant to the provisions of Section 27.16. 
Section 27.06. - Application for and granting of certificate of zoning compliance. 
For all land uses designated in this Resolution as "permitted uses" or for structural alterations to a permitted use, a certificate of zoning compliance must first be obtained. The following procedures govern the granting of the certificate of zoning compliance: 
[1]  Application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be made to the zoning enforcement officer. The application shall conform to the provisions set out in Section 27.07[1](b). 
[2]  If, after review of the application, the zoning enforcement officer determines that the proposed use or structural change complies with all of the provisions of law and of this Resolution, he shall issue the certificate. 
[3]  Such certificate shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the premises described on the permit during the period of construction. 
[4]  The zoning enforcement officer may require an applicant to provide satisfactory proof of compliance with the laws and regulations of various state, city, and county agencies including, but not limited to, the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Macon-Bibb County Fire Department, Macon-Bibb County Health Department, and the respective engineering departments of the City of Macon and the County of Bibb. 
[5]  The zoning enforcement officer may impose such reasonable conditions upon any granting of a certificate of zoning compliance as he may determine to be required to protect adjacent properties or the general neighborhood from any harmful effects of the permitted use. A right of appeal to the Commission shall exist from any such determination by the zoning enforcement officer. (See Section 27.14.) 
[6]  Applications for manufactured homes shall be accompanied with a picture, brochure, blue prints, or other visual means of depicting the proposed manufactured home. 
[7]  The zoning enforcement officer shall either approve or deny an application for a certificate of zoning compliance within twenty (20) business days of receipt of the completed application. Any completed application not approved or denied within the twenty (20) business day period described above shall be deemed an approval. 
(Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02; Amended July 22, 2002, ZA02-07-06) 
Section 27.07. - Application for and granting of special zoning permits. 
A special zoning permit is required for all "conditional uses," for all uses of land or building, construction, modification or alteration of a building requiring Commission approval and for variances or the granting of other permitted exceptions to the terms of this Resolution by the Commission. 
[1]  Procedure for obtaining special zoning permit: 
(a)  Applications shall be submitted to the zoning enforcement officer, by 12:00 noon, twenty-six (26) days prior to the public hearing at which it is to be considered. The zoning enforcement officer, after review of the application for compliance with the application procedures, will give public notice as required herein and will forward the application to the Commission for public hearing. (The twenty-six-day [2] requirement shall apply only to applications requiring Commission approval). (Amended May 14, 1984, ZA84-05-01; Amended July 23, 1990, ZA90-07-01; Amended March 25, 1991, ZA91-03-02) 
(b)  An application shall be accompanied by an acceptable site plan with such reasonable information shown thereon as may be required by the zoning enforcement officer or the Commission. Such site plan shall include at a minimum the following: a sketch illustrating the property lines and dimensions, location and size of existing and proposed structures or monuments, use of structures, easements (private and public), water courses, fences, parking areas where applicable, street names and street right-of-way lines shown thereon, and such other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the application. The zoning enforcement officer or the Commission may require the applicant to submit additional information. 
(c)  Applications for manufactured homes shall be accompanied with a picture, brochure, blue print, or other visual means of depicting the proposed manufactured home. (Amended November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-02) 
(d)  An application concerning any of the following land uses must be accompanied by written approval of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department. However, the zoning enforcement officer may submit the application to the Commission for land use approval only. In such case, the special zoning permit shall not be issued until the written approval of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department is received. 
(i)  Motels, mobile home and travel trailer parks, and tourist courts. 
(ii)  Carnivals, fairs, itinerant [3] meetings, and tent meetings. 
(iii)  Food service establishments such as restaurants, cafes, drive-in restaurants, grills, bars, taverns, night clubs, lunch counters and all similar dining and/or drinking establishments. 
(iv)  Frozen dessert and milk processing plants. 
(v)  Retail food establishments such as groceries, meat markets, drive-ins, etc. 
(vi)  Dairy farms. 
(vii)  Schools and other institutions such as nursing homes, hospitals, etc. 
(viii)  Stables and other animal housing. 
(ix)  Any use of radioactive material, or hazardous waste. 
(x)  Ice plants. 
(xi)  Bedding manufacturers or renovators. 
(xii)  Public swimming and recreation areas. 
(xiii)  Fall-out shelters. 
(xiv)  Guest quarters serving meals. (Added May 9, 1988, ZA88-05-02) 
(xv)  Guest quarters. (Added May 9, 1988, ZA88-05-02) 
(e)  An application for storage of explosives, ammunition, blasting agents, and above-or belowground storage of flammable or combustible products must be accompanied by written approval of the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department. However, if the zoning enforcement officer deems it impractical to require such approval prior to Commission action on the application, he may submit the application to the Commission for land use approval. The special zoning permit shall not be issued until the written approval of the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department is received. (Amended July 22, 1985, ZA85-07-03) 
(f)  Applications for day care centers, day care homes, kindergartens, or playschools must contain the following: conditional approval from the Macon-Bibb County Health Department, the Macon-Bibb County Fire Prevention Bureau, the Bibb County Department of Family and Children Services, and day care licensing shall accompany the application for a special zoning permit. 
(g)  The applicant for a conditional use shall have the burden of proof in going forward with the evidence and burden of persuasion on all questions of fact relevant to the application. 
(h)  Incomplete applications will be held until all information is supplied. 
[2]  Public hearing. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on all applications for special zoning permits, except for those permits to be granted by the zoning enforcement officer pursuant to Section 27.04. 
[3]  Action by the Commission for Application for Conditional Use. The Commission shall approve or disapprove the application for conditional use, except for signs, within forty-five (45) days, or defer same in accordance with the forty-five (45) day provisions of Section 27.12[10]. If the application is approved, the zoning enforcement officer shall have fifteen (15) days in which to issue a special zoning permit provided that the application is complete and all other conditions of approval have been met by the applicant. 
For applications for a conditional use for a sign permit, final action must be taken by the Commission at the next regularly scheduled hearing following submission to the Commission pursuant to Section 27.07 [1]. If the application is approved, the zoning enforcement officer shall have five (5) days in which to issue a special zoning permit provided that the application is complete and all other conditions of approval have been met by the applicant. (Amended Sept. 27, 2010, ZA10-09-01) 
[4]  Conditions upon approval. The Commission may make the granting of any special zoning permit conditional upon such conditions, restrictions, stipulations, or safeguards as it may deem appropriate to carry out the purpose and intent of this Resolution and to protect adjacent properties, the general neighborhood, and the residents, workers, and visitors therein. 
[5]  Denied permits. Whenever the Commission has denied an application for a special zoning permit for conditional uses, it shall not thereafter consider any further application for the same special zoning permit of any part or all of the same property for a period of six (6) months from the date of final denial of the application. (Amended October 25, 1982, ZA82-10-01; Amended January 8, 1990, ZA90-01-01) 
[6]  Special exceptions. The Commission must approve or disapprove an application for special exception within forty-five (45) days. If the Commission takes no action to either approve or disapprove an application for special exception after the expiration of forty-five (45) days or otherwise fails to act, the application shall be deemed approved. The forty-five (45) day period begins to run on the day immediately following the submission of a final and complete application for special exception. 
[7]  Failure to Appear. Failure of an applicant to appear at the hearing scheduled on any item will result in an automatic withdrawal of the application that was scheduled to be heard. A new application with appropriate fees will be required to reinstate the application. (Added January 13, 2003, ZA03-01-01) 
(Amended May 14, 1984, ZA84-05-01; Deleted March 25, 1991, ZA91-03-02; Amended ZA02-07-07, July 22, 2002; Amended Sept. 27, 2010, ZA10-09-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The term "twenty-six-day" was substituted for "twelve-day" in the third sentence of § 27.07[1](a) due to Res. ZA90-07-01 which amended the first sentence of this subsection [1](a) by changing "twelve (12) days" to "twenty-six (26) days." 
 --- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The word "itinerant" was substituted for "itinerate." 

Section 27.08. - Compliance with application. 
Approval of applications for a certificate of zoning compliance or a special zoning permit shall be based on the application. All supportive documentation including, but not limited to, site plans, drainage plans, and statements of intent shall be considered a part of the application and any amendments thereto. Representations, written or oral, of applicant to the Commission at the hearing on the application, or where applicable to the zoning enforcement officer, shall become part of the application. Any use or development of land or any construction, erection, alteration or modification of a building or structure must conform to the application and any amendments thereto. Any amendment to the application must receive prior approval of the zoning enforcement officer. Any use or development of land or any construction, erection, alteration, or modification of a building or structure which is different from that contained in the application, to include any representations, written or oral, or any amendments properly allowed by the Commission, shall be a violation and shall subject the applicant to any and all penalties which may be provided in Section 33.01 of this resolution. 
Section 27.09. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. ZA95-08-02, § 2, adopted Aug. 14, 1995, deleted former § 27.09, which pertained to notice requirements for special zoning permits. 
Section 27.10. - Land use only approval. 
The Commission may grant approval for "land use only" if it determines a more detailed site plan than required by Section 27.07[1](b) is necessary prior to issuing a certificate of zoning compliance or a special zoning permit. Such "land use only" approval shall automatically expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance if the required site plan has not been submitted within the time limit. In cases of hardship, the zoning enforcement officer may grant one (1) extension not to exceed six (6) months. 
Section 27.11. - Variances. 
[1]  The Commission is hereby authorized to grant variances from the strict application of this Resolution upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence that: 
(a)  By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topographical conditions, or other extraordinary situations or conditions peculiar to a specific parcel of property, the strict application of these regulations would result in peculiar or unusual, practical, difficulties to or exceptional or undue hardship upon the owner of such property; 
(b)  Such variance is the minimum reasonably necessary to overcome the aforesaid exceptional conditions; 
(c)  Such variance can be granted without substantial impairment to the intent, purpose, and integrity of this Resolution and/or the comprehensive plan or other master plan adopted for the property; and 
(d)  Such variance will not be detrimental to the use and enjoyment of adjoining or neighboring properties. These provisions, however, shall not permit the Commission to grant any variance to any setback or yard requirements for property zoned for commercial or industrial purposes when such property abuts or immediately adjoins any property zoned for residential purposes unless such residential property is proposed for commercial or industrial use on the comprehensive land development plan. 
[2]  Variances cannot be granted for use of land or structures not permitted or prohibited, or to increase the density of development for a tract of land beyond that permitted by the zoning district. 
[3]  If the hardship invoking the provisions of this section was the result of the applicant's intentional disregard or willful failure to comply with the terms of this Resolution, the Commission may refuse to grant a variance. 
[4]  A variance(s) cannot be granted to cure a violation of this Resolution unless and until the Commission finds as a fact that: 
(a)  The violation cannot be reasonably remedied by any other means; 
(b)  The act creating the violation was not deliberate, intentional, or the result of gross negligence; 
(c)  Such variance can be granted without substantial impairment to the intent and purpose of this Resolution and will not be detrimental to the use and enjoyment of adjoining or neighboring properties; and 
(d)  The violator has not previously requested and been granted a variance under the provisions of this subsection, except that this provision shall not apply if the violator can establish that such previous violation was the result of an accident or other excusable cause. 
[5]  Variances for a sign shall be governed by the provisions of Section 27.07[3]. (Added Sept. 27, 2010, ZA10-09-01) 
Section 27.12. - Public hearings. 
On all matters requiring a public hearing by the Commission such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
[1]  All hearings shall be open to the public. The chairman, or his designee in the chairman's absence, shall preside. 
[2]  The Commission may adjourn a regular meeting if all business cannot be disposed of on the day set, and no further public notice shall be necessary for such a meeting if the time and place of its resumption is stated at the time of adjournment and is not changed after adjournment. 
[3]  The applicant shall appear at the public hearing or be represented by an agent, attorney or any other party on the applicant's behalf. 
[4]  Adherence to the rules of evidence of a trial at law shall not be required. The chairman of the Commission may allow such latitude on the receipt of evidence as rule of fair play may require; however, the chairman may limit the presentation of repetitive evidence. 
[5]  All hearings shall proceed as follows: 
(a)  Statement by Commission representative explaining the nature of the action to be taken; 
(b)  Oral presentation of staff report, if requested by any Commissioner; (Amended October 8, 1984, ZA84-10-01) 
(c)  Presentation by applicant; 
(d)  Presentation of other interested parties; first in support of application, then in opposition to application; and 
(e)  Closing presentation by the applicant. (Amended November 14, 2011, ZA11-004) 
[6]  Witnesses may be called by either side of the proposition being considered by the Commission or by the Commission itself. 
[7]  The Commission may request the staff or Commission attorney to make a presentation to ensure a complete record upon which the decision must be based. 
[8]  The chairman may establish appropriate time limits for arguments, but such time limit shall be equal for both sides. Each side shall have a minimum of ten (10) minutes for the presentation of arguments on each agenda item. The chairman may request representatives of each side to speak for the entire group or portions of the group but shall not require such representation against the wishes of the group involved. 
[9]  An applicant may request a continuance of any hearing to present additional information. 
[10]  The Commission may, in its discretion, defer decision on any application for a conditional use for a period not to exceed forty five (45) days or the next Commission meeting if such meeting does not fall within the above mentioned forty five (45) days. At the next meeting following the deferral the Commission shall approve or deny the application. If such decision is not made within the forty-five (45) day deferral period or the next scheduled meeting falling outside the forty-five (45) day period, the application shall be deemed approved. There shall be no deferral of applications for special exceptions. 
[11]  Any party or interested person wishing to submit information to be considered by the Commission at a public hearing shall submit ten (10) copies of such information or documents no later than 5:00 p.m. on the Thursday before the scheduled Commission hearing or present such information at the hearing in person or through an agent. Information submitted after 5:00 p.m. on the Thursday before the scheduled Commission hearing, with the exception of presenting the information at the hearing, will not be considered by the Commission. 
(Amended November 13, 1989, ZA89-11-01; Amended March 11, 1991, ZA91-03-01; Amended January 13, 1997, ZA97-01-01; Amended July 22, 2002, ZA02-07-08; Amended March 24, 2003, ZA03-03-01) 
Section 27.13. - Rehearing. 
Any person, firm, or corporation whose application has been denied by the Commission may, within thirty (30) days from the date of disapproval, file an application for a rehearing. All motions for a rehearing by the Commission shall be heard in the same manner as any other application and may be granted if new or additional written information or graphical information that was not available at the time of the original hearing, or was not presented for excusable neglect, is shown. Such information shall be submitted at the time the request for rehearing application is filed. If a rehearing is granted, no new application will be required unless the application has changed so significantly that the Zoning Enforcement Officer decides a new legal ad is warranted. The applicant will pay appropriate fees as set by the Commission's approved fee schedule. 
(Amended November 14, 2011, ZA11-004) 
Section 27.14. - Appeals from acts or decisions of zoning enforcement officer. 
All decision or acts of the zoning enforcement officer in the administration of this Resolution shall be final seven (7) days after said decision or act. Any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by any decision or act of the zoning enforcement officer in the administration of this Resolution may file an appeal in writing with the Commission within seven (7) days of the act or decision being appealed. The Commission, may, after a hearing, affirm or reverse, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination of the zoning enforcement officer. The procedure for hearing appeals from the decisions or acts of the zoning enforcement officer shall be the same as set out in Section 27.12, "Public Hearings." 
(Amended August 14, 1995, ZA95-08-01) 
Section 27.15. - [Appeal.] 
Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by an act, omission or decision of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the right to appeal and the appeal shall be taken by Writ of Certiorari, as provided by law. 
(Added April 14, 2003, ZA03-04-03) 
Section 27.16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 27.16, which pertained to certificate of occupancy required, was deleted October 9, 1995, ZA95-10-02. 
Section 27.17. - When use or construction may begin. 
Until the issuance of the proper permit for any use or occupancy of land or erection, construction, alteration, or modification of any structure or building, no work shall begin, including, but not limited to, site preparation, grading, fill, or removal of trees and vegetation. 
Section 27.18. - Cease and desist order. 
Whenever the zoning enforcement officer determines that any building or structure is being constructed, altered, or modified, or any land is being used in violation of the terms of this Resolution, and in his judgment immediate cessation of construction, alteration, or modification of buildings or structures or use of land is required to prevent harm to any person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, or to preserve the status quo, he may issue a cease and desist order to those responsible. Whenever a cease and desist order is issued by the zoning enforcement officer, the person receiving such order will be invited to appear before the next regularly scheduled Commission public hearing or such special hearing as may be called, to contest the issuance of the order. The zoning enforcement officer may enforce such order in accordance with the provisions of Section 27.04[11]. 
Section 27.19. - Suspension or revoking of permit for use or occupancy of land. 
[1]  Whenever the Commission shall find that any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions upon which any certificate, approval or permit is granted are not being complied with, the Commission is authorized, after due notice to all parties concerned and after granting full opportunity for a public hearing, to suspend or revoke such permit or take other action as it deems necessary to ensure compliance. The Commission is authorized to request and obtain investigations and reports as to compliance from such county or state agencies or administrative officers as may be appropriate. 
[2]  The granting of a permit by the Commission for the use of land or buildings does not confer upon the permittee the right to use such land or building in a manner that would create a nuisance. 
(a)  Whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to the provisions of Ga. Code Ann., Title 72, Nuisances; or the Code of Ordinances, City of Macon, Georgia, Sections 15-3001 et seq., shall make a finding that a nuisance exists relative to the use of land or buildings, the Commission may, after a public hearing, direct the owner(s) and/or occupant(s) to abate the use creating the nuisance, the failure of which may result in the revocation of any permit issued by the Commission for such use. Such hearing will not be a de novo hearing on the merits of the question resolved by the courts. 
(b)  Failure of the owner(s) or occupant(s) to comply with such Commission directive shall be a violation of this Resolution and the Commission may take such action(s) as authorized pursuant to Chapter 33 of this Resolution. 
[3]  Any permit which has been issued based upon an application as defined in Section 27.08, which contains false or misleading information may be revoked by the Commission. The zoning enforcement officer may issue a cease and desist order in accordance with Section 27.18, pending a decision by the Commission. 
Section 27.20. - Permits issued in error. 
Any certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit issued in error shall not confer any rights or privileges to the applicant to proceed with construction. Any permit issued by the Commission based upon incorrect or false information supplied by the applicant may be revoked by the Commission. 
Section 27.21. - Expiration of certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit. 
A certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit shall expire six (6) months after date of issue if actual construction, as defined in Section 1.01[29], has not begun or at anytime a project is abandoned. The zoning enforcement officer may, upon application, grant one (1) extension, not to exceed six (6) months, where he determines that the denial of such extension will impose an unreasonable hardship on the applicant. 
Section 27.22. - Requirement for financial guarantee. 
The Commission may, as a condition to the granting of a permit which is subject to conditions and/or restrictions, require the applicant for such permit to provide the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission a financial guarantee in the form of a performance bond, cash escrow deposit or letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Commission. The financial guarantee shall be payable to the Commission and shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the entire cost of performing the conditions and/or restrictions specified. The duration of the financial guarantee shall be until such time as the work to be performed pursuant to the conditions and/or restrictions is accepted by the Commission or such other period of time as the Commission may specify to insurance completion or maintenance. 
If any portion of the required improvements specified in the conditions and/or restrictions shall fail to be performed as required, the Commission may declare the guarantee forfeited and require the guarantor to pay the Commission immediately the amount of the guarantee. 
The Commission shall utilize any funds realized under the guarantee to complete improvements called for in the conditions and/or restrictions imposed upon the permit and in the event all of the funds are not utilized, any remaining portion shall be returned to the applicant, bonding company, or crediting institution as appropriate. 
Section 27.23. - Flood hazard district. 
Within the area of the City of Macon and Bibb County lie lands which are identified as being within flood hazard districts. These lands are identified on the national flood insurance rate maps for the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia dated August 2, 1990, and the "Flood Insurance Study for the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia," prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency dated August 2, 1990, as they may be amended from time to time. As to any such lands situated in a flood hazard district as identified in the aforementioned maps, no zoning permit may be issued until a floodplain development permit has been obtained from either the City of Macon or Bibb County. 
(Added March 5, 1991, ZA91-03-02) 
Chapter 27A - DESIGN REVIEW[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Resolution ZA16-001, adopted July 11, 2016, amended Chapter 27A in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 27A, §§ 27A.01—27A.10, derived from Amendment ZA97-08-01, § 7, adopted Aug. 14, 1997; as subsequently amended by ZA97-10-01, adopted Oct. 13, 1997; ZA02-01-03, adopted Jan. 28, 2002; ZA02-01-04, adopted Jan. 28, 2002; ZA02-02-01, adopted Feb. 11, 2002; ZA05-01-01, adopted Jan. 10, 2005; and ZA-07-01, adopted May 14, 2007. See also the Comparative Table. 

Section 27A.01. - Intent. 
The establishment of Design Review Districts, the Design Review process, and the Design Review Board provide valuable public benefits in preserving and protecting the aesthetics, integrity and historic character of the various Design Review Districts in Macon-Bibb County for the benefit and enjoyment of all citizens, current and future. 
To that end, this chapter provides procedures for designation of design review districts, creates the design review board and the duties and powers of said board, lists performance criteria for the rehabilitation, restoration, alteration and relocation of existing structures, and the construction and erection of new structures, defines and delimits causes for demolition and relocation of structures, and establishes the application and review process for certificates of appropriateness in such districts. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.02. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
[1]  "Board" or "Design Review Board" shall refer to the board established pursuant to Section 27A.04 of this resolution. 
[2]  "Design review district" or "design district" shall mean any historic zoning district and any other district designated by the Commission where a certificate of appropriateness shall be required. The following zoning districts are designated as design districts: HR1, HR2, HR3, HPD, HPD-BH, HC, CBD-1 and CBD-2 zoning districts, plus any other districts as may be so designated by the Commission from time to time. 
[3]  "Significant structure" shall mean any structure which is individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or has been determined to be a contributing structure to the design review district in which it is located as determined by the Georgia State Historic Preservation Office. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.03. - Procedures for designation of design review districts. 
The following criteria and procedures shall govern the designation and establishment of any design review district. The boundaries of any such district shall, in general, be drawn so as to include all lands closely related to and bearing upon the character of the area to be protected, thus providing a landscaped unit and affording transitional regulations needed to control potentially adverse environmental influences. For the purposes of this chapter, an area or parcel of land possessing one (1) or more structures, landmarks or sites which are themselves of unique, historical, cultural or architectural significance, may be designated as a design review district. 
[1]  General criteria for designation. 
(a)  A site, structure or area to be designated as a design review district must meet the criteria established for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places; or 
(b)  A site, structure or area to be designated as a design review district must exhibit architectural or esthetic qualities that are in need of protection. 
[2]  Procedures for establishment or removal of design review districts. The following procedures shall be used in creating or removing design review districts, or altering their boundaries: 
(a)  A proposed amendment to the zoning boundaries or classifications of property on the official zoning maps to create, remove, or alter the boundaries of, a design review district may be initiated by a verified application by one (1) or more of the owners or authorized agents of the property to be affected by the proposed amendment. Applications for such amendment to the official zoning maps by property owners or their agents must contain a statement of the proposed use for the property to be affected by the proposed amendment. 
(b)  Other interested parties for the establishment, removal or altering the boundaries of a design review district shall submit their request in the form of a written request to amend these regulations to the zoning enforcement officer. 
(c)  The following procedures shall be used to establish, remove, or alter the boundaries of, a design review district under either (a) or (b) of this section: 
(i)  The zoning enforcement officer shall examine the request for compliance with these regulations and then forward the request to the Design Review Board and to the Commission. 
(ii)  The Commission in its discretion may initiate a survey of a proposed district to determine if the proposed district is an appropriate candidate for a design review district prior to either the Commission making any final determination or prior to the Design Review Board making any recommendations. 
(iii)  The Design Review Board shall consider the request, as well as any other pertinent information or public comment, and make its recommendations to the Commission. 
(iv)  Should the Commission decide, after reviewing the recommendations of the Design Review Board, that a new design review district should be created or removed, or have its boundaries altered, then the Commission may initiate an amendment to the official zoning maps under the procedures established in Chapter 28 of this Resolution. 
(d)  The Commission may also initiate an amendment to the official zoning maps to establish or remove a design district, or alter its boundaries, by its own motion under the procedures established in Chapter 28 of this Resolution. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.04. - Establishment of design review board. 
There shall be established a design review board to assist the Commission in making decisions regarding the application of regulations to design districts. It is recognized that such districts are of a unique character, possessing special qualities, and that certain individuals possess unique skills and qualifications which are useful to the Commission in making decisions concerning the application of such district regulations. The intent is to obtain special expertise and knowledge as guidance for the Commission. 
[1]  Membership. The design review board shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the Commission for overlapping terms of three (3) years. Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission. 
[2]  Term. The appointment of members of the design review board shall be for a term of three years. 
[3]  Vacancies. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Each member shall serve until their successor is appointed by the Commission and may be reappointed at the pleasure of the Commission. 
[4]  Membership requirements. Each member shall be a resident of Macon-Bibb County and shall have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in a design profession, history, planning, real estate or the preservation of historic resources. At least one (1) member shall be a resident property owner or business owner in a designated design review district in Macon-Bibb County. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.05. - Duties and powers of the Design Review Board. 
The design review board shall have the following duties and powers: 
[1]  To review documentation or surveys of historic sites, landmarks or areas for designation purposes under these regulations; 
[2]  To make recommendations based on findings of fact to the Commission regarding criteria to be used in selecting historic and architecturally significant structures; 
[3]  To make recommendations based on findings of fact to the Commission concerning designation of structures and areas to be designated as historic zoning districts; 
[4]  To assist the Commission and its staff in the preparation of the design guidelines to be considered in review of an application for a certificate of appropriateness; 
[5]  To assist applicants, upon request, in the preparation of applications for certificates of appropriateness to include providing such guidelines and advice that will help the applicant to meet the requirements and design criteria of this Resolution; 
[6]  To employ such other powers and perform such other duties and responsibilities as may from time to time be assigned by Resolution of the Commission; and 
[7]  To review applications for certificates of appropriateness referred to it pursuant to this chapter and make recommendations on the same pursuant to Section 27A.10. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.06. - Certificate of appropriateness required. 
[1]  No structure, including but not limited to buildings, walls, fences, steps, paving, signs, or other appurtenances, that is clearly and readily visible from any public right-of-way, shall be altered, constructed, demolished, erected, rehabilitated, relocated, renovated, restored or displayed within a design district unless an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been approved by the Commission or, where authorized, the zoning enforcement officer, pursuant to the provisions of this resolution. Notwithstanding the above, a certificate of appropriateness is not required for communications antennas allowed as permitted uses under Section 23.27[4]. 
[2]  Landscape. Design review of landscape changes is required for certain changes and under certain circumstances. It is recognized that the landscape plays an important role in the character definition of the historic and design review districts and may be historic in and of itself. Landscape changes that require design review, and a certificate of appropriateness, include changes clearly and readily visible from any public right-of-way involving: 
(a)  The removal of any tree within a design district over four (4) inches in diameter at a height of four (4) feet; and 
(b)  Any landscape change associated with a project requiring design review. 
(c)  The construction, alteration, relocation or establishment of an area used for parking motor vehicles, paved or unpaved and whether formally delineated or not, and located in the front or on the side of a principal building on a residential property. (Added December 11, 2017, ZA17-004) 
[3]  Expiration of certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of appropriateness shall expire six (6) months after date of issue if actual construction, as defined in Section 1.02[29], or other action permitted by such certificate, has not begun or at any time a project is abandoned. The zoning enforcement officer may, upon application, grant one (1) extension, not to exceed six (6) months, where he determines that the denial of such extension will impose an unreasonable hardship on the applicant. 
[4]  Undue hardship . When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the Commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character, of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting such modifications or interpretations, the Commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
[5]  Taking any action without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness where such certificate is required for such action shall subject such person to the penalties provided for in Chapter 33 of this Resolution. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.07. - General performance criteria and design guidelines. 
[1]  Performance criteria. The following criteria shall be considered in the review of applications for certificates of appropriateness involving alteration, construction, erection, rehabilitation, renovation and restoration of structures and, where applicable, other land features located within a design district: 
(a)  A property should be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment. 
(b)  The historic character of a property should be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterized a property should be avoided. 
(c)  Each property should be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, should not be undertaken. 
(d)  Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right should be retained and preserved. 
(e)  Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a historic property should be preserved. 
(f)  Deteriorated historic features should be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, or where any such feature is missing but can be reasonably documented, the new, replacement, feature should match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features should be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence. 
(g)  Alterations, additions, and/or infill construction can be contemporary in design if such is compatible with the size, scale, color, material and character of the original historic appearance. Alterations which appear to be earlier than the building's construction date should be avoided. 
(h)  Additions and/or alterations should be undertaken in such a way that they could be removed in the future and the essential form, material and integrity of the structure would again be evident. 
(i)  If an exterior fire escape is required for safety purposes, it should be located in such a way that important architectural qualities are not destroyed. 
(j)  Interior modifications necessary to accomplish fire rated egress should be undertaken in such a way that the building exterior is not adversely impacted. 
(k)  Where access to a building in a design district is required for physically handicapped persons, the following requirements should be met: 
(i)  Access ramps should be located where they will have the least impact on the most architecturally dominant facades of the building; and 
(ii)  If it is determined that elevators are necessary and financially feasible, they should be installed to have the least impact possible on important exterior qualities. 
(l)  Infill construction should relate to the established rhythm and pattern of the existing streetscape and be of the same or compatible materials as those in adjacent existing structures. 
(m)  Landscape treatment should be in harmony with the character of landscape development, types of plant materials, and spatial treatment of adjacent properties. 
(n)  Any subdivision of land or construction should be consistent with the historically established lot size and density patterns for the district in which it is located. 
(o)  The appearance, size, position, method of attachment, texture of materials, color and design of signs in design districts should be in keeping with the collective characteristics of the structures located within such district. 
(p)  Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials should not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, should be undertaken using the gentlest, and least destructive, means possible. 
(q)  Significant archaeological resources affected by a project should be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures should be undertaken. 
(r)  Additions, exterior alterations and/or related construction should not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work should be differentiated from the old and should be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment. 
(s)  Additions and adjacent or related construction should be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form, material and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(t)  In addition to the above standards, the Secretary of the United States Department of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation shall guide all rehabilitation and construction of structures. 
[2]  Design guidelines. In addition to the general performance criteria and guidelines listed above, the design guidelines for particular design review districts adopted by the Commission, as amended from time to time, shall guide all alteration, construction, demolition, erection, rehabilitation, relocation, renovation and restoration of structures and land features, where applicable, within such design review districts. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.08. - Application requirements for certificates of appropriateness. 
[1]  An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be filed in the office of the Commission on forms provided by the staff and shall include drawings, descriptions, and photographs with enough detail to clearly depict the proposed alteration, construction, demolition, erection, rehabilitation, relocation, renovation, or restoration of a structure or land feature. Applications requiring review by the Design Review Board and the Commission shall be submitted to the zoning enforcement officer, by 12:00 noon, at least twenty-six (26) days prior to the public hearing at which they are to be considered. 
[2]  Applications for demolition and relocation of existing structures shall also contain: 
(a)  A site plan with all existing structures on the property; 
(b)  Proposed plans for re-use of the land on which the structure to be demolished is located and preliminary drawings, site plans, and specifications for any structures to be constructed on such land. Additionally, when the application includes the relocation of a structure to a new site, information must be submitted regarding the proposed new location for the structure including preliminary drawings, site plans, and photographs; 
(c)  A narrative on the proposed use of the property that addresses why the existing structure cannot be reused and retained; 
(d)  Documentation regarding the age and history of the building such as Sanborn maps, property deeds, tax information, or other historic information; and 
(e)  A complete structural report by a licensed engineer or architect is required for applications where building condition is cited as the purpose of the demolition request. The report shall include an analysis of the structural integrity of the building and a cost analysis of required improvements to bring the structure up to code. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.09. - Action by zoning enforcement officer on certificates of appropriateness. 
[1]  The zoning enforcement officer shall initially review all applications for certificates of appropriateness and thereafter shall either: 
(a)  Refer such application to the Design Review Board; 
(b)  Where expressly permitted under subpart [2] herein, refer such application directly to the Commission with a recommendation to approve such application with or without conditions related to and/or changes in the same; 
(c)  Require additional information from the applicant where reasonably needed by the officer to determine which of the actions herein are appropriate, including, but not limited to the information described in Section 27A.08, above; 
(d)  Deny such application where it is materially incomplete pursuant to this chapter and/or this resolution and the applicant is unable or unwilling to provide the required information; or 
(e)  Grant such application where authorized under Section 27.04[7.1] of this resolution. 
[2]  Referral to the Commission of certain certificates of appropriateness. As provided in this subpart, the zoning enforcement officer may refer applications for certificates of appropriateness directly to the Commission as to the following matters, with a recommendation to approve such application, with or without conditions related to and/or changes in the same, after determining that the application complies with the performance criteria and design guidelines adopted by the Commission: 
(a)  Signage; 
(b)  Fences; 
(c)  Rehabilitation projects including the installation or replacement of siding, porch components, doors, windows, screens, trim, gutters, and lights; 
(d)  Site alterations including decks, patios, steps, swimming pools, driveways, walkways, walls, and landscaping; 
(e)  Demolition or relocation of, or additions to, non-contributing, non-historic accessory structures; 
(f)  Removal of dead and diseased trees or trees causing or in imminent danger of causing damage to existing structures; 
(g)  Replacement of existing roofing materials provided that no other significant alterations such as removal of architectural features, dormers, and chimneys are proposed; 
(h)  Construction of single story accessory buildings not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in floor area; and 
(i)  Rehabilitation or modification to non-contributing, non-historic buildings if no significant alteration is proposed. 
Notwithstanding the above, the zoning enforcement Officer or the Commission shall refer any of the above matters to the Design Review Board where the zoning enforcement officer or the Commission determine that the application raises material design, compliance, historic preservation or aesthetic issues that justify formal consideration by the Design Review Board and the Commission. 
[3]  If the applicant disagrees for any reason with the recommendations of the zoning enforcement officer, then he may appear before the Commission to state his reasons for such disagreement. The Commission, in its discretion, may refer the item back to the zoning enforcement officer, who shall review his recommendations and attempt to resolve the applicant's disagreement. After the second review by the zoning enforcement officer, the application will be placed on the agenda for the next regular Commission meeting. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.10. - Action by Design Review Board on certificates of appropriateness. 
[1]  The Design Review Board shall initially review all applications for certificates of appropriateness referred to it by the zoning enforcement officer and thereafter submit, in writing, to the Commission its recommendations as to whether the application is in compliance with design guidelines and regulations adopted by the Commission. Should the Board determine that the application is not in compliance, it shall suggest to the Commission what changes, if any, in the applicant's plans and specifications will be required to bring the application into compliance. If the applicant disagrees for any reason with the findings of fact or recommendations of the board, then he may appear before the Commission to state his reasons for such disagreement. The Commission, in its discretion, may place the item back on the agenda of the Design Review Board for its next meeting, where the board shall review its findings of facts and attempt to resolve the applicant's disagreement. After the second review by the Design Review Board, application will be placed on the agenda for the next regular Commission meeting. 
[2]  If the Design Review Board needs additional information in order to review an application, make findings of fact or to make a recommendation as required in subpart [1] above, then the Design Review Board may defer action on the application in order to obtain the additional information. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.11. - Action by Commission on certificates of appropriateness. 
[1]  The Commission shall review the recommendations of the zoning enforcement officer and/or the Design Review Board where Commission approval is required. As part of the review, the Commission may seek guidance and assistance from the professional staff of the Commission or others possessing unique qualifications. The Commission in its discretion may refer any matter before it under this chapter to the Design Review Board for consideration. In any instance where the Commission is reviewing a recommendation of the Design Review Board, the chair of the Commission, or the Commission, may request that the chair of the Board, or the Chair's designee, appear before the Commission to explain the recommendations of the Board and/or to answer any questions the Commission may have regarding those recommendations. In addition, any other member of the Board may appear before the Commission to present his or her personal views on a matter on which the Board has made a recommendation. 
[2]  The Commission may approve the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness with or without such changes and modifications in the specifications and plans or subject to such conditions as may be reasonably required to ensure that the purpose and intent of design review district regulations are met. 
[3]  The Commission may deny the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. Whenever the Commission has denied an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the board shall not thereafter consider any further application for the same certificate of appropriateness for any part or all of the same property for a period of six (6) months from the date of final denial of the application. Amended applications may be considered within the six (6) month period. 
[4]  As noted in Sections 27A.09 and 27A.10, the Commission in its discretion may refer any matter back to the zoning enforcement officer or the Design Review Board, respectively, for further discussion with the applicant to attempt to resolve any disagreement. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.12. - Special review procedures and criteria for demolition and relocation of structures. 
In addition to the general procedures described above, the following procedures and criteria shall apply to applications for certificates of appropriateness for demolition and relocation of structures in design review districts: 
[1]  A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for demolition or relocation of any structure within a design review district that is clearly and readily visible from the public right-of-way. It is the policy of the Commission to encourage the preservation of significant structures and other important structures, sites, and areas and to protect against the razing or demolition of any significant structure or other important structure consistent with the standards set forth in this chapter. 
[2]  The Design Review Board shall consider any application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation of a structure referred to it pursuant to this chapter. The Board shall review the circumstances and the condition of the structure and provide a recommendation to the Commission as to the appropriateness of such application based on the criteria listed below. 
[3]  The criteria described below shall be considered in reviewing an application for demolition of a structure: 
(i)  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the structure; 
(ii)  The importance of the structure to the aesthetics, integrity and historic character of a district, 
(iii)  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a structure because of its design, texture, material, detail and/or unique location; 
(iv)  Whether the structure is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or county; 
(v)  Whether the structure is a significant structure; 
(vi)  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
(vii)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the structure from collapse or otherwise being a danger to public safety; and 
(viii)  Whether the structure is capable of earning a reasonable economic return on its value. 
[4]  The criteria described below shall be considered in reviewing an application for relocation of a structure: 
(i)  The historic character and aesthetic interest the structure contributes to its present setting; 
(ii)  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
(iii)  Whether the structure can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; 
(iv)  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the structure or site; and 
(v)  Whether the Commission will have the capacity to protect the structure at the proposed location area. 
[5]  Upon review of the above-mentioned report, and consideration of the above criteria, the Commission shall: 
(i)  Issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation of the structure; or 
(ii)  Delay issuing the certificate of appropriateness for up to one hundred eighty (180) days in order to provide persons or groups interested in historic preservation an opportunity to work with the owner or applicant in an effort to preserve the structure or locate purchasers who would agree to preserve the building or structure in accordance with the provisions of this section; or 
(iii)  If efforts at preservation prove unavailing within the period provided for delay pursuant to (ii), above, at the next regular meeting after such period and after legally required notice, the Commission is authorized to either: (1) consider one additional delay of up to ninety (90) days, (2) issue a certificate of appropriateness or (3) after consideration of the factors listed above, decline to issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition of the structure. If the additional delay of up to ninety (90) days is granted, the Commission shall either issue or decline to issue the certificate of appropriateness at the next regular meeting after such delay and after legally required notice. 
[6]  Conceptual approval of a demolition or relocation may be given without the approval of replacement structures or uses. However, the conceptual approval expires one hundred eighty (180) days after approval if an application for the new structure and/or use has not been submitted for review. A certificate of appropriateness for a demolition or relocation shall only be issued upon permitting or other Commission approval of the new structure and/or use. 
[7]  The demolition or relocation of any structure or any part thereof located in a design district without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness shall subject such person to the penalties provided for in Chapter 33 of this Resolution. In addition, after any such unauthorized demolition or relocation, the Commission may refuse to grant a permit for new construction or for land use for a period of two (2) years, or condition the granting of any permit for new construction or land use as would best serve the purpose of this chapter. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Section 27A.13. - Affirmation of existing building, maintenance, and zoning codes. 
[1]  Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement of any exterior architectural feature in a design district which does not involve a change in design, material, or the outward appearance thereof, or to prevent the alteration, construction, demolition, erection, rehabilitation, renovation or restoration of any structure which is specifically certified by the building official or a court of competent jurisdiction to be required for the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. (A general order to repair or demolish a structure shall not, by itself, be deemed to be a certification that demolition is required for purposes of this chapter.) 
[2]  Interior alterations, renovations, rehabilitations, arrangements or uses having no effect on exterior architectural features or appearance shall not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
[3]  Nothing in these regulations shall be construed so as to exempt property owners from complying with existing building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of their property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Added July 11, 2016, ZA16-001) 
Chapter 28 - AMENDMENTS TO COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE RESOLUTION AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAPS 

Section 28.01. - Intent. 
The commission recognizes that because of changing conditions in Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, periodic amendments, supplements or changes in these regulations, or the zoning boundaries or classification of property on the official zoning maps may become necessary to ensure continued orderly development within this community in accordance with the purposes and intent of this resolution. These regulations and the zoning boundaries or classifications of property on the official zoning map may be amended by the commission in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Section 28.02. - Public notice and hearing required. 
No amendment to the text of this resolution or to the official zoning maps (except as provided in Section 2.05[3]) will be enacted without notice being given to the public and affected parties and a hearing held in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
Section 28.03. - Initiation of amendments. 
Applications to amend this resolution may be in the form of a proposal to amend the text or proposals to amend the official zoning maps. 
[1]  An application to amend the text of the resolution or the zoning boundaries or classifications of property on the official zoning maps may be initiated by the commission on its own motion. 
[2]  A proposed amendment to the zoning boundaries or classifications of property on the official zoning maps may be initiated by a verified application by one (1) or more of the owners or authorized agent(s) of the property to be affected by the proposed amendment. Applications for amendment of the official zoning maps by property owners or their agents, must contain a statement of the proposed use for the property to be affected by the proposed amendment. 
[3]  Any citizen of Macon-Bibb County may request the commission to either amend the text of this resolution, or zoning boundaries or classifications of property on the official zoning maps. The commission shall give due consideration to any and all such requests, and if it deems advisable, may initiate an application proposing the requested change. 
Section 28.04. - Procedure for requesting amendments. 
Proposals for amendments, whether initiated by the commission or any person, firm or corporation, shall be in accordance with the procedures set out below: 
[1]  Procedure for requesting official zoning maps amendments. The application shall be on forms supplied by the zoning enforcement officer and shall contain information describing the applicant(s), any property affected, type of amendment requested, proposed use of property affected by any amendment, map(s), site plan(s) and any other information deemed pertinent by the zoning enforcement officer. After review of the application, the zoning enforcement officer or the commission may request additional information from the applicant including, but not limited to the following: 
(a)  A plat showing the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract(s) to be rezoned prepared by a state licensed registered architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor. 
(b)  Map or plat showing the location of the property for which an application is submitted and its relationship to adjoining properties, public facilities, and services. 
(c)  Information demonstrating suitability of a site for a proposed use. 
(d)  Where applicant seeks to amend the zoning classification of a particular tract for a specific use, the commission may require a development schedule containing information pertaining to the phasing of development, completion date for each phase, identity of all parties participating in the development or use, and a statement of intent to develop in accordance with the schedule. 
(e)  Such other relevant information as the zoning enforcement officer or the commission determines to be necessary to evaluate the impact of a particular application on public facilities, or existing or proposed development in the immediate area of the application. 
(f)  While the commission will assist each applicant, in all cases, the burden of proof shall be upon him. 
[2]  Procedure for requesting text amendments. All proposed amendments submitted to the commission involving a text change to the resolution shall include a written statement giving the reasons for the proposed change. In the case of additions to or changes in the existing wording, the suggested wording of the amendment shall be in the style and format of the existing resolution. 
[3]  Reserved. (Deleted July 22, 1985, ZA85-07-04) 
[4]  Compliance with application. Section 27.08 shall apply to applications for amendments to the official zoning maps. 
Section 28.05. - Public notice. 
Before enacting any amendment to the resolution or official zoning map, public notice shall be given as described in this section. Such notice is the minimum notice required and the zoning enforcement officer may give notice to such other firms, corporations, or persons, as in his opinion, may be necessary to insure adequate public notice of the proposed hearing: (Amended July 25, 1988, ZA88-07-02) 
[1]  Publishing an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in Macon and Bibb County not less than fifteen (15) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing. The advertisement shall state the time and place of the public hearing and the general nature of the amendment to be considered. (Amended July 25, 1988, ZA88-07-02) 
[2]  If the amendment is proposed or initiated by a party other than the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission and will change the zoning district of a particular parcel or parcels of property, the applicant shall identify the property to be rezoned as required by the zoning enforcement officer as to allow the commission to post a sign on the property in a conspicuous place at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearing to be held on the amendment. Such sign shall indicate that a proposal to rezone the property has been submitted to the commission and interested parties may make inquiries of the commission for details of the amendment sought. More than one sign may be posted if, in the opinion of the zoning enforcement officer, one sign would not give adequate notice. (Amended July 25, 1988, ZA88-07-02) 
[3]  Subsection [2] of this section shall not apply to amendments of this resolution adding, deleting or modifying permitted or conditional uses, requirements or conditions in zoning districts. 
(Added January 12, 1987, ZA87-01-02; renumbered August 14, 1995, ZA95-08-02) 
Section 28.06. - Action by the commission. 
The commission shall hold a hearing on the proposed amendment in accordance with the hearing procedures set out in Section 27.12, except to the extent that such procedures may be modified in this chapter. If, following its hearing, the commission finds from the facts presented, taking into consideration the factors to be set out in Section 28.07 below, that the public necessity, convenience and general welfare require the proposed amendment, or any part thereof, it shall approve such amendment or part, and otherwise it shall disapprove the same. 
[1]  Time for hearing. The hearing shall be held at the earliest possible time following the expiration of a forty-five-day period after filing of the application. The hearing may be continued from time to time for good reason shown. The decision may also be deferred for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or the third (3rd) hearing thereafter, whichever is longer. No notice of the continued hearing shall be required. (Amended July 23, ZA90-07-01) 
[2]  Withdrawal of petition. Any petition for a zoning amendment may be withdrawn prior to action thereon by the commission at the discretion of the person, firm, or corporation initiating such request, upon written notice to the zoning enforcement officer. Failure of the applicant for a zoning amendment to appear at the hearing, as scheduled, on the application shall result in the application being withdrawn. A new application with appropriate fees will be required to reinstate the application. (Amended January 13, 2003, ZA03-01-01) 
[3]  Denied application. Whenever the commission has denied an application for the rezoning of property, it shall not thereafter consider the same parcel for rezoning until expiration of at least six (6) months immediately following the final denial of the application by the commission. (Amended July 25, 1988, ZA88-07-02) 
[4]  Restrictions, stipulations, and safeguards. The commission may approve an amendment to be official zoning maps subject to stipulations limiting the use of the property and may grant such amendment conditional upon such conditions, restrictions, stipulations and safeguards as it may deem necessary to ensure compliance with the intent and purposes of this resolution, and to protect adjacent properties and the general neighborhood. 
Section 28.07. - Restrictions, conditions, stipulations, and safeguards. 
Restrictions, conditions, stipulations, and safeguards attached to an amendment may include, but are not limited to, those necessary to protect adjacent or nearby land owners from any deleterious effects from the full impact of any permitted uses; limitations more restrictive than those generally applying to the district regarding density, height, connection to central water and sewer systems and stipulations requiring that development take place in accordance with a specific site plan. The commission may also stipulate that the development take place within a given period of time after which time public hearings will be initiated and the district returned to the original designation or such other district as determined appropriate by the commission in accordance with this resolution. In cases where stipulations, conditions, restrictions, or safeguards are attached, all representations of the owner or his agents at public hearings shall be deemed contractual and may be enforced. All conditions, restrictions, stipulations, and safeguards which are a condition to the granting of the change in zoning district shall be deemed contractual and may be enforced by the commission against the applicant, his heirs, successors, assignees, and transferees. 
Section 28.08. - Criteria for zoning amendments to official zoning maps. 
The Commission, in reviewing applications for amendments to the official zoning maps, shall consider the proposed change in relation to the following, where applicable: 
[1]  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
[2]  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
[3]  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
[4]  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
[5]  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; 
[6]  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(Amended November 14, 2011, ZA11-004) 
Section 28.09. - Criteria for amendment to comprehensive land use resolution. 
The commission, acting upon proposed amendments to this resolution, shall consider and study: 
[1]  The need and justification for the change; and 
[2]  The relationship of the proposed amendment to the purposes and the objectives of the comprehensive planning program and to the comprehensive land development resolution, with appropriate consideration as to whether the proposed change will further the purposes of these zoning regulations and other city and county codes, regulations, and actions designed to implement the comprehensive plan. 
Section 28.10. - Burden of proof upon applicant. 
The applicant for a zoning amendment shall have the burden of proof in going forward with the evidence and burden of persuasion on all questions of fact to be determined by the commission. 
Section 28.11. - Legal effect of amendment to official zoning maps. 
Amendments to the official zoning maps changing the zoning district in which a particular tract(s) or parcel(s) of land is located do not constitute land use approval or approval of any site or development plan that may have been submitted in conjunction with an application to amend the official zoning maps. For any proposed use of the land affected by the amendment, or construction, alteration, or modification of any structure or buildings on such parcel(s) or tract(s) of land, a certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit must first be obtained. (See Chapter 27 of the resolution for procedures to obtain such permits.) 
Chapter 29 - PROCEDURES FOR SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Res. No. ZA08-11-01, adopted November 10, 2008, repealed the former ch. 29, §§ 29.01—29.08, and enacted a new ch. 29, §§ 29.01—29.08, as set out herein. The former ch. 29 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Comparative Table. 

Section 29.01. - Platting authority. 
The Commission shall be the official platting authority. As the official platting authority, it hereby delegates to the Executive Director the power and authority to approve or deny all preliminary and final plats in accordance with all the regulations of the Commission. As a result of this action, the Executive Director may appoint the Zoning Enforcement Officer to review and approve all plats and applications or deny the same. 
(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-01) 
Section 29.02. - Procedure for preliminary plat approval. 
[1]  Application for preliminary plat approval. The subdivider shall submit to the Executive Director or his designee the following: 
(a)  A completed plat review application 
(b)  A minimum of ten (10) copies of the plat and other documents as specified in Section 29.03; and 
(c)  A preliminary plat filing fee. 
[2]  Review of preliminary plat. The Executive Director or his designee shall check the plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this resolution. 
(a)  Preliminary approval. Plats are distributed as follows: one (1) copy to the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department, one (1) copy to the Macon-Bibb County Health Department, one (1) copy to the City or County Engineering Department, one (1) copy to the Macon-Bibb County Traffic Engineering Department, one (1) copy to the Macon Water Authority. Following the review of the preliminary plat and other related material, the Executive Director or his designee may grant preliminary approval of a preliminary plat noting any conditions of such approval on the preliminary plat. Two (2) copies are retained by the Commission and the remaining copies are returned to the applicant. Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. 
(b)  Expiration time. Preliminary approval shall expire and be of no further effect twelve (12) months from the date of the preliminary approval unless the time is extended by the Executive Director or his designee. 
(c)  Disapproval. Following the review of the preliminary plat and other related material, the Executive Director or his designee may find reasons detrimental to the public safety, health, and general welfare, or in conflict with adopted plans to the Commission which require the disapproval of the preliminary plat. A statement of the reasons for disapproval shall be made on two (2) copies of the preliminary plat with one (1) copy being returned to the subdivider and one (1) copy being added to the records of the Commission. The applicant may re-apply for preliminary plat approval in accordance with Section 29.02[1] above. 
(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-01) 
Section 29.03. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
[1]  Scale. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than two hundred (200) feet to one (1) inch. 
[2]  Sheet size. Sheet size shall not be greater than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on a sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one (1) sheet with an index map on a separate sheet at a reduced scale. 
( Note: Final plat specifications may be found in Section 29.05.) 
[3]  Ground elevations. The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations, and contour lines as shown on the Bibb County Topographical Maps. Elevations shall be based on control datum as approved by the City or County Engineering Office. (Sewer inverts shall not be used as control datum.) Subdivisions with on-site sanitary systems shall provide ground elevations and topographic information as required by the Macon-Bibb County Health Department. 
[4]  Information to be provided on preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider; 
(b)  Proposed name of subdivision; 
(c)  North point, graphic scale, and date; 
(d)  Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the subdivision; 
(e)  Boundary lines of the tract; 
(f)  Names of owners of record of adjoining land with its approximate acreage; 
(g)  Existing streets, utilities, and easements on and adjacent to the tract, including the size and width of each; 
(h)  Proposed layout including streets, alleys and easements with both approximate dimensions and proposed street names; lot lines with approximate land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses; and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings; 
(i)  Block letters and lot numbers or section designation and lot numbers; 
(j)  Provisions for drainage, as required by the City or County Engineering Department; 
(k)  Notation as to whether water supply service and sewerage service are provided publicly or privately; to include public or private lift stations. 
(l)  Minimum building front yard setback lines; 
(m)  Location of streams, lakes and swamps and land within the elevation of the regulatory flood as required by the City or County Engineering Department. 
(n)  Existing zoning district classification of the proposed subdivision and of adjoining properties; 
(o)  Inscription stating "NOT FOR FINAL RECORDING."* 
(p)  Legend containing all symbols or abbreviations used on the plat. Symbols or abbreviations not used on the plat shall not be included in the legend; and 
(q)  A statement shall be shown on the plat as follows: 
"Due diligence has been performed by this surveyor regarding easements and research has been conducted regarding easements for utilities and ingress/egress. All easements apparent on the ground and/or those for which recorded documents were found are shown hereon." 
[5]  Preliminary plat approval of single-family attached developments. The Executive Director or his designee will require that all attached dwelling units shall conform to requirements of Section 29.03[1] through [4] and require that the following information be provided: 
(a)  Number of units; 
(b)  Minimum and maximum lot width; 
(c)  Proposed building setbacks, and 
(d)  Proposed parking layout. 
The applicant shall make application for plat approval, appear before and comply with all requirements of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
[6]  Approval from Fire Department. A signed certification of approval from the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department shall be placed on the preliminary plat. 
"Approved by Macon-Bibb County Fire Department. 

 
[7]  Approval from the City and/or County Engineer. A signed certification of approval for layouts only by the City or County Engineer shall be placed on the preliminary plat as follows: 
"This preliminary approval is for layout only. (Bibb County) (City of Macon) does not, by this approval, accept the dedication, if any, of drainage easements and assumes no responsibility for their maintenance. 
Date: ____________ 
(City) (County) Engineer: ____________ " 
[8]  Approval from the Health Department. A signed certification of approval of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department shall be placed on the preliminary plat as follows: 
"This preliminary plat has been reviewed by the Macon-Bibb County Health Department and has been discussed with the applicant. Final approval of the layout of the subdivision lots for on-site sewage systems shall be subject to submission of additional information and subject to laws applicable at the time of such submission. 

 
[9]  Approval from Macon Water Authority. A signed certification of approval for lay-out only by Macon Water Authority shall be placed on the preliminary plat as follows: 
"This preliminary approval is for layout only. The detailed specifications and construction checklist are available at the Macon Water Authority, Engineering Office, Macon, Georgia. 

 
[10]  Approval from the Traffic Engineering Department. A signed certification of approval from the Macon-Bibb County Traffic Engineering Department shall be placed on the preliminary plat as follows: 
"Approved by the Macon-Bibb County Traffic Engineering Department. 

 
[11]  Preliminary plat exemptions. The Executive Director or his designee may not require a preliminary plat under the following conditions: 
(a)  When the subdivision includes less than three (3) lots; 
(b)  Minor re-subdivision of land; 
(c)  Combining of previously platted lots, or 
(d)  Loan plats where the lot has been previously recorded. 
[12]  Certificate of preliminary approval. A certificate of approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
"In that all the requirements of Preliminary Approval have been fulfilled, this subdivision plat was given Preliminary Approval by the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
This Preliminary Approval does not constitute approval of the Final Plat. This Certificate of Preliminary Approval shall expire and be null and void on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 

 
(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-01) 
Section 29.04. - Procedure for final plat approval. 
[1]  Application for final plat approval. After the preliminary plat of proposed land subdivision has been given preliminary approval by the Executive Director or his designee, the subdivider may, within one (1) year or within such additional time as may be granted by the Executive Director or his designee, submit to the executive director or his designee the following: 
(a)  An application requesting review and approval of the final plat; 
(b)  Twelve (12) printed copies of the final plat with signed certificates and other documents as specified in Section 29.05; and 
(c)  A final plat filing fee. 
(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-01) 
Section 29.05. - Final plat specifications. 
[1]  Conformance with the preliminary plat. The final plat shall conform to the conditions of approved preliminary plat. 
[2]  Original tracing specifications. Final plats shall be a good legible copy, such as a blue, white, or other commercial print reproduced from an original and shall comply with all requirements of the "Georgia Plat Act," Section [1](a). The scale shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet to the inch on a sheet size of not less than eight and one-half (8½) inches by eleven (11) inches nor greater than seventeen (17) inches by twenty-two (22) inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one (1) sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one (1) sheet with an index map at a reduced scale. 
[3]  Additional specifications. The final plat shall contain the following information: 
(a)  North point, graphic scale, and date; 
(b)  Tax map designation; 
(c)  Names of owners of record of adjoining land; 
(d)  Location of streams, lakes, swamps and land within the elevation of the regulatory flood as required; 
(e)  Tract boundary lines, municipal or county lines when included within the subdivision, right-of-way lines, lines of street easements, property lines of residential lots and other sites with sufficient data to determine readily and to reproduce on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, whether curved or straight. This shall include, but not be limited to, the length of arc; internal angles and bearings of the tangent distances for the center line of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. All dimensions shall be given to the nearest one-hundredth ( 1/100 ) of a foot and all angles shall be given to the nearest minute; 
(f)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth ( 1/100 ) of a foot and angles to the nearest minute, shall be balanced and closed with an apparent error of closure not greater than one foot (1FT) in ten thousand feet (10,000FT); 
(g)  Widths and names of all streets and alleys within the new subdivision shall be shown on the plat; 
(h)  Land-lot and land-district number(s) shall be shown; 
(i)  Lots shall be numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically or section labeled appropriately; 
(j)  Each parcel platted shall have a street address which has been assigned by the County Engineer's Office. Parcels shall include but are not limited to drainage lots, cemeteries, detention ponds, green space, common areas, parks and building lots. Parcels not intended for use as building lots shall be labeled as such and listed in a note on the plat that includes the address, acreage, and proposed use(s). 
(k)  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for the public use shall be shown on the plat; 
(l)  Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers shall be described on the plat; 
(m)  Minimum building front yard setback lines shall be shown; 
(n)  Point of Reference to nearest street right-of-way intersection, indicated by a directional arrow and distance; 
(o)  All buildings on the property shall be shown. In the case of large tracts subdivided, the surveyor shall include a certification that no building(s) located on the property encroaches the required setback from the new property line(s) as shown; 
(p)  A statement shall be shown on the plat as follows: 
"Due diligence has been performed by this surveyor regarding easements and research has been conducted regarding easements for utilities and ingress/egress. All easements apparent on the ground and/or those for which recorded documents were found are shown hereon." 
[4]  Final plat approval of single-family attached. The Executive Director or his designee will require that all provisions of the preliminary plat and subsequent commission approval be obtained. All final plats shall conform to Section 29.05[1] through [3] and shall reflect "As-Built Conditions." 
[5]  A surveyor's certification. A signed certification by a registered land surveyor certifying to the accuracy of the survey and the plat shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"The field data upon which this map or plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in ____________ feet and an angular error of ____________ per angle point, and was adjusted using the ____________ rule. 
This map or plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one (1) foot in ____________ feet. 
The linear and angular measurements shown on this plat were obtained by using a ____________ and ____________ . 
By: _____ Georgia Registered Land Surveyor Number" 
[6]  An owner's certification. A signed certification of ownership shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"Owner's Certification:  State of Georgia, County of Bibb 
The undersigned certifies that he is the owner of the land shown on this plat and acknowledges this plat and allotment to be his free act and deed and dedicates to public use forever all areas shown or indicated on this plat as streets, alleys, easements, or parks. I also understand that said dedication does not imply acceptance by the applicable governing body for maintenance of any streets, alleys, easements or parks, and that appropriate petitions must be made to and approved by the applicable governing body for public maintenance. 

 
[7]  Fire Department certification. A signed certification of the Fire Department shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
(a)  "Approved by Macon-Bibb County Fire Department 

 
(b)  "Approval subject to installation of proper water mains and fire hydrants Macon-Bibb County Fire Department 

 
(c)  "Approved—Limited water supply—No fire hydrants within 500 feet—in County only. 

 
[8]  Health Department certification. A signed certification of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
(a)  "Approval of this plat by the Department of Health is solely for the purpose of permitting it to be recorded in the Bibb County Superior Court. Said approval does not imply nor is it intended to grant permission to any person to construct any building or to install a sewage disposal system or water supply system on property covered by this plat. 
Approved for Recording Purposes Only  Macon-Bibb County Health Department 

 
(b)  Health Department approval relates to general subdivision lot layout only. Individual approval required for each lot prior to construction. 
(c)  Restricted to public sewers and public water supply. 
(d)  Approved by Macon-Bibb County Department of Health 

 
The blanks on the certification statement of Macon-Bibb County Health Department shall be completed by the director of environmental health, or his designee, so as to indicate whether approval is based upon the use of individual sewerage systems, individual water supplies, a community sewerage system, a community water supply or a combination thereof. 
[9]  A certificate of approval by the County Engineer. A signed certification of the County Engineer for plats of property located in unincorporated Bibb County shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"I certify that the final plat layout meets the platting requirements of the County of Bibb Engineering Department. The County of Bibb does not, by this approval, accept the dedication, if any, of drainage easements and assumes no responsibility for their maintenance. 

 
[10]  A certificate of approval by the City Engineer. 
A signed certification of the City Engineer shall be placed on the final plat for properties within the city limits of Macon as follows: 
"I certify that the final plat layout meets the platting requirements of the City of Macon Engineering Department. The City of Macon does not, by this approval, accept the dedication of drainage easements or any other public improvement dedicated by this plat." 

 
[11]  Water and sewerage certification. A signed certification of Macon Water Authority shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"I certify that the specifications of the water and/or sewer lines meet the minimum requirements of the Macon Water Authority and that the installation meets with such specifications and proper financial arrangements have been made to insure installation according to said specifications; therefore, the final plat is approved by the Authority. 

 
A note as follows shall be placed on all subdivision plats: 
"IMPORTANT NOTICE TO POTENTIAL LOT PURCHASERS/DEVELOPERS: 
The following fees apply to each lot in this subdivision and must be paid to the Macon Water Authority at the time each lot is developed: 
Basin Specific Fee ____________ 
Meter Fee ____________ 
Sewer Tap Fee: ____________ 
The above fees are subject to change at ay time by action of the Macon Water Authority." 
The developer/subdivider must contact the Macon Water Authority Engineering Department for the specific amounts to be inserted into the blanks. 
[12]  Traffic Engineering Department certification. A signed certification of approval from the Macon-Bibb County Traffic Engineering Department shall be placed on the final plat as follows: 
"Approved by the Macon-Bibb County Traffic Engineering Department. 

 
[13]  Certification of final approval by the Commission. Certification of final approval by the Executive Director or his designee shall be placed on the final plat only after every item in Section 29.05 has been complied with and shall state the following: 
"I certify that all the requirements for Final Approval of this Plat have been fulfilled in accordance with the Resolutions of Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. 

 
(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-01) 
Section 29.06. - Recording of final plat. 
Upon the approval of a final plat by the Executive Director or his designee, the owner, or his agent, shall have the final plat recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court prior to conveyance of any lot in the subdivision. 
(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-01) 
Section 29.07. - Requirements after recording final plat. 
Upon recording the owner or his agent shall notify the Planning and Zoning office of the Plat Book and Page wherein the plat is recorded. Zoning permits for new construction shall not be issued until plat is recorded in the Bibb County, Georgia Clerk of Superior Court's Office. 
(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-01) 
Section 29.08 - Procedure for appeals. 
Appeals may be taken by an aggrieved person, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City of Macon or County of Bibb, affected by any decision of the Executive Director or his designee or the Commission. Such appeals shall be allowed as provided by the following rules: 
[1]  Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by a decision of the Executive Director or his designee in administering this resolution may file in writing his appeal with the full commission within seven (7) days of the decision. The Commission may, in conformity with the provisions of this resolution, reverse, or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions, or determination of the Executive Director or his designee at its next regular meeting; and 
[2]  Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by a decision of the Commission shall have the right of certiorari as provided by law. 
(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-01) 
Chapter 30 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN FOR THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND 

Section 30.01. - General design requirements. 
[1]  Suitability of land. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion, or which is for topographical, geological or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other uses that will continue to increase the danger to health, safety, or property destruction. (For detailed floodplain regulations contact the City Engineer or County Engineer, depending upon the location of proposed development.); (Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-02) 
[2]  Name of subdivision. The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the Executive Director. The name shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
[3]  Access. Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public street(s) as may be required by the Executive Director. 
[4]  Conformance to Macon Area Transportation Study. All streets and other features of the Macon Area Transportation Study shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the plan, as adopted by the Commission. 
[5]  Through traffic. Minor streets shall be so designed that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
Section 30.02. - General requirements for streets and other rights-of-way. 
[1]  Continuation of existing streets. Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width as set forth in Section 30.03. 
[2]  Connections with future subdivisions. Streets shall be reserved at strategic locations to provide for access to adjoining properties which may be subdivided in the future. Each street connection shall intersect property lines at a ninety-degree (90°) angle. The executive director shall determine if a temporary turnaround is needed, with said turnaround conforming to requirements of a permanent cul-de-sac. 
[3]  Street names. Street names shall require the approval of the executive director. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already in existence and already named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets. 
[4]  Street jogs. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. 
[5]  Culs-de-sac. Culs-de-sac, or deadend streets, shall not be greater in length than eight hundred (800) feet. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least fifty (50) feet. 
[6]  Development along major street, limited-access highway or railroad right-of-way. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an expressway, freeway, arterial or collector street, or a railroad right-of-way, the commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way either as a marginal access street, or at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of intervening land, with a nonaccess reservation suitably platted. Due regard should be given to requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to expressways, freeways, or arterial streets, but only to an accessible street in which case the Commission may require double frontage lots. 
[7]  Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and, where the Commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
[8]  Alleys. The requirements for providing alleys within a subdivision are as follows: 
(a)  Alleys shall be provided in multifamily, commercial and industrial districts, except where other definite and assured provisions is made for service access, such as off-street parking, loading and unloading consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed; 
(b)  Alleys shall not be provided in single-family and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the commission of the need for alleys; 
(c)  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall provide sufficient radius to permit safe vehicular movements; and 
(d)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as determined by the Commission. 
[9]  Reserve strips and easements: 
(a)  Reserve strips controlling the access to streets shall be prohibited except where this control is definitely placed in the hands of the City or County under conditions approved by the Commission. The Commission may control access to expressways, freeways, arterial and collector streets by requiring all lots to face and have access to only minor streets. 
(b)  Easements of the required width located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided, as is necessary for utility lines and underground mains and cables. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage right-of-way of adequate width. Parallel streets may be required by the Commission in connection therewith. 
Section 30.03. - Right-of-way width requirements. 
The minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
[1]  Freeways and expressways ..... 200 feet 
(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-02) 
[2]  Arterial streets ..... 100 feet 
[3]  Collector streets ..... 90 feet 
[4]  Minor streets within the City of Macon ..... 55 feet 
[5]  Minor streets without curb and gutter within unincorporated Bibb County ..... 60 feet 
[6]  Minor streets with curb and gutter within unincorporated Bibb County ..... 55 feet 
[7]  Alleys ..... 20 feet 
(Amended May 23, 1988, ZA88-05-03; Amended February 10, 1997, ZA97-02-01) 
Section 30.04. - Street design requirements. 
[1]  Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible for a distance of not less than fifty (50) feet with no street intersection being at any angle of less than seventy-five degrees (75°).;(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-02) 
[2]  Right-of-way radius. The street right-of-way radius at street intersection shall be at least twenty (20) feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than ninety degrees (90°), the Commission may require a longer radius. 
[3]  Additional width on existing streets. Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way if needed to meet the minimum right-of-way width requirements set forth in Section 30.03 in accordance with the following: 
(a)  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing streets. 
(b)  When the subdivision is located only on one (1) side of an existing street, one-half (½) of the required right-of-way, measured from the center line of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
Section 30.05. - Design standards for blocks. 
Block lengths and widths shall be determined based on the following requirements: 
[1]  Blocks shall not be greater than twelve hundred (1,200) feet nor less than four hundred (400) feet in length. 
[2]  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where abutting upon major streets, limited-access highways, or railroads, or where other situations make this requirement impracticable, in which case the Commission may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
[3]  Blocks shall have pedestrian walkways where deemed essential, to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
Section 30.05.1. - Requirements for flag lots. 
The Commission may approve under conditions set out in this Section the platting of flag lots for single-family residences. 
[1]  Agricultural and Rural Residential Districts. In Agricultural and Rural Residential Districts, the following shall apply: 
(a)  Flag lot development will not have an adverse impact upon neighboring lots. 
(b)  Flag lots shall be allowed only under circumstances where it would be impractical or unreasonable for normal platting patterns to be followed, such as where terrain or topography or existing platting patterns preclude conventional subdivision development. 
(c)  Flag lots shall have access to a public right-of-way by a flag pole with a minimum thirty-foot and maximum sixty-foot of equal and uniform width constructed and maintained to allow for sanitation and emergency vehicles. 
(d)  The flag pole shall be owned in fee simple. 
(e)  The length of the flag pole shall not exceed 2.5 times the average lot width, excluding the flag pole, or twice the depth of the lot whichever dimension is the lesser of the two, however, no flag pole may exceed five hundred (500) feet. 
(f)  The flag pole shall be parallel to the closest existing side lot line, unless modified by the Commission because of unique topographical or platting conditions. 
(g)  A flag lot shall not be double-stacked. 
(h)  All flag lots shall conform to minimum lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, excluding the flag pole. 
(i)  No more than two (2) adjacent flag lots shall be created, and in no instance shall flag lots constitute more than ten (10) percent of the total number of lots in a given subdivision. 
(j)  The flag pole may alter course or direction provided that the change in direction will not result in confusing the address on the public road with the location of the building site for mail delivery or access by sanitation or emergency vehicles. 
(k)  Access shall be approved by the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department. 
[2]  In Residential districts other than Agricultural and Rural Residential, flag lots shall only be allowed in cluster subdivisions as provided for in Section 23.02. In Cluster Subdivisions, the following rules for flag lots shall apply: 
(a)  A flag lot may adjoin another flag lot and share a common driveway. 
(b)  A flag lot shall not be double-stacked. 
(c)  In no instance shall flag lots constitute more than twenty (20) percent of the total number of lots in a given cluster subdivision. 
(d)  The lot area occupied by the flag pole shall not be counted as part of the required minimum lot area. 
(e)  The newly created lot shall provide adequate access, including a flag driveway at least thirty (30) feet in width and no greater than sixty (60) feet in width, and shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. (Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-02) 
(f)  Access shall be approved by the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department. 
(Added November 22, 1999, ZA99-11-04) 
Section 30.06. - Required improvements. 
[1]  Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at all block and lot corners, angle points, points or curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the City or County Engineer. The monuments shall be of such material, size and length as may be approved by the City or County Engineer. 
[2]  Construction and installation requirements. All required improvements in an unincorporated area of Bibb County such as construction and installation of streets, curbs and gutters, other drainage controls, and all utilities, shall be provided by the subdivision developer at his expense, in accordance with the laws and specifications of the Bibb County Board of Commissioners, the Macon Water Authority and/or the Macon-Bibb County Board of Health Department and the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission prior to approval of the final plat by the Commission. Where improvements are not made, but guarantees, sureties, or other performance agreements have been approved by the County Engineer, the Commission may approve the final plat. 
(Amended November 10, 2008, ZA08-11-02) 
Chapter 31 - ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Resolution ZA90-06-02, adopted June 25, 1990, repealed former §§ 31.02—31.08, adopted a new § 31.02 as set forth herein, and renumbered former §§ 31.09—31.11 as §§ 31.03, 31.05 and 31.06 and then amended §§ 31.03 and 31.06. The repealed provisions had been amended by Res. ZA87-01-01, adopted January 12, 1987. 

Section 31.01. - Purpose and intent. 
Land disturbing activities such as grading, dredging, excavating, and filling may pose special hazards to the environment with potential adverse impact on soil stabilization; creating erosion and increasing stormwater runoff. Trees moderate the effects of sun and wind, provide buffers and screens against noise and air pollution, filter out pollutants from the air, serve to reduce the hazard of flooding, and assist in the stabilization of soil and in the prevention of erosion. 
It is the policy of this commission to recognize and promote efforts, both nationally and locally, to conserve, develop and utilize our natural resources and to protect the atmosphere, land and waters from pollution, impairment or destruction, for the benefit, enjoyment, and general welfare of our citizens. Therefore, it is the intent and purpose of this chapter to prescribe regulations governing land disturbing and tree removal activities and the control of stormwater runoff to protect, preserve and enhance a valuable natural resource and to protect the health, safety and welfare of our citizens. 
The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be in accordance with the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, Georgia Laws 1975, p. 994, as amended; the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission having been designated under O.C.G.A. Section 12-7-4 to enforce its provisions. 
(Amended June 25, 1990, ZA90-06-02) 
Section 31.02. - [Standards adopted; status.] 
The Macon-Bibb County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Standards as adopted June 25, 1990 by the commission (and any subsequent amendments thereto) shall govern any land disturbing activity undertaken within the City of Macon and Bibb County except those items specifically exempted in said standards. 
Notwithstanding, at such time the City of Macon and/or County of Bibb adopt ordinances or other legislation to address soil erosion and sedimentation and such standards;sd; are certified by the Director of Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia as the issuing authority and have in place an agreement with the Ocmulgee River Soil and Water Conservation District providing that the city or county can conduct, review and approve land disturbing applications without referring the application and plan to the district, these standards shall become null and void and the commission will no longer monitor soil erosion controls. 
(Amended June 25, 1990, ZA90-06-02) 
Section 31.03. - Tree removal activity. (Amended June 25, 1990, ZA90-06-02) 
[1]  Scope and exclusions. No person shall cut or otherwise destroy trees in Macon-Bibb County, except those exempted in Section III of the Macon-Bibb County Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Standards adopted by the commission on June 25, 1990, or any exemptions set out by the City of Macon or County of Bibb under their soil erosion and sedimentation control standards, as they may adopt. For purposes of this section, a tree removal activity shall mean the removal or effective removal of a mass of trees, as opposed to selective thinning of trees in keeping with standard forestry practices. For the purpose of this definition, a tree shall be any hardwood or evergreen having a diameter of ten (10) inches or greater at breast height, (four and one-half (4½) feet). (Amended June 25, 1990, ZA90-06-02) 
[2]  Application procedures: 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit as required by this section shall submit an application and plan to the zoning enforcement officer. This plan shall indicate the limits of clearing of the proposed development. (Amended June 25, 1990, ZA90-06-02) 
(b)  When tree removal is required by any development or land use requiring the submission of a site plan, or subdivision plan, the said plan and permit, upon approval, shall constitute a tree removal permit. 
(c)  When the person seeking a tree removal permit is not required to file a site plan or subdivision plan, the applicant shall request a special zoning permit to allow tree removal. 
[3]  Standards for review. Prior to modifying or rejecting the proposed limits of tree removal activity, the following factors shall be considered: 
(a)  The extent to which the actual or intended use of the property, in accordance with the regulations of the zoning district in which the property lies, required land disturbance or the cutting down or destruction of trees. 
(b)  The hardship to the applicant which will result from a modification or denial of the requested permit. 
(c)  The desirability of preserving any tree by reason of its size, age, or some other outstanding quality, such as uniqueness, rarity or status as a landmark or species specimen. 
(d)  The extent to which the area would be subject to increased water runoff and other environmental degradation due to land disturbance or removal of the trees. 
(e)  The heightened desirability of preserving tree cover in densely developed or densely populated areas. 
(f)  The need for visual screening in transitional zones, or relief from glare, blight, commercial, industrial ugliness or any other affront to the visual sense in any part of the county. 
(g)  The effect that changes in the natural grade will have on the trees to be preserved. 
(h)  Whether the plan submitted will destroy no more trees than is reasonably necessary to achieve the proposed development. 
[4]  Action on application: 
(a)  The zoning enforcement officer may approve applications pursuant to this section for all permitted uses. The commission will approve all other applications. 
(b)  Applications may be approved in whole or in part and subject to such conditions or modifications as would preserve the intent of this section to include replacement of destroyed trees by other trees of the same or comparable species as those removed. 
Section 31.04. - Reserved. 
Section 31.05. - Performance guarantee. 
The commission may require a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or cash escrow deposit in such amount as the commission may determine necessary to ensure compliance with these regulations for any land disturbance or tree removal activity. 
(Amended June 25, 1990, ZA90-06-02) 
Section 31.06. - Stormwater management. 
Stormwater management plans shall be required for any project involving single-family attached units, unit developments, churches, multifamily developments, commercial developments, industrial developments and planned developments. 
[1]  Application procedure: 
(a)  Stormwater management plans shall be submitted to the city or county engineer for approval. These plans shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section 31.11[2] below. 
(b)  The city or county engineer and/or the zoning enforcement officer may require that the plans be certified by a state registered civil engineer to ensure compliance with all regulations. 
[2]  Standards for stormwater management: 
(a)  A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required when the proposed development shall increase the peak rate of runoff by more than one (1) percent for a ten-year frequency storm; 
(b)  Should the peak rate of stormwater runoff from the site exceed the permitted peak release rate, then on-site retention or detention shall be required. All retention or detention facilities shall be designed for all intensities up to and including twenty-five-year frequency for all duration of rainfall. The peak runoff rate from the site after the development shall not be greater than the permitted peak release rate; and 
(c)  The live retention or detention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the twenty-five-year frequency rainfall, as published by the National Weather Service for the affected site. The retention or detention volume required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of the twenty-five-year rainfall for any and all durations from the proposed development, less than that volume discharged during the same duration at the approved release rate as specified above. 
[3]  Permit. A stormwater management plan approved by the city or county engineer shall constitute a permit that will satisfy the requirements of this section. 
[4]  Termination date. Notwithstanding any provision contained in this Section 31.06 to the contrary, this section shall become null and void upon adoption of a storm water management ordinance by the City of Macon and/or County of Bibb. 
(Added June 25, 1990, ZA90-06-02; Amended June 25, 1990, ZA90-06-02) 
Section 31.07. - Criteria for protection of groundwater recharge areas. 
[1]  Intent. The intent of these regulations shall be to provide development standards for construction situated in ground water recharge areas and to meet the criteria for protection of groundwater recharge areas as established by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
[2]  Supplemental definitions: For the purpose of these regulations, the following definitions shall apply. 
(a)  "Aquifer" means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
(b)  "DRASTIC" means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection agency document EPA-600/87-035. 
(c)  "Hazardous waste" means any substance listed as a hazardous constituent in regulations promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency which are in force and effect on February 1, 1992, codified as appendix VIII to C.F.R. Part 261 - Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste. 
(d)  "Pollution susceptibility" means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to areas of the state into areas having high, medium and low ground-water pollution potential. 
(e)  "Pollution susceptibility maps" means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the State into areas having high, medium and low ground-water pollution potential. 
(f)  "Recharge area" means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
(g)  "Significant recharge areas" means those areas mapped by the Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, the presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. Significant recharge areas are as follows: 
(i)  In the Piedmont, rocks have little primary porosity, with most groundwater being stored in the overlying soils. The significant recharge areas are those with thicker soils. Field mapping indicates that thick soils in the Piedmont and Blue Ridge are characterized by a density of two (2) or more geologic contacts per four (4) square miles (source: 1976 1:500,000 Geologic Map of Georgia and slopes lower than eight (8) percent.) 
(ii)  In the Coastal Plain, the significant recharge areas are the surface outcroppings of the large and extensively used drinking water aquifers (e.g., the Floridan, the Clayton, etc.) and soils having high permeability according to the 1976 1:750,000 Soils Association Map of Georgia. 
[3]  The following criteria pursuant to O.G.C.A. 12-2-8 shall apply in significant recharge areas: 
(a)  No permits for new sanitary landfills not having synthetic liners and leachate collection systems shall be issued. 
(b)  No permits for the land disposal of hazardous wastes shall be issued. 
(c)  All new facilities permitted or to be permitted to treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste shall perform such operations on an impermeable pad having a spill and leak collection system. 
(d)  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of six hundred sixty (660) gallons, shall have secondary containment for one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of such tanks or one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. 
(e)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
(i)  a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(ii)  a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifteen (15) acre-feet; 
(iii)  a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifty (50) acre-feet in size. 
As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5×10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(f)  New dwellings, including single manufactured homes, served by a septic tank/drainfield system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimum set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A through F) of the DHR Manual. 
(i)  One hundred fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(ii)  One hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(iii)  One hundred ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(g)  New manufactured home communities served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A through F) of the DHR Manual. 
(i)  One hundred fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
(ii)  One hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
(iii)  One hundred ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(h)  Lots recorded prior to the adoption of this section and any preliminary plat filed with the commission prior to the adoption of this section are exempt from the requirements of Section 31.07[3] (f) and (g). 
(i)  No construction may proceed on a building or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank unless the Macon-Bibb County Health Department first approves the septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the DHR Manual and (f), (g), and (h) above. 
(j)  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(k)  Spray irrigation of wastewaters or the land spreading of wastewater sludge in areas having high pollution susceptibility shall be approved by the department of natural resources prior to the issuance of a zoning compliance permit for the intended use of property. 
(l)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(m)  Exclusive of mining settling basins, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner in areas having high pollution susceptibility as required by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(Added July 10, 2000, ZA00-07-01; Amended October 23, 2000, ZA00-10-01) 
Section 31.08 - Wetlands. 
[1]  Intent. The wetlands in the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the state of Georgia. 
Nationally, a considerable number of these important resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling excavating, building, pollution and other acts, piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
The purpose of these regulations is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
[2]  Supplemental definitions. 
(a)  " Wetlands " means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of venation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for hydrological conditions that involve temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(b)  " Generalized Wetlands Map " means the current U.S. Fish and wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the City of Macon and Bibb County Georgia. 
(c)  " Jurisdictional Wetland " means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(d)  " Jurisdictional wetland determination " means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1344, as amended. 
(e)  " Regulated activity " means any activity which will, or which may reasonably expected to result in the discharge of dredge or fill material into the waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
[3]  Establishment of the Wetlands Protection District. The Wetlands Protection District is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia that area mapped as wetlands by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the Generalized Wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
The Generalized Wetland Map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia and cannot serve as a substitute for delineation by the U.S. Army Corps of engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any action under these regulations does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
[4]  Protection criteria; requirement for local permit or permission. No regulated activity will be permitted within the Wetlands Protection District without permission or a permit from the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. If the area proposed for development is located within fifty (50) feet of a Wetlands Protection District boundary, as determined by the zoning enforcement officer using the Generalized Wetlands Map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, a local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
[5]  Permitted uses. The following uses are allowed as a right within the Wetlands Protection District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other law or regulation, including the laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. 
(a)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit. 
(b)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, riding, and canoeing. 
(c)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with Best Management Practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(d)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to Best Management Practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(e)  The pasturing of live stock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agriculture Best Management Practices are followed. 
(f)  Education, scientific research, and natural trails. 
[6]  Prohibited uses. The following uses are not permitted within the Wetlands Protection District: 
(a)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; and 
(b)  Hazardous or sanitary landfills. 
(Added October 23, 2000, ZA00-10-02) 
Section 31.09 - Water supply watersheds. 
[1]  Intent. In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threaten by unrestricted development. Land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase soil erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients, into the water supplies, making water treatment more expensive and complicated and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport, and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
The purpose of these regulations is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. These regulations shall apply to all existing and proposed water supply watersheds within the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia. 
[2]  Supplemental definitions. 
(a)  " Impervious surface " means a man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure of the surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools and patios. 
(b)  " Large water supply watershed " means a watershed containing one hundred (100) square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(c)  " Water supply reservoir " means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(d)  " Water supply watershed " means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
[3]  Establishment of a Water Supply Watershed District. The Ocmulgee Water Supply Watershed District is hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to the Town Creek Water Supply Intake located on the Ocmulgee River. The boundaries of this overlay is defined by the ridgelines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius of seven (7) miles upstream of said public water supply intake. This overlay shall be further delineated and defined on the Water Supply Watershed Overlay District map of the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of these regulations by reference. 
The following is hereby defined and the boundaries shall be identified on the Water Supply Watershed District Overlay Map. The Ocmulgee River water supply watershed district: 
(a)  Is a large supply watershed; 
(b)  Has a water supply intake for the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia located on this river; and 
(c)  Does not contain a water supply reservoir within the jurisdiction of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
[4]  Protection criteria. New facilities, located within seven (7) miles of a water supply intake or water supply reservoir as defined herein, which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
[5]  Exemptions. The following uses shall be exempted from the provisions of this section of the watershed protection regulations: 
(a)  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of these regulations. 
(b)  Mining activities permitted by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
(Added October 23, 2000, ZA00-10-03) 
Chapter 32 - STREET CLASSIFICATION CHART AND SPECIAL SETBACKS[1] 
The following definitions and street classifications shall be used in determining setback, the location of certain uses, and in meeting other requirements of this resolution. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Amendment ZA11-003, adopted November 14, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 32, §§ 32.01—32.05, and enacted a new Ch. 32 as set out herein. The former Ch. 32 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ZA97-02-01, February 10, 1997. 

Section 32.01. - Definitions. 
All streets and highways in the City of Macon and Bibb County are hereby divided into seven (7) classes. 
[1]  Freeways are those streets which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic, and which are divided with full control of access and with no crossing at grade. 
[2]  Expressways are those highways or streets which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic, and which are divided with full or partial control of access and generally with grade separations at intersections. 
[3]  Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. 
[4]  Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of freeways, expressways, and arterial streets and highways. 
[5]  Minor or local residential streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting residential properties. 
[6]  Minor or local commercial and industrial streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting commercial and industrial purposes. 
[7]  Alleys are those which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(Amended November 14, 2011, ZA11-003) 
Section 32.02. - Street and highway functional classifications. 
The following streets and highways shall be classified as follows: 

 
**  Indicates that special setbacks apply to portions of these streets. See Section 32.05. 
(Amended November 14, 2011, ZA11-003) 
Section 32.03. - Minor or local residential streets. 
All streets not otherwise designated elsewhere in this resolution which have a right-of-way width greater than twenty (20) feet. 
(Amended November 14, 2011, ZA11-003) 
Section 32.04. - Alleys. 
All streets not otherwise designated elsewhere in this resolution which have a right-of-way width of twenty (20) feet or less shall not be considered a minor street for setback distance purposes. 
(Amended November 14, 2011, ZA11-003) 
Section 32.05. - Special minimum setbacks. 
[1]  Special minimum setbacks for streets and highways . The following special setbacks are hereby imposed to provide for the future widening of streets and highways to prevent future traffic congestion: 

 
[2]  Special setbacks for Lake Tobesofkee. The three hundred sixty-nine (369) contour lines shall be considered the rear property line for all property adjacent to the lake. Whichever is greater of the following setback requirements shall be imposed: 
(a)  All buildings on public sewer shall meet the rear yard setback requirements of the zone in which they are located; 
(b)  All buildings requiring a septic tank shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from the three hundred sixty (360) contour line; or 
(c)  Buildings requiring a septic tank shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the rear property line, or the Macon-Bibb County Health Department may require a greater distance for the positioning of the septic tank. 
(Amended November 14, 2011, ZA11-003) 
Chapter 33 - ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES 

Section 33.01. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, or association, whether owner (including their assigns or successors in title), principal agent, employee, contractor, independent contractor, or otherwise who violates, or causes such violation, or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this resolution, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with the granting of a certificate of zoning compliance, special zoning permit, variances or amendments to the official zoning maps or permits such violation shall be punishable as provided by law and the zoning enforcement officer may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the violator, institute proceedings in the recorder's court of the City of Macon pursuant to Section 8-14011 of the Macon City Code or in the state court of Bibb County pursuant to Section 11-3011 of the Bibb County Code or Sections 12 and 19 of the General Planning Enabling Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, 1957 (No. 358), as amended (Georgia Code Annotated, Section 69-12, et seq.). Each and every day of such violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Amended September 27, 1993, ZA93-09-03) 
Section 33.02. - Enforcement. 
[1]  In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this resolution, the commission, through its authority or other designated official, or any other appropriate city or county authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of each such building or use of land. 
[2]  Whenever the commission shall find, in the case of any permit heretofore or hereafter granted pursuant to the provisions of this article, that any of the terms, conditions or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, the commission is authorized, after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a public hearing, to suspend or revoke such permit or take other action as it deems necessary to ensure compliance. The commission is authorized to request and obtain investigations and reports as to compliance from such city, county or state agencies or administrative officers as may be appropriate. 
[3]  Where a violation of this resolution exists with respect to a structure or to land, the commission may, in addition, notify all public utilities of such violation and request that public utility services be withheld therefrom until such structure or premises are no longer in violation of this resolution (or until the contemptor is purged of contempt, as the case may be). 
[4]  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the commission from taking such other lawful action as may be appropriate in the case of a violation of these regulations. 
Section 33.03. - Subdivision enforcement. 
[1]  The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the City of Macon and County of Bibb who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat to subdivide such land before such plat has been approved by the commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Bibb County, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor in accordance with Section 33.01 of this resolution and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by law. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The commission, through its attorney or other designated official, may enjoin such transfer or sale of agreement by appropriate action. 
[2]  No plat or plan of subdivision within the City of Macon and County of Bibb shall be filed or recorded by a subdivider in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Bibb County until it has been approved by the commission, and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the executive director. The clerk of the superior court shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision which does not have the approval of the commission. The filing of a plat of a subdivision by the owner or agent of the owner without approval of the commission is hereby declared a misdemeanor in accordance with Section 33.01 of this resolution and, upon conviction, the owner or agent of the owner is punishable by law. 
Chapter 34 - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section 34.01. - Validity. 
Should any section, clause or provision of this resolution be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such action shall not affect the validity of this resolution as a whole or any part hereof other than the part so declared to be invalid, each section, clause and provision hereof being declared severable. 
Section 34.02. - Effective date. 
This resolution shall be effective immediately upon its adoption by the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Section 34.03. - Repeal of conflicting resolutions, approvals and actions. 
This is the Comprehensive Land Development Resolution for Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, and all other conflicting resolutions are hereby repealed; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying those zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this resolution. 
All variances and exception heretofore granted by the commission shall remain in full force and effect, and all terms, conditions and obligations imposed by the commission shall remain in effect and be binding. Prior resolutions shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against such violations and for the prosecution of any violations heretofore commenced. 
Section 34.04. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the requirements of this resolution are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted statutes, rules, regulations, ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing higher standards, shall govern. No certificate of zoning compliance or special zoning permit shall be issued or considered valid for any use or activity which is otherwise illegal under the terms of any local, State or Federal Law. 
(Amended February 22, 1993, ZA93-02-01) 
SO ADOPTED, this 26th day of October, 1981. 
CATHEY SMITH, Chairman       
Attested: 
VERNON B. RYLE, III       
Executive Director 
APPENDIX A 
PART 1. - RELATED LAWS 
  
BIBB COUNTY—ZONING AND PLANNING—  PROPOSED CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT. 
No. 334 (House Bill No. 389). 
An Act to propose to the qualified voters of Georgia and to the voters in the area directly affected, an amendment to Article XI, Section I, Paragraph VI, of the Constitution of Georgia, so as to authorize the city of Macon and Bibb County, separately or jointly, to adopt rules and regulations or to delegate such authority to agencies or to an agency, for zoning and planning; to provide for the submission of the amendment for ratification by the people; and for other purposes. 
Section 1. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that Article XI, Section I, Paragraph VI, of the Constitution of Georgia, and as the same has heretofore or contemporaneously been amended, revised, or changed, shall be further amended by adding at the end thereof a new paragraph as follows: 
"And except that the City of Macon and Bibb County may, through their respective governing authorities, separately or jointly, promulgate zoning and planning laws, rules and regulations, and administer the same, and/or appoint agencies or agency for adopting zoning and planning laws, rules, and regulations, and for administering the same, the governing authorities or their designated agencies being authorized to condition the application of any zoning and planning and the administration of the same according to any presently existing zoning or planning law, any that may hereafter be enacted or according to any that may be resolved or ordained by either or both or by their designated agency or agencies". 
Section 2. Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that whenever the above proposed amendment to the Constitution shall have been agreed to by two-thirds (⅔'s) of the members elected to each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and the same has been entered on their Journals, with the yeas and nays taken thereon, the Governor shall be and he is hereby authorized and instructed to cause such amendment to be published in one or more newspapers in each Congressional District, for two months previous to the time of holding the next general election, at which election members of the General Assembly are chosen, and in like manner cause the said amendment to be advertised in the City of Macon, County of Bibb. 
Section 3. Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the above proposed amendment shall be submitted for ratification or rejection to the electors of the State and of the area directly affected thereby at the next general election to be held after the publication, as provided for in the second section of this Act, in the several election districts of this State, at which every person shall be qualified to vote who is qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly. All persons voting at said election in favor of adopting the said proposed amendment to the Constitution shall have written or printed on their ballots the words: 
"For ratification of amendment to Paragraph VI of Section I of Article XI of the Constitution of Georgia, authorizing the City of Macon and Bibb County, separately or jointly, to establish zoning and planning rules, regulations, and commissions"; 
and all persons opposed to the adoption of said amendment shall have written or printed on their ballots the words: 
"Against ratification of amendment to Paragraph VI of Section I of Article XI, of the Constitution of Georgia, authorizing the City of Macon and County of Bibb, separately or jointly, to establish zoning and planning rules, regulations, and commissions." 
If the people in the State, as a whole, and in the City of Macon, County of Bibb, ratify such amendment by a majority of the electors qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly voting thereon, such amendment shall become a part of the Constitution of this State. The returns of the election shall be made in like manner as returns for members of the General Assembly, and it shall be the duty of the Secretary of State to ascertain the result and to certify the result to the Governor, who shall, if such amendment be ratified, make proclamation thereof. 
Section 4. Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act, be and the same are hereby repealed. 
Approved March 28, 1947. 
CITY OF MACON AND BIBB COUNTY—ZONING AND PLANNING;  LOCAL CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT CONTINUED. 
No. 1314 (House Bill No. 1883). 
AN ACT 
To continue in force and effect as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia that constitutional amendment authorizing the City of Macon and Bibb County, separately or jointly, to establish zoning and planning rules, regulations, and commissions (Act No. 334; H.B. 389; Ga. L. 1947, p. 1240); to provide the authority for this Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Section 1. That constitutional amendment authorizing the City of Macon and Bibb County, separately or jointly, to establish zoning and planning rules, regulations, and commissions (Act No. 334; H.B. 389; Ga. L. 1947, p. 1240) shall not be repealed or deleted on July 1, 1987, as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia but is specifically continued in force and effect on and after that date as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Section 2. This Act is passed pursuant to Article XI, Section I, Paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia which authorizes the continuation of certain amendments to the Constitution. 
Section 3. All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
GEORGIA, BIBB COUNTY 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO INTRODUCE  LOCAL LEGISLATION 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 28-1-14. Official Code of Georgia Annotated, notice is hereby given of intention to introduce in the 1986 Session of the General Assembly of Georgia the following local legislation: 
A Bill to be Entitled an Act to continue in force and effect as a part of the Constitution of the State of Georgia that constitutional amendment authorizing the City of Macon and Bibb County, separately or jointly, to establish zoning and planning rules, regulations, and commissions (Act No. 334; H. B. 389; Ga. L. 1947, p. 1240); to provide the authority for this Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
This 3rd day of February, 1986. 
EMORY GREENE, Chairman  Board of Commissioners of  Bibb County, Georgia.  2/8,1986-589570 
PART 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION SECTIONS SAVED FROM REPEAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are Ch. 2, Art. VII, Div. 4, §§ 2-656—2-666, from the former City of Macon Code of Ordinances, and Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 7, §§ 2-291—2-301, from the former Bibb County Code of Ordinances. Said sections were saved from repeal by Ord. No. O-2013-4, § 3, adopted Dec. 31, 2013, and Ord. No. O-15-0033, § 2, adopted July 21, 2015, which provide that the delegations of authority previously granted by the City of Macon and Bibb County to the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission shall not be repealed or affect the legal validity of "The Comprehensive Land Development Resolution for the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia" enacted by the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission, or the continued existence of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission itself. 

DIVISION 4. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— Ch. 2, Art. VII, Div. 4, §§ 2-656—2-666, from the former City of Macon Code of Ordinances. See also editor's note at App. A, Pt. 2. 
State Law reference— City's authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 4; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

Sec. 2-656. - Established. 
A planning and zoning commission of the city is hereby established, and shall be known as The Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission referred to throughout this division as the commission. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1001) 
Sec. 2-657. - Membership; terms; qualifications; eligibility, compensation. 
The commission shall consist of five (5) members, all of whom shall be initially appointed jointly by the governing authorities of the city and county. Initially, one (1) member shall be appointed for five (5) years, one (1) for four (4) years, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for two (2) years, one (1) for one (1) year from January 1, 1953. Subsequent appointments shall be made for five-year periods, with the county and city governing authorities making the appointment in alternate years, the first such appointment being made by the county. All persons appointed pursuant to this section shall hold office for the term designated, and until their successors are chosen and qualified. The members of the planning and zoning commission shall be residents of the County of Bibb, and not less than three (3) shall also reside in the city. No member of the county board of commissioners nor the mayor or the city council shall be eligible to hold office as a member of the commission, provided that after the appointment of the initial commission of five (5) members, the city and the county may, by joint agreement but only if requested so to do by the commission, each appoint an additional commissioner, either from their respective governing bodies or otherwise, to serve during the respective terms of office of the appointing power, thus increasing the personnel of the commission to seven (7). If the initial commission shall request the appointment of the additional commissioners, it shall indicate whether such additional commissioners should or should not be given voting powers. The commission shall annually choose one (1) of its members as chairman or presiding officer, for a term of one (1) year. Secretarial assistance shall be furnished by the city and county as from time to time may be determined. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except as may be determined by joint action of the city and county governing authorities. In the event of the death, resignation, or abandonment of office by any member hereof, his other successor shall be appointed for the unexpired term by the governmental authority originally making the appointment. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1002) 
Charter reference— Acts required of city's governing authority to be done by ordinance, § 8-103. 
Sec. 2-658. - Meetings; hearings; rules; temporary rules. 
(a)  The commission shall establish a regular time and place for its meetings, and shall adopt rules of procedure. These rules shall provide for notice of any proposed action by the commission to zone or re-zone an area, and such action shall be taken only after public hearing. The rules shall provide that notice of the time and place of public hearings shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least ten (10) but not more than twenty (20) days before the date of the hearing; provided, however, that the commission shall be empowered to make any other and further provision for notice as shall be consistent with due process. 
(b)  Pending adoption of a comprehensive plan of zoning, temporary zoning regulations may be adopted without notice, provided such regulations shall not be effective for a longer period than thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1003) 
State Law reference— Hearings on proposed local government zoning decisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4. 
Sec. 2-659. - Powers; functions; scope of authority. 
(a)  The powers and functions of the commission shall be to: 
(1)  Hold hearings on all zoning, districting, rezoning and redistricting matters whether originated by private parties, by a governmental agency or by the commission itself; 
(2)  Conduct such hearings as provided by law and its own rules and regulations; and 
(3)  Thereupon pass orders providing for the zoning, rezoning, districting or redistricting of areas of the city and the county. 
(b)  The commission shall have power to: 
(1)  Make regulations restricting the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lots that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open space, the density of population, the location and use of buildings and other structures, and the use, conditions of use, or occupancy of land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, transportation, agriculture, or other purposes; 
(2)  Regulate concerning city and county planning; 
(3)  Provide for the regulation of subdivision of land; and 
(4)  Establish setback lines for buildings and structures along the streets, lanes, avenues and roads, including the power and authority to divide the city and the county into districts of such number, shape and area as the commission shall find to be best suited to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(c)  The commission shall further have the power within such districts to: 
(1)  Regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings and structures, and the use, conditions of use or occupancy of land; and 
(2)  Adopt official zoning regulations including a map indicating the districts. The regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this division or adopted by the commission shall prohibit the owner or occupant from making ordinary repairs, alterations, or improvements to or upon any structure already located within a district, or to prohibit the continued use of any such structure or premises for any business of substantially the same character as that for which it is already used, provided that no existing building within a zoned district shall be replaced or substantially altered or used for any substantially different business purpose except upon the approval first obtained from the commission. Such approval shall be given only when the proposed replacement, alteration, or change of use will not defeat the general purposes hereof. 
(e)  The commission shall be empowered to authorize in specific cases such variance from the terms of its regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions fully demonstrated on the basis of the facts presented, literal enforcement of the provisions of the regulations will result in great practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the regulations shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(f)  The commission shall also be empowered to permit in appropriate cases, in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such regulations, a building to be erected or premises to be used for public utility or other public service purposes in any location which is reasonably necessary for public convenience and welfare. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1004) 
Sec. 2-660. - Regulations to be consistent with comprehensive plan; other considerations; temporary regulations. 
(a)  Regulations adopted by the commission shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan designed for the purposes, among others, of: 
(1)  Lessening congestion in the roads and streets; 
(2)  Securing safety from fire, flood, erosion and other dangers; 
(3)  Providing adequate light and air; 
(4)  Promoting the health and general welfare; 
(5)  Encouraging such distribution of population and such classification of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization as will tend to facilitate economic and adequate provisions for transportation, communications, roads, airports, water supply, drainage, sanitation, education, recreation or other public requirements; 
(6)  Conserving and developing the natural resources, and 
(7)  Protecting the food supply. 
(b)  Regulations of the commission shall be made with reasonable consideration, among others, to the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, and to the minimum and maximum amounts of land required for particular uses, and with a general view to promoting desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods, protecting property against blight and depreciation, securing economy in governmental expenditures, and encouraging the most appropriate use and management of land. 
(c)  Pending the adoption of a comprehensive zoning plan, the commission is empowered to adopt temporary zoning regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1005) 
Sec. 2-661. - Approval required for development. 
All plans, plots, divisions and subdivisions of land, building lots, and the streets, alleys or portions of the same intended to be dedicated for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto and located within the city or the county shall be submitted to the commission, and no such road, street, avenue, lane, alley, or other thoroughfare shall be accepted or maintained as a public way unless and until the commission shall have adopted a resolution certifying that the subdivision or resubdivision and the street or other thoroughfare therein meet the requirements of the commission, and are consistent with its plans for the orderly development of the area affected. Nothing in this division shall dispense with the necessity of registering county thoroughfares with the county and securing acceptance of city thoroughfares by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1006) 
Sec. 2-662. - Debt limitation. 
The commission shall have no power to incur any debt except within the limit of funds appropriated by the city and county and on hand in the treasury of the commission. From such funds, the commission shall be authorized and empowered to employ any technical assistants as it shall find to be necessary to assist it in the proper accomplishment of its functions. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1007) 
Sec. 2-663. - Annual report. 
The commission shall, on July first of each year, make a report to the county board of commissioners and to the mayor and the city council of its proceedings, together with a full statement of disbursements and expenditures and the progress of its work during the year preceding the report. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1008) 
Sec. 2-664. - Authority to enforce regulations. 
The Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby authorized and empowered to bring, in the name of the city and county, all legal actions necessary to prevent, enjoin, or abate violations of the rules and regulations of the commission as to persons and property within the limits of the city. The commission is empowered to take such action from time to time, and in such cases as shall be necessary for the adequate enforcement of its rules and regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1009) 
Sec. 2-665. - Certiorari. 
Any person aggrieved by act or omission of the commission shall have the right of certiorari as provided by law. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1010) 
Sec. 2-666. - Violation of rules and regulations; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to perform any act or do anything required by the rules and regulations of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission as they now or as they may hereafter exist. It shall be further unlawful for any person to do anything or perform any act prohibited by the rules and regulations of the commission as the same now or may hereafter exist. 
(b)  Each day that any person remains in violation of the rules and regulations, either by commission or omission, shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person who shall violate this section shall be punished as provided by the laws of the state creating the municipal court of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 11-1011) 
DIVISION 7. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 7, §§ 2-291—2-301, from the former Bibb County Code of Ordinances. See also editor's note at App. A, Pt. 2. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 4; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

Sec. 2-291. - Establishment. 
A planning and zoning commission of the City of Macon and the county is hereby established, and shall be known as "The Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission." 
(Code 1974, § 11-3001) 
Sec. 2-292. - Membership. 
The joint planning and zoning commission shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be initially appointed jointly by the governing authorities of the city and county. Initially, one member shall be appointed for five years, one for four years, one for three years, one for two years and one for one year from January 1, 1953. Subsequent appointments shall be made for five-year periods, with the county and city governing authorities making the appointment in alternate years, the first such appointment being made by the county. All persons appointed hereunder shall hold office for the term designated, and until their successors are chosen and qualified. The members of the planning and zoning commission shall be residents of the county, and not less than three shall also reside in the City of Macon. No member of the board of commissioners of the county nor of the mayor and council of the City of Macon shall be eligible to hold office as a member of the commission. The commission shall annually choose one of its members as chairman for a term of one year. Secretarial assistance shall be furnished by the city and county as from time to time may be determined. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except as may be determined by joint action of the city and county governing authorities. In the event of the death, resignation, or abandonment of office by any member hereof, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired term by the governmental authority originally making the appointment. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3002) 
Sec. 2-293. - Meetings; rules. 
The joint city-county planning and zoning commission shall appoint a regular time and place for meeting, and shall adopt its rules of procedure. Such rules shall provide for notice of any proposed action by the commission to zone or rezone an area, and such action shall be taken only after public hearing. Such rules shall provide that notice of the time and place of public hearings shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county not less than ten nor more than 20 days before the date of such hearing; provided, however, that the commission shall be empowered to make such other and further provision for notice as shall be consistent with due process. Pending adoption of a comprehensive plan of zoning, temporary zoning regulations may be adopted without notice provided such regulations shall not be effective for a longer period than 30 days. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3003) 
Sec. 2-294. - Powers and functions; owners' rights. 
(a)  The powers and functions of the joint planning and zoning commission shall be to hold hearings on all zoning, districting, rezoning or redistricting matters whether originated by private parties, by a governmental agency or by the commission itself; to conduct such hearings as provided by law and its own rules and regulations; and to thereupon pass orders providing for the zoning, rezoning, districting or redistricting of areas of the City of Macon and/or the county. The commission shall have power to make regulations restricting the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lots that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open space, the density of population, the location and use of buildings and other structures, and the use, conditions of use, or occupancy of land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, transportation, agriculture, or other purposes; to regulate concerning municipal and county planning; to provide for the regulation of subdivision of land; to establish setback lines for buildings and structures along the streets, lanes, avenues and roads, including the power and authority to divide the City of Macon and/or the county into districts of such number, shape and area as the commission shall find to be best suited to carry out the purposes of this joint resolution and ordinance. The commission shall further have the power within such districts to regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings and structures, and the use, conditions of use or occupancy of land; and to adopt official zoning regulations including a map or maps indicating the districts; and the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained or adopted by the commission shall prohibit the owner or occupant from making ordinary repairs, alterations, or improvements to or upon any structure already located within a district, or to prohibit the continued use of any such structure or premises for any business of substantially the same character as that for which it is already used; provided that no existing building within a zoned district shall be replaced or substantially altered or used for any substantially different business purpose except upon the approval first obtained of the commission. Such approval shall be given only when the proposed replacement, alteration, or change of use will not defeat the general purposes hereof. 
(c)  The commission shall be empowered to authorize in specific cases such variance from the terms of its regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions fully demonstrated on the basis of the facts presented, literal enforcement of the provisions of the regulations will result in great practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the regulations shall be observed and substantial justice done. The commission shall also be empowered to permit in appropriate cases, in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such regulations, a building to be erected or premises to be used for public utility or other public service purposes in any location which is reasonably necessary for public convenience and welfare. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3004) 
Sec. 2-295. - Limitations upon regulations. 
Regulations adopted by the joint planning and zoning commission shall be made in accordance with a comprehensive plan designed for the purposes, among others, of lessening congestion in the roads and streets; securing safety from fire, flood, erosion and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; promoting the health and general welfare; encouraging such distribution of population and such classification of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization as will tend to facilitate economic and adequate provisions for transportation, communications, roads, airports, water supply, drainage, sanitation, education, recreation or other public requirements; conserving and developing the natural resources, and protecting the food supply. Such regulations of the commission shall be made with reasonable consideration, among others, to the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, and to the minimum and maximum amounts of land required for particular uses, and with a general view to promoting desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods, protecting property against blight and depreciation, securing economy in governmental expenditures, and encouraging the most appropriate use and management of land. Pending the adoption of a comprehensive zoning plan, the commission is empowered to adopt temporary zoning regulations. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3005) 
Sec. 2-296. - Submission of plans, etc. 
All plans, plots, divisions and subdivisions of land, building lots, and the streets, alleys or portions of the same intended to be dedicated for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto and located within the City of Macon or the county shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission, and no such road, street, avenue, lane, alley, or other thoroughfare shall be accepted or maintained as a public way unless and until the commission shall have adopted a resolution certifying that such subdivision or resubdivision and the street or other thoroughfare therein meet the requirements of the commission, and are consistent with its plans for the orderly development of the area affected. Nothing herein shall dispense with the necessity of registering county thoroughfares with the county and securing acceptance of city thoroughfares by the city. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3006) 
Sec. 2-297. - Master plans; maps; recommendations. 
The joint planning and zoning commission shall further have the power and duty to study the resources, possibilities and needs of the City of Macon and the county and shall prepare master plans and maps for the systematic future development of the city and county and for this metropolitan area, and from time to time make such recommendations to the appropriate governing or other authority as may be deemed advisable. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3007) 
Sec. 2-298. - Gifts and grants; contracts. 
The joint planning and zoning commission shall have the right, power and authority to receive funds, gifts and grants from any source, including but not limited to the national, state and local governments, and shall further have the right, power and authority to expend such funds in its zoning and planning activities, including the preparation of maps. Such commission is specifically empowered to enter into contracts with the federal, state or local governments, or with private individuals, firms and corporations for the performance of planning and zoning work. Such commission shall have no power to incur any debt except within the limits of such funds as have been given or granted to the commission and are on hand in the treasury of the commission. The commission may make contracts for the performance of work for sums of money in excess of those on deposit with the commission if, and only if, such contracts receive the prior written approval of the City of Macon and county, acting through their respective governing authorities. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3008) 
Sec. 2-299. - Reports to city and county. 
The joint planning and zoning commission shall on July 1 of each year make a report to the board of commissioners of the county and to the mayor and council of the City of Macon of its proceedings, together with a full statement of disbursements and expenditures and the progress of its work during the year preceding such report. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3009) 
Sec. 2-300. - Right of certiorari. 
Any person aggrieved by act or omission of the joint planning and zoning commission shall have the right of certiorari as provided by law. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3010) 
Sec. 2-301. - Violations of rules and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to perform any act or do anything required by the rules and regulations of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission as such regulations now or may hereafter exist. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to do anything or perform any act prohibited by the rules and regulations of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission as such regulations now or may hereafter exist. 
(c)  Each day that such person remains in violation of such rules and regulations, either by commission or by omission, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate this section shall be tried in the state court of the county, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1974, § 11-3011) 
COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the disposition of amendments to the Comprehensive Land Development Resolution which have been enacted since its adoption on October 26, 1981. The abbreviation "Rpld" indicates that a section or subsection was specifically repealed or deleted by the amendment. 

 