CODE OF ORDINANCES OF MACON-BIBB COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the Board of Commission 
____________ 

OFFICIALS of the COUNTY OF MACON-BIBB, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert Reichert 
Mayor 
____________ 
Gary Bechtel 
Larry Schlesinger 
Elaine Lucas 
Mallory Jones, III 
Bert Bivins, III  Mayor Pro-Tem 
Ed Defore 
Scotty Shepherd 
Virgil Watkins, Jr. 
Al Tillman 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Dale Walker 
Chief Administrative Officer 
____________ 
Judd Drake 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Sheila Thurmond 
Clerk of Commission 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of this Code were provided by Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Board of Commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2015 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
(Index or Indexes) 
The (index or indexes) (has or have) been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the (index itself or indexes themselves) which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Austin Bates, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Jean Howard for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
© ;hg;Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 2015. 
O-15-0033 
SPONSOR: MAYOR ROBERT A.B. REICHERT 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE MACON-BIBB COUNTY COMMISSION RE-ADOPTING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR MACON-BIBB COUNTY, GEORGIA IN THE FORM REQUIRED FOR PUBLICATION BY THE MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH GEORGIA LAW; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE; AND FOR OTHER LAWFUL PURPOSES. 
WHEREAS, the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County has the legislative power to adopt clearly reasonable ordinances; and 
WHEREAS, on December 30, 2013, the Macon-Bibb County Commission approved and adopted the inaugural Macon-Bibb County Code of Ordinances which became effective on January 1, 2014; and 
WHEREAS, Macon-Bibb County Commission re-adopts the Macon-Bibb County Code of Ordinances in the form required for publication by the Municipal Code Corporation as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19 (d)(1); and 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, and it is hereby so ordained by authority of the same: 
Section 1. 
The document entitled "Code of Ordinances, Macon-Bibb County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 29, each inclusive, is hereby adopted. 
Section 2. 
It is the intention of the Macon-Bibb County Commission that the delegations of authority previously granted by the City of Macon and Bibb County to the Macon-Bibb County Planning & Zoning Commission in sections 2-656 through 2-666 of the City of Macon Code of Ordinances and sections 2-291 through 2-301 of the Bibb County Code of Ordinances shall not be repealed and that nothing in the Code of Ordinances or herein be construed to affect in any way the legal validity of "The Comprehensive Land Development Resolution for the City of Macon and Bibb County, Georgia" enacted by the Macon-Bibb County Planning & Zoning Commission or the continued existence of the Macon-Bibb County Planning & Zoning Commission itself. 
Section 3. 
It is the intention of the Macon-Bibb County Commission that nothing in the Code of Ordinances be construed as a zoning decision for purposes of Georgia Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. Section 36-36-1 et. seq. 
Section 4. 
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 1, 2014, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 5. 
The repeal provided for in section 4 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 6. 
Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of Macon-Bibb County to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that references to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 7. 
Ordinances adopted after January 1, 2014 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 8. 
a.  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Macon-Bibb County Commission that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this ordinance and the Code of Ordinances are or were, upon their adoption, believed by the Macon-Bibb County Commission to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
b.  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Macon-Bibb County Commission that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance and the Code of Ordinances is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance and the Code of Ordinances. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the Macon-Bibb County Commission that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance and the Code of Ordinances is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance and the Code of Ordinances. 
c.  In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this ordinance or the Code of Ordinances shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the Macon-Bibb County Commission that such invalidity, unconstitutionality, or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, or sections of this ordinance or the Code of Ordinances and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this ordinance and the Code of Ordinances shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
Section 9. 
This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its approval by the Mayor or upon its adoption into law without such approval. 
APPROVED AND ADOPTED this  21 st   day of  July  , 2015. 
By: ____________ 
 ROBERT A.B. REICHERT, Mayor 
Attest: ____________ 
  JEAN S. HOWARD, Clerk of Commission 
(SEAL) 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - THE CHARTER 
Charter of Macon-Bibb County as established by Ga. L. 2012, p. 5595/HB 1171  As amended by 2013 SB 25  As amended by 2013 HB 514 

SECTION 1. 
(a)  The governmental and corporate powers, duties, and functions now vested in the City of Macon, a municipal corporation created by an Act of the General Assembly, approved March 23, 1977 (Ga. L. 1977, p. 3776), as amended, are restructured with the governmental and corporate powers, duties, and functions of the County of Bibb, such restructuring of the governments of the City of Macon and the County of Bibb being pursuant to the constitutional power granted by Article IX, Section III, Paragraph II of the Constitution of Georgia, as amended. Said restructuring shall result in the establishment of a single county-wide government with powers and jurisdiction throughout the territorial limits of Bibb County, which single government shall supersede and replace the governments of the City of Macon and the County of Bibb, and, to the extent provided in this charter, shall also supersede and replace any public authorities and special service districts located and operating within Bibb County. Said county-wide government shall be a new political entity, a body politic and corporate, and a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, to be known as 'Macon-Bibb County' (in this charter at times called 'the restructured government'), having all of the governmental and corporate powers, duties, and functions heretofore held by and vested in the City of Macon and Bibb County, and also the powers, duties, and functions provided in this charter. The restructured government shall be a public corporation; shall have perpetual existence; shall, without the necessity or formality of a deed, bill of sale, or other instrument of transfer, own, possess, and hold all properties of whatsoever kind or nature, assets, contracts, franchises, things, rights, privileges, immunities, and real and personal property theretofore owned, possessed, enjoyed, or held by the City of Macon and the County of Bibb; by the name of Macon-Bibb County shall be able to contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued as provided by this charter, plead and be impleaded in all courts of this state, and do all other acts relating to its corporate capacity; and shall be able in law and equity to purchase, have and hold, receive, enjoy, accept, possess, and retain for the use and benefit of said Macon-Bibb County, in perpetuity or for any term of years, any estate or estates, real or personal, lands, tenements, or hereditaments of whatsoever kind or nature inside or outside the territorial limits of the restructured government, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold, or by any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by the restructured government and to use, manage, improve, sell and convey, rent, or lease same; and to have and use a common seal. From and after the effective date of this charter, the political subdivision known as Bibb County, Georgia, and the municipal corporation known as the City of Macon shall be merged into the said new political entity created in this charter. 
(b)  The territory embraced in the restructured government shall be the total area of Bibb County, as the same may be now or hereafter fixed and established by law, excluding the geographic area encompassed within the boundaries of the City of Payne City. Any portion of the City of Macon as it exists on December 31, 2013, which extends in to any other county shall not be included in the territory of the restructured government and shall on January 1, 2014, become unincorporated land of the county in which it is located. 
SECTION 2. 
(a)  The restructured government shall have and be vested with, to the same extent as if repeated in this charter, all rights, powers, duties, privileges, and authority that the City of Macon or Bibb County, or both collectively, have under the Constitution and general and special laws of Georgia at the time of the adoption of this charter, except as expressly modified in this charter. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, the restructured government shall have all rights, powers, duties, privileges, and authority conferred or enlarged by this charter, and such other rights, powers, duties, privileges, and authority as may be necessary and proper for carrying the same into execution, and also all rights, powers, duties, privileges, and authority, whether express or implied, that may now be vested in or hereafter granted to counties or municipal corporations, or both, by the Constitution and laws of this state, including the powers vested in the restructured government by this charter. 
(c)  The restructured government, in addition to the rights, duties, powers, privileges, and authority expressly conferred upon it by this charter, shall have the right, duty, power, privilege, and authority to exercise and enjoy all other powers, duties, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary and proper to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, and general welfare of said government and its inhabitants and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated in this charter and to do and perform all of the acts pertaining to its local affairs, property, and government that are necessary or proper in the legitimate exercise of its corporate powers and governmental duties and functions. 
(d)  No enumeration of any right, power, privilege, or authority hereinafter made shall be construed as limiting or abolishing any right, power, privilege, or authority set forth in this charter. 
(e)  No repeal of any law under which the restructured government derives any right, power, privilege, or authority, except by amendment of this charter as provided in this charter, shall be construed as limiting or abolishing any such right, power, privilege, or authority set forth in this charter. 
(f)  The general laws of the State of Georgia of a criminal nature shall be applicable to and within the limits of the restructured government. General laws of local application through classification by population, not in conflict with this charter: 
(1)  Which on the effective date of this charter apply to the City of Macon or Bibb County shall be applicable to the restructured government; and 
(2)  Which apply to the restructured government as either a city or a county at the time of their enactment or thereafter shall be effective, but those which did not apply to the City of Macon or Bibb County or the restructured government at the time of their enactment shall not become applicable to the restructured government except through the adoption of a resolution to that effect by the commission. 
(g)  Local Acts of the State of Georgia which apply specifically to Bibb County or the City of Macon, or both collectively, shall be applicable to the restructured government. 
(h)  In construing the applicability of provisions of the Constitution and the general laws of Georgia which apply in general terms to either counties or municipalities, or both, and local Acts of the General Assembly that apply specifically to Bibb County or the City of Macon, or both collectively, the following terms as used in such laws shall be construed to include the restructured government: 
(1)  'City,' 'town,' 'municipal corporation,' or 'municipality' shall be construed to include Macon-Bibb County; 
(2)  'County' shall be construed to include Macon-Bibb County; 
(3)  'Commissioners of roads and revenues' and 'board of county commissioners' shall be construed to include the commission of Macon-Bibb County; 
(4)  'Council,' 'mayor and council,' 'aldermen,' and 'board of aldermen' shall be construed to include the commission of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia; and 
(5)  Any other terms and provisions as used in such Acts to refer specifically to Bibb County or the City of Macon, or both, and the officers, employees, departments, and agencies thereof shall be construed to mean Macon-Bibb County and its officers, employees, departments, and agencies. 
(i)  In construing the applicability of laws in force to the restructured government, the following order shall prevail: 
(1)  The Constitution of the State of Georgia; 
(2)  The general laws of uniform application now in force or hereafter enacted by the General Assembly, as distinguished from general laws of local application through classification by population, applicable to municipal corporations or counties, or both; 
(3)  The general laws of local application through classification by population as and to the extent provided in subsection (a) of this section; 
(4)  Special laws applicable to Bibb County, not in conflict with this charter; 
(5)  Special laws applicable to the City of Macon, not in conflict with this charter; 
(6)  This charter and all ordinances and resolutions passed pursuant thereto; and 
(7)  Existing ordinances and resolutions of the former City of Macon and existing ordinances and resolutions of the former Bibb County not in conflict with this charter. 
(j)  The tort and nuisance liability of the restructured government shall follow the law and rules of tort liability applicable to counties in Georgia. 
(k)  For purposes of all applicable laws, the restructured government shall constitute a municipality and a county, or both. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, if a law applicable to municipalities and the same or another law applicable to counties are in conflict, the law applicable to municipalities shall prevail; provided, however, that the redistricting of commission districts shall be accomplished solely by local law. 
(l)  The restructured government shall have the power and authority to participate in, cooperate in, and take all necessary action with respect to any and all projects, programs, and undertakings of any nature authorized by any statute, rule, or regulation of the United States, the State of Georgia, or any federal or state agency or instrumentality, including, but not limited to, community development, highways, aviation, aviation terminals, airports, airport facilities, municipal area or regional development, sewer and sewage disposal, public housing, housing for the aged, and transportation or mass transit or any phase thereof; to borrow money and issue promissory notes, general obligation bonds, or revenue bonds, or a combination thereof, for any such purposes in accordance with the provisions of this charter; and to execute mortgages or deeds of trust in favor of any federal agency, secured by property of which the restructured government is the legal or beneficial or equitable owner, or in favor of any private agency where the loan is guaranteed by a federal agency. 
SECTION 3. 
(a)  Prior to the effective date of this charter, all powers vested in Bibb County or the City of Macon or any of their respective officers, agents, or agencies shall remain in full force and effect. Upon such effective date, the board of commissioners of Bibb County, the mayor and council of the City of Macon, and the offices of all members thereof shall stand abolished, and all emoluments appertaining thereto shall cease. Thereupon, the governments of Bibb County and the City of Macon shall terminate as such separate political entities and be merged into the government created by this charter. 
(b)  When an agency of the City of Macon or Bibb County is abolished or restructured by this charter, all books, papers, maps, charts, plans, records, other equipment, and personal property in possession of the same shall be delivered to the agency to which its rights, powers, duties, and obligations are transferred. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter, any officer performing duties under the government of the City of Macon or Bibb County may continue to perform the duties thereof until a successor, whether under the same title of office or another, shall be elected or appointed and qualified to perform the duties, it being the intention of this charter that no duty or service shall lapse or be abandoned because of lack of an officer to perform same. 
SECTION 4. 
(a)  All contracts, orders, leases, bonds, and other obligations or instruments entered into by the City of Macon or Bibb County or for their benefit prior to the effective date of this charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof as obligations and rights of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  No action or proceeding of any nature, whether civil or criminal, judicial or administrative, or otherwise, pending on the effective date of this charter by or against the City of Macon or its departments and agencies or Bibb County or its departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this charter. 
(c)  The departmental organization of the cities existing immediately prior to adoption of this charter shall continue in effect upon the effective date of this charter until such organization is changed or reorganized as provided by ordinance of the commission and administrative regulations consistent therewith. 
(d)  The provisions of this charter notwithstanding, the annual compensation of the mayor and councilmembers of the City of Macon for the remainder of their present terms of office shall be the same annual compensation as such officers received in the calendar year immediately preceding the date of adoption of this charter. 
SECTION 5. 
The governing authority of Macon-Bibb County shall consist of a commission of said county composed of a mayor and nine commissioners. Said board is designated as the Macon-Bibb County Commission, referred to in this charter as the 'commission.' The members of said commission are designated and referred to in this charter as 'commissioners.' The commission shall exercise and be subject to all of the rights, powers, duties, and obligations imposed by this charter or previously applicable to the governing authorities of the City of Macon and Bibb County and to any general laws, local laws, or constitutional provisions applicable or effective within the former City of Macon and Bibb County. The commission shall constitute a county as well as a municipality for the purpose of the application of the general laws and Constitution of this state. The commission may exercise the powers vested in the governing authority of the municipality and municipalities generally as well as the powers vested in the former governing authority of the county and counties generally. 
SECTION 6. 
The governing authority shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers, and authorities vested in such body by this charter and perform and discharge the duties, obligations, and responsibilities imposed upon it by law, either directly or through such officers, agents, and employees as it may from time to time ordain, constitute, and appoint in addition to those created and provided for in this charter; and the governing authority shall, except as otherwise provided in this charter, prescribe by ordinances or resolutions the manners and methods in which such jurisdiction, powers, authorities, duties, obligations, and responsibilities shall be exercised, performed, and discharged, and the respective officers, agents, and employees by whom the several portions thereof shall be exercised, performed, and discharged. 
SECTION 7. 
On the effective date of this charter, the operations and employees of the Municipal Court of the City of Macon shall continue its operations without interruption resulting from the adoption of this charter. The employees of such court shall become employees of the restructured government of Macon-Bibb County. The court shall be known as the Municipal Court of Macon-Bibb County. The judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Macon shall be authorized to serve as the judge of said court. Vacancies in the office of judge of the Municipal Court of Macon-Bibb County shall be filled by appointment of the mayor. Such court shall have jurisdiction as provided by law for municipal courts for all covered offenses and all code and ordinance violations occurring in Macon-Bibb County. 
SECTION 8. 
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the duties of the sheriff, the tax commissioner, the coroner, and the clerk of the superior court shall remain as such duties are presently imposed by law for such respective officers as county officers; provided, however, that such duties may be expanded and enlarged by the governing authority to include like duties and responsibilities in connection with the affairs of the restructured government. The compensation paid to any such officer shall be fixed as heretofore provided by law and may not be reduced during his or her term of office below the amount of such compensation as fixed at the commencement of such term, nor shall his or her compensation during his or her term of office in effect upon the effective date of this charter be reduced below the salary then being paid such officer. Such compensation as so fixed shall be the sole remuneration to such officers for their services and any and all other compensation for such services to Macon-Bibb County, the State of Georgia, or any agency thereof, including salaries, fees, commissions, fines, or forfeitures received from any source whatsoever, shall be the property of Macon-Bibb County and paid into its treasury. 
SECTION 9. 
(a)  The territory of the restructured government shall consist of nine election districts to be designated as Commission Districts 1 through 9 and the boundaries of the initial districts shall be as described in the districting plan attached to and made a part of this charter and further identified as 'Plan: bibbcon12-hd139p2r-rev2 Plan Type: Local Administrator: Bibb Co. User: Gina'; provided, however, that such described districts shall not include the city limits of the City of Payne City. 
(b)  (1)  When used in such attachment, the term 'VTD' (voting tabulation district) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(2)  The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Macon-Bibb County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Any part of Macon-Bibb County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any election district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(c)  The commission shall consist of nine members. The initial commissioners shall be elected at a nonpartisan election held on the third Tuesday in July, 2013, for terms of three years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Their successors shall be elected in nonpartisan elections for terms of four years and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following the date of the election. The members shall be elected from the nine districts specified in subsection (a) of this section by a majority of electors voting in such election from such district. All members of the commission shall be full voting members of the commission. The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the commission but shall not be a voting member of the commission; provided, however, that the mayor may cast a vote on any matter before the commission to break a tie. The mayor may propose ordinances in the same manner as a commissioner. 
(d)  No person shall be eligible to serve as a commissioner unless he or she: 
(1)  Has been a resident of Macon-Bibb County for a period of one year immediately prior to the date of the election; 
(2)  Continues to reside within the commission district from which elected during his or her term of office; 
(3)  Is a registered and qualified elector of Macon-Bibb County; and 
(4)  At the time of their election, be citizens of the United States, shall be at least 21 years of age, have been a citizen of this state for at least two years, and have been a legal resident of the territory embraced within the commissioner district from which elected for at least one year; provided, however, that for purposes of qualifying for the initial elections under this charter, and for any subsequent newly described districts resulting from redistricting, a candidate must only be a resident of the commissioner district on the day of qualifying. 
(e)  (1)  Each commissioner shall be paid an annual salary of $15,000.00. Future changes in the salary and expenses of the commissioners shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Code Section 36-35-4 of the O.C.G.A. and in accordance with the procedures of Code Section 36-5-24 of the O.C.G.A.; provided, however, that any increase in the salary or compensation of commissioners shall equal no more than one-half of the average percentage salary increase granted by such governing authority to the restructured government employees over the preceding three years. 
(2)  Any action to increase the salary of commissioners shall not become effective until the date of commencement of the terms of those commissioners elected at the next regular election following such action. 
(3)  In addition to salary and subject to appropriations, commissioners shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the restructured government as provided by rule or regulation. 
(f)  The commission shall elect from among its members in January of each year a member to serve as mayor pro tempore, who shall preside over meetings of the commission in the mayor's absence. 
(g)  For purposes of eligibility for employee benefits, the commissioners shall be deemed to be part-time employees. 
SECTION 10. 
(a)  Those members of the board of commissioners of Bibb County elected to take office in January, 2013, and the mayor and those members of the commission of the City of Macon who are serving as such on the second Monday of January, 2013, and any persons filling vacancies in such offices shall continue to serve as such members until the second Monday of January, 2014, and then all such offices shall be abolished and all terms of office shall expire. After the second Monday of January, 2013, no further elections shall be conducted to elect members of the board of commissioners of Bibb County and the mayor and members of the commission of the City of Macon and all elections for the mayor and the members of the commission shall be conducted pursuant to this charter. 
(b)  The initial mayor shall be elected in a nonpartisan election to be held on the third Tuesday in July, 2013. Candidates shall be elected by majority vote as provided in this section. The person elected as mayor at such election shall take office on the second Tuesday of January, 2014, for an initial term of three years and until a successor is elected and qualified. Thereafter, each successor to the office of mayor shall be elected at the general nonpartisan election to be held on the third Tuesday in July immediately preceding the expiration of a term of office, shall take office on the first day of January immediately following the date of the election, and shall have a term of office of four years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be elected by a majority vote on a county-wide basis by the electors of the entire county. 
(c)  To be eligible for election to the office of mayor, a person at the time of election shall: 
(1)  Have attained the age of 27 years; 
(2)  Have resided in Macon-Bibb County for at least one year; 
(3)  Be a qualified elector of the restructured government; and 
(4)  Meet any other requirements as may be established by general law. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all elections for the mayor and members of the commission shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code,' as now or hereafter amended. Any person who is a registered voter of Macon-Bibb County shall be eligible to vote in any election under this section. 
(e)  The mayor shall be limited to serving a total of no more than two four-year terms. Each commission member shall be limited to serving a total of three four-year terms. An initial term of less than four years shall nevertheless be deemed a full term for purposes of this subsection. Prior service as an officer of the City of Macon or Bibb County shall not be computed for such limitations. 
SECTION 11. - . 
(a)  The commission shall provide by ordinance for the execution of all powers, functions, rights, privileges, duties, and immunities of the restructured government and its officers, agencies, or employees as provided by this charter or general state law. 
(b)  Without limiting the general legislative powers of the commission, it is empowered to: 
(1)  Adopt all annual appropriations for the restructured government by ordinance and any supplements or amendments the commission deems necessary from time to time during the fiscal year; 
(2)  Adopt, by ordinance, a fiscal year for the restructured government and each of its departments, boards, or other agencies and any other ordinances for the regulation and management of the financial affairs of the restructured government it deems necessary; 
(3)  Adopt, by ordinance, provisions for governmental reorganization including the establishment, alteration, or abolishment of any and all nonelective offices, positions, departments, and agencies of the restructured government unless otherwise established or provided by this charter; 
(4)  Adopt ordinances establishing any and all personnel policies it deems necessary for an adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs; 
(5)  Make adjustments, by ordinance, to the boundaries of commission districts of the restructured government as provided in Section 9 of this charter; 
(6)  Establish committees of its members for legislative, investigative, and study purposes without the need for approval of the mayor; 
(7)  Establish and appoint any board or commission of citizens to advise the commission as it deems necessary without the need for approval by the mayor; provided, however, that the term of such boards or commissions shall automatically expire at the end of the term of office of the commission who appointed same, if not earlier abolished by the commission; 
(8)  Grant franchises or make contract for, or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards, and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(9)  Provide for the collection of residential solid waste throughout Macon-Bibb County; and 
(10)  Adopt any other ordinance, resolution, or amendment to this charter as is allowed or not denied now or hereafter under general state law or this charter and exercise any other power as may be provided now or hereafter under general state law, this charter, or ordinance. 
SECTION 12. - . 
The commission shall, upon the approval of the mayor and five commissioners or the approval of six commissioners, provide for an independent annual audit of all restructured government accounts and may provide for more frequent or continuing audits as it deems necessary. Audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants who has no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the restructured government or any of its officers. The commission may designate the accountant or firm annually, provided that the designation for any particular fiscal year shall be made no later than 30 days after the beginning of the fiscal year. The commission may also provide for special independent audits of any office, department, board, commission, or other agency of the restructured government without the need for approval by the mayor. 
SECTION 13. 
The commission, upon the approval of the mayor and five commissioners or upon the approval of six commissioners, may initiate inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the restructured government and the conduct of any department, office, or agency of the restructured government or any joint or independent commission, board, or authority of the restructured government. Any participant in any hearing authorized may request that such hearing be closed to the public and all reports to the commission of the result of any inquiry or investigation by an authorized committee may be closed to the public; provided, however, that all such hearings shall be subject to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., relating to open and public meetings. Any action taken by the commission as a result of such inquiry or investigation shall be taken at and during an open meeting. 
SECTION 14. 
(a)  All of the executive powers of the restructured government are vested in the mayor. The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of Macon-Bibb County and shall be responsible for execution of the laws and policies of the restructured government and applicable state and federal laws. The mayor shall possess and exercise the following executive and administrative powers and duties: 
(1)  To see that the ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the restructured government and laws of this state are faithfully executed and enforced; 
(2)  To exercise supervision over the executive and administrative affairs of the restructured government and to provide for the coordination of executive and administrative activities; 
(3)  In addition to the appointments provided for in Section 16 of this charter, to appoint department heads, subject to the approval of a majority of the commission, to serve at the pleasure of the mayor; 
(4)  To sign and approve deeds, bonds, contracts, and other instruments and documents in any case in which the legal instruments must be in writing or where the general laws of this state or ordinance or resolution of the commission so require; 
(5)  To submit to the commission annually a draft of the recommended appropriations ordinance, the budget message, and the budget report and to submit annually to the commission a capital improvement program; 
(6)  To conduct studies and investigations and to make recommendations to the commission for legislation concerning all matters relating to the restructured government and the welfare of its citizens; 
(7)  To represent the restructured government in its intergovernmental relations; 
(8)  To appoint the attorney, fire chief, municipal county judge, and county manager for the restructured government, with the approval of a majority of the commission, who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor; 
(9)  To provide an annual financial audit of all authorities and provide a report of such audit to the commission; and 
(10)  To perform any other duties as may be required by law, ordinance, or resolution. 
(b)  (1)  Every ordinance adopted by the commissioners shall be presented promptly by the clerk of commission to the mayor after its adoption. 
(2)  The mayor, within ten calendar days of receipt of an ordinance, shall return it to the clerk of commission with or without the mayor's approval or with the mayor's disapproval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the clerk of commission; if the ordinance is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 Noon on the tenth calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the commissioners through the clerk of commission a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The clerk of commission shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(3)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the clerk of commission to the commissioners at their next meeting. If the commissioners then or at their next meeting adopt the ordinance by an affirmative vote of at least six members, it shall become law. 
(4)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the commissioners over the mayor's veto as provided in this subsection. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the commissioners as though disapproved and shall not become law unless overridden by the commissioners as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection. 
(c)  The mayor shall be considered full time and he or she shall receive an annual salary of $100,000.00. In addition, the mayor shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in the performance of his or her official duties, subject to appropriations. Future changes in the salary and expenses of the mayor shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Code Section 36-35-4 of the O.C.G.A. and in accordance with the procedures of Code Section 36-5-24 of the O.C.G.A.; provided, however, that any increase in the salary or compensation of the mayor shall equal no more than one-half of the average percentage salary increase granted by the governing authority to restructured government employees over the last preceding three years. 
(d)  For purposes of eligibility to receive employee benefits, the mayor shall be deemed to be a full-time employee. 
SECTION 15. 
(a)  In the event that the office of mayor or any commissioner shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the commission or those remaining shall, by resolution, order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of that office. 
(b)  If, however, the vacancy in any commission seat occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the commission or those remaining may, within 20 days of the occurrence of the vacancy, appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. 
(c)  If, however, a vacancy in the office of the mayor occurs, the mayor pro tempore shall be acting mayor with all the powers and duties of that office until a successor is elected and qualified, and if the vacancy in the office of the mayor occurs within 12 months of expiration of the term of that office, the mayor pro tempore shall succeed to the office of the mayor for the remainder of the term and the commission seat of such person shall be filled in accordance with this section. 
SECTION 16. 
(a)  (1)  The mayor shall, subject to the approval of a majority of the commission, appoint an officer whose title shall be county manager who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The county manager officer shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. The county manager officer shall hold a master's degree in public or business administration or a related field and shall have at least four years' experience in public administration or in business management in the private sector or shall hold a bachelor's degree in public or business administration or a related field and shall have at least eight years' experience in public administration or in business management in the private sector. Such person need not be a resident of Macon-Bibb County or the State of Georgia at the time of appointment. 
(2)  The mayor shall, subject to a majority vote of all commissioners then serving, appoint a clerk of commission who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The clerk of commission may also serve as clerk of the restructured government or on any other positions he or she may be appointed to in the restructured government. 
(3)  The clerk of the commission shall attend all meetings of the commission; keep the minutes, rules, and records of the commission; provide notice of meetings; and perform other duties required by the commission or by ordinance. The compensation of the clerk shall be as fixed by the commission. 
(4)  The chief of the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the commission, shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor, and shall perform his or her official duties as the chief firefighter throughout the entire limits of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  The county manager officer shall have the following powers, duties, and responsibilities: 
(1)  To serve as director of the department of administration; 
(2)  To advise and assist the mayor in the performance of designated duties; 
(3)  To coordinate the activities of the departments of the restructured government; 
(4)  To serve as a liaison between the mayor and the departments of the restructured government; 
(5)  To carry out the written directives of the mayor; provided, however, that the mayor shall not be authorized to delegate to the chief administrative officer any of the powers or duties conferred upon the mayor by charter or by ordinance; 
(6)  To make periodic reports with any recommendations to the mayor as required by the mayor or as he or she deems appropriate concerning the affairs of the restructured government; and 
(7)  To perform any other duties as shall be required by the mayor. 
(c)  Except for the purpose of inquiry and investigation, the commission shall deal with employees of the unified government other than those who are subject to appointment and removal by the mayor solely through the county manager and shall not give orders or directions to any such employee, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. 
(d)  There shall be an attorney for the restructured government who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the commission and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. Such person shall be an active member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing and shall have been engaged in the active practice of law for at least five years prior to the date of appointment. The attorney shall be legal counsel to the restructured government and perform any other duties as may be provided by ordinance. Such person shall be responsible to the mayor and to the commission. The compensation of the attorney shall be as prescribed by a duly adopted ordinance. The attorney shall recommend legal counsel to all authorities of the restructured government when needed except as otherwise instructed by the mayor. 
(e)  (1)  There shall be a finance officer who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the commission and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(2)  The finance officer shall perform financial duties for the restructured government and any other duties as may be provided by ordinance. Such person shall be responsible to the mayor and to the commission. 
SECTION 17. 
(a)  The newly elected mayor and commissioners shall take office and meet for organization and swearing-in ceremonies on the second Tuesday of January following their election. There shall be a committee on committees made up of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore, and an additional commissioner appointed by the mayor and the mayor pro tempore. The committee on committees shall create, abolish, and appoint all committees and the membership thereof. The mayor and the mayor pro tempore shall not be a voting member of any committee established by the committee or committees. At this meeting, the newly organized commission shall make any appointments and selections as may be required by this charter. 
(b)  At the meeting provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the newly elected mayor and commissioners shall each qualify to take office by taking the oath of office for public officials as provided by state law and the following oath: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will well and truly perform the duties of (mayor or commissioner, as the case may be) by adopting such measures as in my judgment shall be best calculated to promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of Macon-Bibb County and the common interest thereof." 
SECTION 18. 
No person shall fill a vacancy for an unexpired term by appointment of the commission unless that person receives a majority of the votes of all commissioners then serving. 
SECTION 19. 
(a)  Six members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of ordinary business, but the affirmative vote of at least five members shall be required for the commission to take official action. Official action of the commission shall be entered upon its minutes. Any member of the commission shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. 
(b)  The commission may fix the date and time of regular meetings in the commission rules of procedure but there shall be at least one regular meeting each month. 
(c)  Special meetings of the commission may be held on call of the mayor pro tempore or a majority of all members of the commission. The mayor shall also be authorized to call special meetings regarding fiscal affairs or emergencies involving public safety. Notice of a special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. If, after diligent effort, personal service is not possible, notice shall be deemed to have been served if delivered to the residence of record of the member by a law enforcement officer who certifies that such delivery was made at least 24 hours prior to the convening of the meeting. This notice to commissioners shall not be required if all commissioners are present when the special meeting is called. This notice of any special meeting may be waived by a commissioner in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in the commissioner's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(d)  All meetings of the commission shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible 48 hours prior to the meetings. 
(e)  (1)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the commission may convene on call of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore, or a majority of all commissioners and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but this ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. It shall become effective upon adoption and approval or at any later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(2)  Such emergency meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
SECTION 20. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers and employees shall demonstrate by their example the highest standards of ethical conduct, to the end that the public may justifiably have trust and confidence in the integrity of government. They, as agents of public purpose, shall hold their offices or positions for the benefit of the public, shall recognize that the public interest is their primary concern, and shall faithfully discharge the duties of their offices regardless of personal consideration. 
(b)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the restructured government, any authority of the restructured government, or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction in which the person has a financial interest which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
(2)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which such person is engaged or is a member of without proper legal authorization or use that information to advance the financial or other private interest of such person or others; 
(3)  Accept any valuable gift from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in business dealings with the governmental body he or she is a member of or by which such person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any campaign; 
(4)  Represent private interests, other than his or her own, in any action or proceeding against the restructured government or any portion of its government; or 
(5)  Vote or otherwise actively participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract between the restructured government and any business or entity in which he or she has a substantial financial interest. 
(c)  Any elected or appointed officer or employee of the restructured government, any authority of the restructured government, or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who possesses or who acquires any financial interest as might reasonably tend to create a conflict with the public interest shall make full disclosure in writing to the appointing authority or the commission, in the case of a member of the commission, at any time a conflict becomes apparent. The disclosure statement shall be made a matter of public record and be filed with the clerk of commission. Any member of the commission who has any personal or private interest, indirect, financial, or otherwise, in any proposal before the commission shall disclose the interest in writing to the commission. The disclosure shall be made a matter of public record prior to the taking of any vote on the proposal. 
(d)  No elected member of the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County nor any company or business in which such elected member or a member of his or her immediate family presently has an interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties, shall do business with an authority associated with Macon-Bibb County nor an authority whose members in whole or in part are appointed by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County nor shall any member of an authority of the restructured government do business with an authority associated with Macon-Bibb County or an authority whose members in whole or in part are appointed by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County. 
(e)  No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the restructured government, any authority of the restructured government, or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by the restructured government for financial benefit, convenience, or profit except in ccordance with policies of the restructured government. 
(f)  Any violation of this charter which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render the contract or sale involved voidable and rescindable as to that party, at the option of the commission. 
(g)  Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any commissioner shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the government of Macon-Bibb County or otherwise be employed by Macon-Bibb County or any agency thereof during the term for which such official was elected, provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any elective office holder in office on the effective date of this charter. 
(h)  No person shall be hereafter appointed by the mayor, commission, or any member thereof, to any office, agency, or employment who is related within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity to the mayor or any member of the commission, nor shall any other board created by this charter or the head of any department of the restructured government hereafter appoint or employ any person who is so related to any member of such board or head of such department; nor shall any person be hereafter appointed or employed in any capacity on behalf of the restructured government who is so related to the person so appointing or employing him or her. 
(i)  Employees of Macon-Bibb County may individually exercise their right to vote and privately express their views as citizens, but no employee of Macon-Bibb County shall: 
(1)  Use his or her official authority or capacity for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election or nomination for office; or 
(2)  Directly or indirectly coerce, attempt to coerce, or command a state or local officer or employee to pay, lend, or contribute anything of value to a party, committee, organization, agency, or person for political purposes. 
(j)  (1)  A knowing violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of Macon-Bibb County who knowingly violates any requirement of this section shall upon conviction be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit the office or position. 
(3)  The appointing authority may reprimand, put on probation, demote, suspend, or discharge an employee or appointed officer found to have violated the standards of 3 conduct established by this section. 
SECTION 21. 
(a)  The general obligation bonded indebtedness of the City of Macon which is outstanding on the effective date of this charter shall become the debt and obligation of a special tax district which shall correspond to and be conterminous with the corporate limits of the City of Macon as said corporate limits existed on the day immediately preceding the effective date of this charter. The ad valorem taxes imposed by the City of Macon prior to the effective date of this charter to retire such bonded indebtedness shall continue to be imposed within the special tax district in the same manner and to the same extent that such ad valorem taxes were previously imposed by the City of Macon in accordance with the terms of the obligations of such bonded indebtedness. The commission, as the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County, shall be the successor to the previously existing governing authority of the City of Macon for all purposes relating to such bonded indebtedness, including the enforcement of rights and remedies of bondholders. 
(b)  The general obligation bonded indebtedness of Bibb County outstanding on the effective date of this charter shall not be affected by this charter, and the commission, as the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County, shall become the successor to the previously existing governing authority of Bibb County for all purposes relating to such bonded indebtedness, including the enforcement of rights and remedies of bondholders. 
(c)  Each special tax district created by this section shall cease to exist upon the full satisfaction of all relative bonded indebtedness, but not later than July 1, 2019. At the time the final special tax district ceases to exist, this section shall stand repealed. 
SECTION 22. 
(a)  Existing ordinances and resolutions of the board of commissioners of Bibb County and existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies thereof not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue to be effective as ordinances and resolutions of the commission and as rules and regulations of the appropriate department or agency thereof until they are modified or repealed. 
(b)  Existing ordinances and resolutions of the board of commissioners of Bibb County and existing rules and regulations of departments and agencies of Bibb County which, by their terms or by their operation, were applicable prior to the effective date of this charter throughout the territorial limits of Bibb County shall continue to be effective throughout the territorial limits of Bibb County until such time as the commission, by resolution or ordinance, modifies or repeals such ordinances, resolutions, or regulations. 
(c)  Existing ordinances and resolutions of the commission of the City of Macon which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue to be effective as ordinances and resolutions of the commission until they are modified or repealed. 
(d)  In the event of a conflict between any of the ordinances or resolutions continued by this section, the provisions thereof shall apply only to the territory of the restructured government that such ordinance or resolution applied to prior to the effective date of this charter and until such ordinance or resolution is repealed, changed, or amended to eliminate the conflict. 
(e)  Through December 1, 2013, all ordinances and resolutions shall apply uniformly throughout the area of the restructured government. Prior to this date, the transition task force created pursuant to Section 37 of this charter shall review all ordinances and resolutions and take whatever action is needed to remove any conflicts between ordinances and resolutions continued by this section in order to produce a uniform body of ordinances and resolutions free of any conflicts or contradictions between such provisions. 
SECTION 23. 
(a)  Until July 1, 2014, the restructured government shall operate under the funds remaining from the fiscal year 2013-2014 of the combined budgets of the City of Macon and Bibb County. The City of Macon and Bibb County shall adopt budgets for the period from July 1, 2013, and the date the consolidated government becomes effective. The finance departments of such entities shall develop a proposed budget for the consolidated government from the date such government is effective and the end of fiscal year 2014. 
(b)  (1)  The first full 12 month budget of the unified government for fiscal year 2015 shall not exceed an amount equal to the combined fiscal year general operating budgets of the City of Macon and Bibb County, plus any funds required by accounting standards to be dissolved and made part of the general fund and any increases due to inflation as specified in the Consumer Price Index, but not including capital road improvement and other special revenue funds including, without limitation, special purpose local option sales tax and transportation special purpose local option sales tax funds. 
(2)  The 12 month budget of the unified government for fiscal year 2016 shall not exceed an amount equal to 95 percent of the fiscal year 2015 general operating budget, plus increases due to inflation as specified in the Consumer Price Index, but not including capital road improvement and other special revenue funds. 
(3)  The 12 month budget of the unified government for fiscal year 2017 shall not exceed an amount equal to 90 percent of the fiscal year 2015 general operating budget, plus increases due to inflation as specified in the Consumer Price Index, but not including capital road improvement and other special revenue funds. 
(4)  The 12 month budget of the unified government for fiscal year 2018 shall not exceed an amount equal to 85 percent of the fiscal year 2015 general operating budget, plus increases due to inflation as specified in the Consumer Price Index, but not including capital road improvement and other special revenue funds. 
(5)  The 12 month budget of the unified government for fiscal year 2019 shall not exceed an amount equal to 80 percent of the fiscal year 2015 general operating budget, plus increases due to inflation as specified in the Consumer Price Index, but not including capital road improvement and other special revenue funds. 
(c)  The budget limits established by subsection (b) of this section may be exceeded by not more than 25 percent in any given year if extreme economic circumstances require or if additional expenditures for public safety purposes are needed but only by a vote of six of the nine commissioners at an open meeting after notice on the official website of Macon-Bibb County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the meeting and the hearing of public comments. 
(d)  The tax assessments made by the board of tax assessors of Bibb County and the City of Macon as of the effective date of this charter shall constitute the basis for the assessment and collection of taxes of the commission for the calendar year in which this charter becomes effective. 
SECTION 24. 
(a)  The commission may create special services tax districts and shall assess, levy, and collect ad valorem taxes and collect service charges and fees for the provision of district services within a special services district only in accordance with the kind, character, type, and degree of district services provided by the commission within such special services tax district. The provisions of this section shall control ad valorem taxation and the collection of service charges and fees for the provision of district services within special services tax districts by the commission. District services shall mean and include all of those governmental services enumerated in Article IX, Section II, Paragraph III of the Constitution. 
(b)  It is the purpose of this section that property shall be subject to taxation in relation to services received. 
(c)  Within four years of the effective date of this charter, the restructured government shall adopt a service delivery plan. 
SECTION 25. 
(a)  All employees and former employees of Bibb County and the City of Macon and of every agency, instrumentality, commission, or authority thereof shall retain those pension rights, if any, which had accrued to them prior to the effective date of this charter under any pension plan adopted by law or by ordinance or resolution by the board of commissioners of Bibb County or the mayor and commission of the City of Macon. The commission shall assume on the effective date of this charter all obligations arising under all such pension plans, but the assumption of such obligations by the commission shall not create any obligation on the part of the commission or create any right which did not exist prior to the effective date of this charter. 
(b)  The commission is authorized and empowered to establish and maintain a new pension system or pension systems affecting new employees and such other employees as desire to be covered thereby and to revise, combine, and consolidate any pension system in effect on the effective date of this charter; provided, however, that in no event shall any revision, combination, or unification of any existing pension system in effect when this charter is adopted result in the curtailment or diminishment of any right accrued under any existing pension system to any person heretofore employed by the City of Macon, Bibb County, or of any agency of such former governments. 
SECTION 26. 
(a)  (1)  The mayor shall submit to the commission at least six weeks prior to the start of the fiscal year a budget message and a budget report, accompanied by a draft of the recommended appropriations ordinance, in a form and manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, which shall provide for the appropriation of the funds necessary to operate all the various departments and to meet the current expenses of the restructured government for the next fiscal year. Such ordinance must be approved by a two-thirds' majority vote of the commissioners then serving. 
(2)  The commission shall annually appropriate the funds necessary to operate all the various departments and to meet the current expenses of the restructured government for the next fiscal year. The fiscal year of Macon-Bibb County shall be as determined by ordinance. 
(b)  (1)  Each appropriations ordinance, as enacted or as amended from time to time, shall continue in force and effect for the next fiscal year after adoption and it shall then expire except for any mandatory appropriations required to meet contractual obligations or the continued appropriation and authorization of state or federal grants. 
(2)  The commission shall not appropriate funds for any given fiscal year which, in aggregate, exceed a sum equal to the amount of unappropriated surplus expected to have accrued in the city treasury at the beginning of the fiscal year, together with an amount not greater than the total receipts from existing revenue sources anticipated to be collected in the fiscal year as determined by the mayor, less refunds as estimated in the budget report and amendments thereto. 
(3)  All appropriated funds, except for the mandatory appropriations required by law and those required to meet contractual obligations or the continued appropriation and authorization of state or federal grants, remaining unexpended and not contractually obligated at the expiration of the appropriations ordinance shall lapse. 
(4)  All state or federal funds received by Macon-Bibb County are by this charter continually appropriated in the exact amounts and for the purposes authorized and directed by the state or federal government in making the grant. 
(c)  (1)  In addition to the appropriations made by the appropriations ordinance and amendments thereto, the commission may make additional appropriations in the same manner as provided in this charter, which shall be known as supplementary appropriations ordinances, provided that no supplementary appropriation shall be made unless there is an unappropriated surplus in the treasury of the restructured government or the revenue necessary to pay the appropriation has been collected into the general fund of the treasury as provided by law. 
(2)  In no event shall a supplementary appropriations ordinance continue in force and effect beyond the expiration of the appropriations ordinance in effect when the supplementary appropriations ordinance was adopted and approved. 
(d)  (1)  The appropriation for each department, office, bureau, board, commission, function, or line item for which appropriation is made shall be for a specific amount of money and no appropriation shall allocate to any object the proceeds of any particular tax or fund or a part or percentage thereof. All appropriations by function or line item shall be lump sum by function or line item. 
(2)  Any appropriation made in conflict with the foregoing provisions shall be void. 
SECTION 27. 
(a)  The commission shall prescribe, by ordinance, the procedures to be followed in the making of contracts which shall bind the restructured government. All contracts and all ordinances which shall make or authorize contracts shall be approved as to form by the attorney for the restructured government. The mayor shall sign and authorize all contracts; provided, however, the commission may authorize the mayor, by ordinance, to designate another appropriate official to sign any type of contract. The clerk of commission shall authenticate all contracts. The original of all contracts shall be maintained on file in the office of the clerk of commission. 
(b)  The commission shall prescribe, by ordinance, the procedures for all purchases of real and personal property by the restructured government. Competitive bidding shall be required for purchases and contracts and awards shall be made to the lowest or best bidder; provided, however, that the commission by ordinance may authorize the purchase of goods, materials, supplies, equipment, and services without the receipt of formal sealed bids where the price does not exceed a specified dollar amount. Prior to the making of purchases and contracts, the availability of adequate funds shall be certified as provided by ordinance. 
(c)  The commission shall prescribe, by ordinance, the procedures for all sales and other disposition of real and personal property by restructured government. 
SECTION 28. 
(a)  On the effective date of this charter, the Board of Public Education and Orphanage for Bibb County established pursuant to an Act approved August 23, 1872 (Ga. L. 1872, p. 388), as amended, shall continue in the exercise of its functions and duties, subject to the provisions of law applicable thereto and subject to the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  The Board of Public Education and Orphanage for Bibb County shall annually certify to the commission of Macon-Bibb County a school tax for the support and maintenance of education in Macon-Bibb County. The commission shall annually levy said tax upon the assessed value of all taxable property within Macon-Bibb County and collect the same like other taxes of the restructured government. The levy made by the board of education and certified to the commission shall not exceed 22 mills per dollar unless such mill limitation shall be increased or removed in the manner provided by law. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of local law, the Board of Public Education and Orphanage for Bibb County shall not be required to submit to the commission of Macon-Bibb County a copy of the school budget which is prepared pursuant to the provisions of Part 4 of Article 6 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the O.C.G.A. as the same is now or hereafter amended. 
SECTION 29. 
(a)  Macon-Bibb County shall have power and authority to levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation and to levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law. 
(b)  (1)  The commission, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate within the limits provided in subsection (a) of this section for the restructured government property tax; a due date; and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. 
(2)  The commission, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due and provide for interest on late installments. 
(c)  (1)  Macon-Bibb County shall have the power to levy any occupation or business taxes as are not prohibited by general state law. These taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in Macon-Bibb County or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent the persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to Macon-Bibb County to be so taxed. These taxes may be levied and imposed on a fixed rate or gross receipts basis or any combination thereof. The commission may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of these taxes in any manner as is reasonable and payment of these taxes may be compelled as provided in subsection (i) of this section. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no occupation or business tax based on gross receipts shall be levied and imposed prior to the holding of a special public hearing thereon, and in no event shall the total revenue received from the imposition of an occupation or business tax based on gross receipts exceed in its first year the total revenue received the immediately preceding year from the occupation and business taxes levied. 
(d)  Macon-Bibb County shall have the power to require individuals or corporations who transact business in Macon-Bibb County or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for these activities from Macon-Bibb County and to pay a reasonable fee for the license or permit where the activities are not now regulated by general state law in such a way as to preclude regulation by Macon-Bibb County. These fees may reflect the total cost to Macon-Bibb County of regulating the activity and if unpaid shall be collected as provided in subsection (i) of this section. The commission by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
(e)  Macon-Bibb County shall have power and authority to impose and collect license fees and taxes on life insurance companies in the manner provided by Code Section 33-8-8.1 of the O.C.G.A. and on fire and casualty insurance companies in the manner provided by Code Section 33-8-8.2 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended. 
(f)  Macon-Bibb County shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer, sanitary and health services, and garbage and solid waste collection and disposal services, or any other services rendered inside and outside the corporate limits of Macon-Bibb County for the total cost to Macon-Bibb County of providing these services. If unpaid, these charges or fees shall be collected as provided in subsection (i) of this section. 
(g)  Macon-Bibb County shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under any terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, these charges shall be collected as provided in subsection (i) of this section. 
(h)  Macon-Bibb County shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by state law and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of Macon-Bibb County to tax or otherwise govern its local affairs. 
(i)  The commission, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due Macon-Bibb County under this charter or general state law by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general state law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes, fees, or other revenues are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi.fa's.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes, fees, and other revenues personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes, fees, or other revenues imposed; revoking licenses issued by Macon-Bibb County for failure to pay any Macon-Bibb County taxes, fees, or other revenues; allowing exceptions for hardship; providing for the assignment or transfer of executions and collection of transferred executions; providing for the billing and collecting of principal, interest, and costs of delinquent executions as an addition to and a part of the annual ad valorem tax bill issued by the Macon-Bibb County tax commissioner. 
(j)  The commission, by ordinance, shall prescribe the amount and terms of surety bonds conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of office of any officer or employee of Macon-Bibb County charged with the responsibility of handling moneys on a regular basis. 
(k)  Macon-Bibb County shall have all power granted by general law to issue general obligation bonds. Such issuance shall be accomplished in the manner provided by general law. 
(l)  Macon-Bibb County shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. This bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the item the issue is undertaken. 
(m)  Revenue bonds may be issued by Macon-Bibb County as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be repaid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
(n)  Macon-Bibb County may issue short-term notes as now or hereafter provided by state law. 
(o)  (1)  In order to facilitate the financing of any improvements authorized by law, Macon-Bibb County may issue bonds of Macon-Bibb County in the aggregate amount of assessments for the improvement then unpaid, which bond or bonds and the interest thereon shall in no event become a liability of Macon-Bibb County or the mayor and the commission issuing them. 
(2)  These bonds shall mature at a date and bear an interest rate as the commission may determine by ordinance but in no event shall the rate of interest exceed that which the assessments are to bear. 
(3)  These bonds shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk of commission, shall have the impression of the corporate seal of Macon-Bibb County thereon, and shall be payable at a place designated by ordinance. 
(4)  These bonds shall be designated as improvement bonds and shall, on the face thereof, recite the nature and location of the improvement for which they have been issued and shall recite that they are payable solely from assessments which have been levied upon the lots and tracts of land abutting upon or being the situs of the improvement made. 
(5)  These bonds shall be sold at not less than par and the proceeds thereof applied to the payment of the costs and expense of the improvement for which the bonds were issued, or the bonds, in the amount that shall be necessary for that purpose, may be turned over and delivered to the contractor, in respect to the improvement at par value, in payment of the amount due on the contract, and the portion thereof which shall be necessary to pay other expenses, incident to and incurred in providing for the improvement, shall be sold or otherwise disposed of as the commission by ordinance shall direct. 
SECTION 30. 
(a)  The sheriff of Bibb County in office upon the date the governing authority of the restructured government is installed shall become the sheriff and chief law enforcement officer of Macon-Bibb County. He or she shall serve for the same term and his or her compensation shall be fixed as heretofore provided by law. Subsequent elections for sheriff shall be upon the basis provided by state law for sheriffs generally. The sheriff of Macon-Bibb County shall execute the orders and processes of the courts, shall enforce executions issued by any officer or agency of Macon-Bibb County, shall maintain and operate the jail wherein state or federal prisoners are incarcerated, be responsible for the transport of prisoners, and shall perform such other duties as are provided for in Code Section 15-16-10 of the O.C.G.A. and the Constitution of this state. 
(b)  (1)  The commission shall utilize the facilities, equipment, vehicles, records, and personnel of both the former Macon Police Department and the Bibb County Sheriff's Department in such manner as it shall deem necessary to ensure adequate protection of the lives and property of all of the citizens of Macon-Bibb County. 
(2)  The commission in cooperation with the chief shall utilize the facilities, equipment, vehicles, records, and personnel of both the former Macon Fire Department and the Bibb County Fire Department in such manner as it shall deem necessary to ensure the most advantageous rating classification of the commercial, residential, and public property in Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the administrative and service departments of the restructured government shall be created and established by ordinance and shall perform such functions, duties, services, and responsibilities as enumerated therein and as prescribed by administrative regulations. 
(d)  The commission may by ordinance reorganize, combine, consolidate, or discontinue any department or agency of the restructured government subject to the jurisdiction of the commission and may by ordinance prescribe the functions and duties thereof and may establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices and positions of employment as necessary for the proper administration of the restructured government. 
(e)  Except as provided by this charter or prohibited by the general laws of this state, all members of all boards, commissions, committees, panels, authorities, or other entities who were appointed by the board of commissioners of Bibb County or the governing authority of the City of Macon shall serve out the term of office to which such members were appointed. Except as provided by this charter or prohibited by the general laws of this state, the positions of director or administrative head, by whatever name known, of each department or entity of the governments of Bibb County and the City of Macon shall be abolished 90 days after the members of the commission take office under this charter. Such departments may be abolished, reestablished, reorganized, or restructured; new job descriptions shall be established as appropriate; and a director or administrative head shall be appointed for each department by the mayor. Any person who formerly occupied such position and any other person shall have the right to apply for any position thus created. The provisions of this subsection shall not result in the automatic termination from employment with the reorganized government of any such person and the provisions of Section 14 of this charter shall be applicable to any such person. On or after January 1, 2016, no person shall be eligible for appointment to any position as the administrative head of any department or agency of the restructured government unless such person meets such qualifications as may be established by the mayor. Each person serving as the administrative head of any department or agency of the restructured government shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provision of this charter to the contrary, the Macon-Bibb County Hospital Authority shall continue to exist as provided by Article 4 of Chapter 7 of Title 31 of the O.C.G.A., the "Hospital Authorities Law," as now or hereafter amended, and the ordinances and resolutions activating such authority on the effective date of this charter; provided, however, that appointments and the filling of vacancies on such authority shall be made by the commission of Macon-Bibb County in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances, and resolutions. 
SECTION 31. 
(a)  The commission shall establish by ordinance a system of civil service for employees of the fire department which shall provide for the establishment of a civil service board to orally interview and pass judgment upon the qualifications of applicants and candidates for promotion; provided, however, that eligible personnel of the city police department shall be covered by the Bibb County Police Civil Service System established by an Act approved March 5, 1955 (Ga. L. 1955, p. 682), as now or hereafter amended. The sheriff may elect to include eligible employees of the sheriff's office in such civil service system. To provide for requirements for selections, training, promotion, physical condition, and appeal procedures and other related matters, the commission shall adopt civil service rules and regulations to govern and control the fire department. 
(b)  The commission shall establish by ordinance a personnel management system based on merit principles that meets the social, economic, and program needs of the people of Macon-Bibb County. This system shall provide means to recruit, select, train, develop, and maintain an effective and responsive work force and shall include policies and guidelines for employing, hiring and advancement, training and career development, job classification, discharge, code of conduct, fringe benefits, and other related activities. All appointments and promotions in Macon-Bibb County shall be made without regard to sex, race, religion, national origin, age, or political affiliation and shall be based on merit and fitness. 
(c)  It is the intent of the General Assembly that as many employees of Bibb County and the City of Macon as feasible shall continue in the same or a substantially equal position with at least the same salary and benefit level, where possible within budget constraints, after the consolidation is complete. It is further the intent of the General Assembly that the integration of the sheriff's office and the city police department shall be seamless and cooperative and that where possible the rights and positions of all employees shall be respected. 
SECTION 32. 
(a)  The commission shall afford equal opportunities for employment and promotion to all persons regardless of sex, race, religion, national origin, age, or political affiliation. 
(b)  It shall be the policy of the commission that all citizens shall have equal opportunity for employment, promotion, and appointment by the commission. It shall further be the express policy of the commission that all persons shall have equal opportunity for conducting business with the commission to the greatest extent possible. 
(c)  In furtherance of the policies stated in subsection (b) of this section, and subject to the availability of funds, there is created and established the Office of Small Business Affairs as an agency of the consolidated government. 
(d)  The purposes for which the Office of Small Business Affairs is established shall include the following: 
(1)  To promote, stimulate, develop, and advance the economic growth of small businesses within Macon-Bibb County and thereby promote, stimulate, develop, and advance the business, prosperity, and economic welfare of the entire county; 
(2)  To stimulate and assist in the expansion of all kinds of small business activity which will tend to promote small business development; 
(3)  To cooperate and act in conjunction with other organizations, public or private, in the promotion of small business development in Macon-Bibb County; and 
(4)  To promote economic literacy among low-wealth citizens of Macon-Bibb County. 
(e)  In furtherance of its purposes, the Office of Small Business Affairs shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To provide technical advice and assistance for both public and private sources of contract opportunities for small businesses; 
(2)  To monitor the progress and improvement of small business and minority business owners' access to business with local government authorities and other publicly financed entities; 
(3)  To implement procedures and promulgate rules and regulations to increase procurement opportunities extended to the small business and minority business community and to provide direct assistance to small business and minority businesses on how government and private contracting processes work; 
(4)  To encourage small business and minority business participation in the public sector; 
(5)  To operate an economic development program designed to transition persons who are receiving public assistance to gainful employment; 
(6)  To construct or establish the necessary legal mechanism to be able to apply for and to accept any gifts, bequests, or grants or loans of funds or property or financial or other aid in any form from the federal government or agency or instrumentality thereof or from the state or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from any other source for any or all of the purposes specified in this section and to comply with the terms and conditions thereof; 
(7)  To review governmental policies and recommend changes to ensure fair participation by small businesses and minority businesses in contract bidding; 
(8)  To randomly and statistically review purchase orders and bids to ensure compliance with fair participation by small businesses and minority businesses in government contracts; 
(9)  To ensure that bid specifications do not discriminate against small businesses and minority businesses; 
(10)  To work with local agencies in assisting small businesses and minority businesses in bid application and funding available for doing business with the governing authority; 
(11)  To manage and recommend economic development assistance to small businesses and minority businesses from governing authority economic development funds; 
(12)  To work with local agencies in determining and coordinating all sources of education and financial assistance available to small business and minority business owners; 
(13)  To encourage contractors and large bidders to include small businesses and minority businesses among their subcontractors; 
(14)  To maintain statistical information to ensure that small business and minority business participation is improving in contracts with the commission and issue an annual report; and 
(15)  To establish a mentor program where proactive businesses which have pledged increased minority business relationships can assist minority businesses in doing business with government and the private sector. 
(f)  The Office of Small Business Affairs shall be under the direction and supervision of a director appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the commissioners. The director shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To appoint assistants, clerks, and other employees as the director may deem necessary within constraints of the budget; 
(2)  To furnish technical advice and assistance with respect to small business economic development to further the purposes of this section; 
(3)  To render monthly written reports to the commission. The reports may contain recommendations of the director for legislative or other action to effectuate the purposes of this section; 
(4)  To act as a liaison between community based groups, small businesses and minority businesses, government agencies, community development corporations, and the private sector; and 
(5)  To request from any state or local governmental agency or department such reports and information at such times as it may deem reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. 
SECTION 33. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter or applicable state law, all boards, commissions, and authorities of the City of Macon and Bibb County shall continue in the exercise of their functions and duties, subject to the provisions of laws applicable thereto and subject to the provisions of this charter. As used in the Acts and amendments creating the existing boards, commissions, and authorities of the City of Macon and Bibb County, the terms 'Macon City Council' and 'Bibb County Board of Commissioners' shall mean the commission of Macon-Bibb County and the term 'mayor of Macon' shall mean the 'mayor of Macon-Bibb County.' 
(b)  Where the enabling legislation or ordinance of a board, commission, retirement committee, or authority calls for a membership position or appointment authority for the mayor of the City of Macon, Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County, or the Board of commissioners of Bibb County, the term: 
(1)  'Mayor of the City of Macon' shall be construed to refer to the mayor of Macon-Bibb County; 
(2)  'Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County' shall be construed to mean the mayor of Macon-Bibb County; 
(3)  'City Council of the City of Macon' and 'Board of Commissioners of Bibb County' shall be construed to refer to the Macon-Bibb County Commission; 
(4)  'City councilmember' shall be construed to refer to members of the Macon-Bibb County Commission; and 
(5)  'President of the Macon City Council' shall be construed to refer to the mayor pro tem of Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter or applicable state law, any vacancy in the office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the restructured government shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment, except as otherwise provided in this charter or by applicable state law. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter or applicable state law, members of all boards, commissions, and authorities of the restructured government shall be limited to two consecutive full terms of office on such boards, commissions, and authorities. Filling more than one-half of an unexpired term of office shall constitute a full term of office. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter or applicable state law, members of all boards, commissions, and authorities of the restructured government shall serve four-year terms of office unless otherwise provided in this charter or applicable state law, provided that such members are subject to removal at any time by the appointing authority. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter or applicable state law, no board, commission, or authority shall create any other entity or subsidiary whatsoever without first obtaining approval by a two-thirds' vote of the commission of Macon-Bibb County. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter or applicable state law, the commission is authorized to review and dissolve at its discretion any entity to which this section is applicable that was created prior to the effective date of this charter by two-thirds' vote of the members then serving. 
SECTION 34. 
All officers, officials, and employees of the former City of Macon and Bibb County shall cooperate with and assist the commission, mayor, and other officers of Macon-Bibb County: 
(1)  In planning the restructuring of departments, boards, commissions, and agencies of said former governments and in transferring the functions, duties, and responsibilities of such departments, boards, commissions, authorities, and agencies to the appropriate agencies of the restructured government of Macon-Bibb County; and 
(2)  In all other respects in order that the transfer of the governments be accomplished in the most orderly manner possible. The officers of the restructured government shall be entitled to examine all records, files, and other data in the possession of the former governments and of all officers, officials, employees, and departments thereof. The former governments shall to the extent possible provide working areas and facilities for the officers of the restructured government. 
SECTION 35. 
This charter may be modified, rescinded, changed, or amended by only the following methods: 
(1)  An Act of the General Assembly of Georgia; or 
(2)  An ordinance adopted by the commission of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, as provided for in Article IX, Section II, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
SECTION 36. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, all contracts, orders, leases, bonds, and other obligations or instruments entered into by Bibb County or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof as obligations and rights of the restructured government; provided, however, any obligation created by Bibb County to become effective after the effective date of this charter shall be subject to ratification and approval by the commission of the restructured government within six months following the effective date of this charter. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, contracts, orders, leases, bonds, and other obligations or instruments entered into by the City of Macon or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof as obligations and rights of the restructured government; provided, however, any obligation created by the City of Macon to become effective after the date of approval of this charter and prior to the effective date of this charter shall be subject to ratification and approval by the commission of the restructured government within six months following the effective date of this charter. 
(c)  No pending action or proceeding of any nature, whether civil, criminal, judicial, administrative, or other, by or against the City of Macon or Bibb County or an agency or department thereof shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this charter, and the restructured government shall stand substituted as a party in lieu thereof. 
SECTION 37. 
(a)  Effective September 1, 2012, there is created a transition task force for the purpose of planning and preparing for the assumption of governmental powers by the restructured governing authority. The transition task force shall be composed of members as follows: 
(1)  The chairperson of the board of commissioners of Bibb County who shall be the co-chief executive officer of the task force; 
(2)  The chairperson of the finance committee of the board of commissioners of Bibb County; 
(3)  The chairperson of the finance committee of the city council of the City of Macon; 
(4)  The mayor of the City of Macon who shall be the co-chief executive officer of the task force; 
(5)  The president of the city council of the City of Macon; 
(6)  The president of the Bibb County Chamber of Commerce or his or her designee; 
(7)  The Macon City Police Chief; 
(8)  The chairperson of the Bibb County delegation in the General Assembly who shall serve as chairperson of the transition task force; 
(9)  The vice-chairperson of the Bibb County delegation in the General Assembly; 
(10)  The sheriff of Bibb County; and 
(11)  Five members appointed by the members of the General Assembly whose districts include all or any portion of Bibb County. 
The transition task force shall meet upon the call of the chairperson of the transition task force for the purpose of planning and scheduling the initial organization of the government in accordance with the applicable provisions of this charter. 
(b)  The transition task force shall be authorized to make such recommendations as it deems appropriate for the assumption of governmental powers by the commission. The transition task force is specifically charged with the responsibility of developing proposed ordinances which should be considered for adoption by the commission at its first regular meeting held following the second Tuesday in September, 2012, or at a regular meeting of the commission held as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(c)  All officers, officials, including elected officials, and employees of Bibb County and the City of Macon shall cooperate with and assist the transition task force. The transition task force shall be entitled to examine all records, files, and other data in the possession of Bibb County and the City of Macon and all officers, officials, and employees and departments thereof. Bibb County and the City of Macon shall, to the extent possible, provide working areas and facilities for the transition task force. 
(d)  The transition task force shall be authorized to receive and expend appropriations from the board of commissioners of Bibb County and from the mayor and commission of the City of Macon for the purpose of carrying out its duties, but members of the transition task force shall receive no compensation for their services as such members. 
(e)  During the period beginning on the date on which this charter is approved in the referendum provided for by Section 45 of this charter, it shall be the duty of the transition task force to recommend and the duty of the board of commissioners of Bibb County and the mayor and commission of the City of Macon to implement, where possible, such restructuring or reorganization of services, functions, powers, and duties as may be advantageous to the restructuring of such governments. 
(f)  The transition task force shall be abolished on the date specified by the commission. 
SECTION 38. 
On and after January 1, 2014, that portion of the City of Macon that is located in Jones County shall be treated as having been deannexed from the City of Macon and shall be an unincorporated area of Jones County. 
SECTION 39. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this charter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this charter, which shall remain of full force and effect as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this charter if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
SECTION 40. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of Bibb County shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of Bibb County for approval or rejection. The election superintendent shall conduct that election on the date of the general primary in 2012 and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Bibb County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES 
 ( ) NO 
Shall the Act restructuring the governments of the City of Macon, the City of Payne City, and Bibb County and creating a single county-wide government to supersede and replace these governments and providing for the termination of the terms of office of members of the governing authorities of Bibb County, the City of Macon, and the City of Payne City and which cuts short the terms of sitting commission members and county commissioners to be approved?" 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes in the county as a whole cast on such question are for approval of the Act and if more than one-half of the votes cast in the City of Macon on such question are for approval of the Act, this charter shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 2013. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, the remaining sections of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by Bibb County. It shall be the election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
SECTION 41. 
(a)  Sections 37 and 40 of this Act and this section shall become effective upon the approval of this Act by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
(b)  Except as provided in Section 39 of this Act, the remaining provisions of this Act shall become effective on January 1, 2014. 
SECTION 42. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Page 1 
Plan: bibbcon12-hd139p2r-rev2 
Plan Type: Local 
Administrator: Bibb Co. 
User: Gina 
District 001 
Bibb County 
VTD: 021HO3 - HOWARD 3 
VTD: 021HO6 - HOWARD 6 
VTD: 021HO7 - HOWARD 7 
VTD: 021HO8 - HOWARD 8 
VTD: 021HO9 - HOWARD 9 
013408: 
1016 1017 1018 1030 1031 
013410: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1040 1041 1042 3029 
3030 
013411: 
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2021 2022 2036 
District 002 
Bibb County 
VTD: 021EM1 - EAST MACON 1 
VTD: 021EM4 - EAST MACON 4 
011000: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 
1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 2000 
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 3000 
3004 3005 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 4003 4004 
4005 4006 4007 4008 4009 
VTD: 021GF1 - GODFREY 1 
010800: 
1070 1071 
011500: 
1000 1001 1005 
013700: 
1059 1060 1061 1065 1066 1067 1070 1071 1072 1073 1074 1075 
1077 1078 1079 1080 1081 1082 1083 1084 1085 1086 1087 1088 
1089 1090 1098 1107 1110 1112 1117 1118 1120 1121 1122 1123 
1124 1125 1126 1127 1128 1129 1130 1131 1132 1133 1134 1135 
1136 1137 1138 1139 1140 1141 1142 1143 1144 1145 1146 1147 
1148 1149 1150 1151 1152 1153 1154 1155 1156 1157 1158 1159 
1160 1161 1162 1163 1164 1165 1166 1167 1168 1169 1170 1171 
1172 1173 1174 1175 1176 1177 1178 1179 1180 1181 1182 1183 
1184 1185 1186 1187 1188 1189 1190 1191 1192 1193 1194 1195 
1196 1197 1198 1199 1200 1201 1202 1203 1204 1205 1206 1207 
1208 1209 1210 1211 1212 1213 1214 1215 1216 1217 1218 1219 
1220 1221 1222 1223 1224 1225 1226 1227 1228 1229 1230 1231 
1232 1233 1234 1235 1236 1237 1238 1239 1240 1241 1242 1243 
1244 1245 1246 1247 1248 1249 1250 1251 1252 1253 1254 2021 
2022 2023 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 
3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 
3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019 3020 3021 3022 3023 3024 3025 
3026 3027 
013900: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 
1012 1013 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 
1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 
1041 1042 1043 1044 1045 1046 1047 1048 1049 1050 1051 1052 
1053 1054 1055 1056 1057 1058 1059 1060 1061 1062 1063 1064 
1065 1066 1067 1068 1069 1070 1071 1072 1073 1074 1076 1077 
1078 1079 1080 1081 1082 1083 1084 1085 1098 1203 1204 1205 
1206 1207 1208 1209 1210 1211 1212 1213 1224 1228 1229 1230 
1231 1232 1233 1234 1235 1236 1237 1238 
VTD: 021GF2 - GODFREY 2 
VTD: 021GF4 - GODFREY 4 
012700: 
2006 2007 2010 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 
2022 
012800: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 
1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 
012900: 
1000 2007 2008 2012 2013 2015 2016 
VTD: 021HO5 - HOWARD 5 
District 003 
Bibb County 
VTD: 021EM2 - EAST MACON 2 
VTD: 021EM3 - EAST MACON 3 
VTD: 021EM4 - EAST MACON 4 
011000: 
3001 3002 3003 3006 3007 3008 3009 4000 4001 5001 5002 5003 
Page 2 
5006 5007 5008 5009 5010 5011 5012 5013 5014 5015 5016 5017 
5018 5023 5024 5025 5026 5027 
VTD: 021EM5 - EAST MACON 5 
VTD: 021EM6 - EAST MACON 6 
VTD: 021RU2 - RUTLAND 2 
013502: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 
1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 
1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 
1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 1041 1042 1043 1044 1045 1046 1047 
1048 1049 1050 1051 1052 1053 1054 1055 1056 1057 1058 1059 
1060 1061 1062 1063 1064 1065 1066 1067 1068 1069 1070 1071 
1072 1073 1074 1075 1076 1077 1078 1079 1080 1081 1082 1083 
1084 1085 1086 1087 1088 1089 1090 1091 1092 1093 1094 1095 
1096 1097 1098 1099 1100 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 
013504: 
3017 3020 3021 3022 3023 3026 3027 4001 4002 4012 4013 
013900: 
1189 1192 1194 1195 1196 1197 1199 1200 1201 1214 1215 1216 
1217 1218 1219 
District 004 
Bibb County 
VTD: 021HA1 - HAZZARD 1 
013201: 
2004 2033 2035 2036 2047 2048 2049 
VTD: 021HA2 - HAZZARD 2 
VTD: 021HA3 - HAZZARD 3 
013201: 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2005 2006 2008 2009 2011 2020 2021 2022 
2028 2030 2031 2032 2034 2055 
013410: 
2022 2027 
013605: 
1005 1006 1007 1008 1010 1011 
VTD: 021HA7 - HAZZARD 7 
013409: 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2015 2016 
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 
013605: 
2015 
VTD: 021HO1 - HOWARD 1 
VTD: 021HO2 - HOWARD 2 
VTD: 021HO4 - HOWARD 4 
011800: 
3000 3001 3002 3003 3007 3008 3010 3011 3012 3013 4003 4005 
4009 4010 4011 4012 4013 4014 4015 4016 4017 4018 
012200: 
1000 
VTD: 021HO9 - HOWARD 9 
013410: 
1029 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3013 3027 3028 
013411: 
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2037 2038 2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 
2044 2045 2047 
District 005 
Bibb County 
VTD: 021GF1 - GODFREY 1 
010200: 
3019 
010300: 
1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 
1018 1019 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 
1033 1034 1035 1036 1040 1041 1042 1047 1048 1049 1050 1051 
1052 1053 1054 1055 1056 1057 1058 1059 1060 1061 1062 1063 
1064 1065 1066 1067 1068 1069 1070 1071 1072 1073 1074 1075 
1076 1078 
VTD: 021GF3 - GODFREY 3 
010400: 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 
2012 2013 2014 2022 2023 2024 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 
3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 
3018 4000 4001 4002 4003 4004 4005 4006 4007 4008 4009 4010 
4011 4012 4013 4014 4015 4016 4017 4018 4019 4020 4021 4022 
4023 4024 4025 4026 4027 4028 4029 4030 4031 4032 4033 4034 
4035 4036 4037 4038 4039 4040 4041 4042 4043 
012500: 
3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 
3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019 3024 3025 3028 3029 
3030 3031 3032 3033 
012600: 
Page 3 
2006 2017 2018 2019 
VTD: 021VV2 - VINEVILLE 2 
VTD: 021VV3 - VINEVILLE 3 
VTD: 021VV6 - VINEVILLE 6 
VTD: 021VV7 - VINEVILLE 7 
010200: 
3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 
3018 
011800: 
1007 1018 
VTD: 021VV8 - VINEVILLE 8 
District 006 
Bibb County 
VTD: 021HA1 - HAZZARD 1 
013201: 
2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 2046 2050 2051 
VTD: 021HA3 - HAZZARD 3 
013101: 
1069 1070 
013201: 
2007 2010 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2029 2052 2053 2054 4043 
013603: 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2036 2037 
2038 2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 
013604: 
2000 2001 2019 2020 2028 2029 2030 3000 3001 3002 3005 
013606: 
1010 1011 4000 4001 4002 4003 4004 4005 4006 4007 4008 4009 
4010 4011 4012 4013 4014 4015 4016 4017 4019 
VTD: 021HA4 - HAZZARD 4 
VTD: 021HA7 - HAZZARD 7 
013605: 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 
2012 2013 2014 
VTD: 021WA1 - WARRIOR 1 
VTD: 021WA2 - WARRIOR 2 
013101: 
1073 1074 1075 
013603: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1015 1016 1017 1029 1031 2046 
013604: 
1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1020 3003 3004 3006 
3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 
District 007 
Bibb County 
VTD: 021GF4 - GODFREY 4 
012900: 
1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 
1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 
1025 2005 2006 2014 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 
013900: 
1152 1153 1154 1170 1171 1179 1180 1181 1182 1183 1184 1185 
1186 1187 1188 1191 1226 
VTD: 021GF7 - GODFREY 7 
VTD: 021RU1 - RUTLAND 1 
VTD: 021RU2 - RUTLAND 2 
013504: 
3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3024 3025 4000 4003 4004 
4005 4006 4007 4008 4009 4010 4011 4014 4015 4016 4017 4018 
4019 4020 4021 4022 4023 4024 4025 4026 4027 4028 4029 4030 
4031 4032 4033 
VTD: 021WA2 - WARRIOR 2 
013603: 
1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1018 1019 1020 
1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1030 1032 1033 1034 
1035 1036 1037 1038 
District 008 
Bibb County 
VTD: 021GF1 - GODFREY 1 
010300: 
1020 1021 1022 1037 1038 1039 1043 1044 1045 1046 1077 
010400: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 
1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 
1024 2034 
010500: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 
1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 
Page 4 
1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1036 
1037 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 
011500: 
1002 1003 1004 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 2036 2037 2038 2039 
2040 2047 2048 2049 2056 2057 
013700: 
2009 2012 2017 2018 2019 2035 3000 3007 
VTD: 021GF3 - GODFREY 3 
010400: 
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 
2030 2031 2032 2033 
VTD: 021GF5 - GODFREY 5 
VTD: 021GF6 - GODFREY 6 
VTD: 021HA6 - HAZZARD 6 
013101: 
3000 3013 3025 
013102: 
4000 4001 4002 4003 4004 4005 4006 4007 4008 4009 4010 4011 
VTD: 021VV1 - VINEVILLE 1 
District 009 
Bibb County 
VTD: 021HA1 - HAZZARD 1 
012500: 
2016 3026 
013201: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 2012 2013 2017 2018 2019 2037 2038 
2039 3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 
3011 3012 4000 4001 4002 4016 4017 4018 4019 4020 4021 4022 
4028 4029 4030 4031 4033 4034 4035 4036 4037 4038 4039 4045 
4046 
VTD: 021HA3 - HAZZARD 3 
013201: 
4003 4004 4005 4006 4007 4008 4009 4010 4011 4012 4013 4014 
4015 4023 4024 4025 4032 4041 4042 
VTD: 021HA5 - HAZZARD 5 
VTD: 021HA6 - HAZZARD 6 
013101: 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 3001 3002 3003 3018 
3022 3026 
013202: 
1010 1014 1015 1017 1020 3011 
VTD: 021HO4 - HOWARD 4 
011800: 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 3004 3005 3006 3009 
4008 4019 
012000: 
3015 3016 3021 3022 
VTD: 021VV4 - VINEVILLE 4 
VTD: 021VV5 - VINEVILLE 5 
VTD: 021VV7 - VINEVILLE 7 
011800: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 
1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1019 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019 
3020 3021 
012200: 
1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1013 
012300: 
3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 
3012 
Charter Appendix I. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY PENSION PLAN[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Effective as of December 17, 1968, Bibb County, Georgia, established The Bibb County Pension Plan of 1968 (the "Plan"). The Plan was amended and restated effective as of January 1, 1989 and again effective January 1, 2011. Effective January 1, 2014, the Plan was amended to reflect the restructuring of Bibb County, Georgia and the City of Macon, Georgia governments into a new entity Macon-Bibb County, Georgia and sponsorship of the Plan was transferred to Macon-Bibb County (the "Employer"). Effective January 1, 2015, the Plan is again amended and restated to incorporate all Plan amendments since January 1, 2011, and for purposes of filing the Plan with the IRS for a favorable determination letter. The Plan is now referred to as the Macon-Bibb County Pension Plan. Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, adopted December 15, 2015 , further amended App. I, by repealing and replacing app. I, arts. 1—18, in its entirety. See Code Comparative Table for history of derivation. 
Except where noted, the provisions of this Plan shall apply only to Employees whose employment with the Employer terminates on or after January 1, 2015. If the Employee's employment with the Employer terminates prior to such date, the Employee shall be entitled to benefits under the Plan as the Plan existed on the date of the Employee's termination of employment, except where noted. 
The Plan is intended to satisfy Code Section 401(a) by meeting the requirements of Code Section 414(d). 
State Law reference— Power to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Const. Ga. Art. 9, Sec. 2, Par. 3 (a)(14); public retirement standards law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1 - DEFINITIONS 
Accrued Benefit means, subject to Article 12 of the Plan, the retirement benefit a Participant would receive at his Normal Retirement Date, determined under Section 5.02 of the Plan based on his Final Average Monthly Base Earnings and Years of Service at the date of determination. 
Accumulated Past Service Credit means the credit for years of employment with the Employer prior to the Original Effective Date (including Years of Service under the former fee system of compensation) and acquired and retained upon establishment of the Plan. 
Actuarial Equivalence or Actuarial Equivalent means, except as otherwise set forth herein, a benefit that has the same present value as the Regular Monthly Benefit on the date the benefit payment commences, based on a 7.5% interest rate and the following mortality table: 
1/1/1989 — 12/31/1994 — 1971 Group Annuity Mortality Table 
1/1/1996 — current — 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table 
Effective for distributions with annuity starting dates on or after January 1, 2003, and notwithstanding any other Plan provisions to the contrary, the applicable mortality table used for purposes of adjusting any benefit limitation under Code Section 415(b)(2)(B) (relating to the adjustment to the benefit limitation amount for forms of benefit other than a straight life annuity), Code Section 415(b)(2)(C) (relating to the adjustment to the benefit limitation where benefits begin before age 62), or Code Section 415(b)(2)(D) (relating to the adjustment to the benefit limitation where benefits begin after age 65), as set forth in Article 12 of the Plan, is the table prescribed in Rev. Rul. 2001-62. For any distribution with an annuity starting date on or after the effective date of this Section and before the adoption date of this Section, if application of the amendment as of the annuity starting date would have caused a reduction in the amount of any distribution, such reduction is not reflected in any payment made before the adoption date of this Section. However, the amount of any such reduction that is required under Code Section 415(b)(2)(B) (relating to the adjustment to the benefit limitation amount for forms of benefit other than a straight life annuity), must be reflected actuarially over any remaining payments to the Participant. 
Actuary means an actuary who is enrolled under Subtitle C of Title III of the federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, P.L. 93-406, or an Associate of the Society of Actuaries. 
Annuity Starting Date means the first day of the first period for which an amount is paid as an annuity or any other form. 
Authorized Leave of Absence means any absence authorized by the Employer under the Employer's standard personnel practices, provided that the Participant retires or returns on or before the expiration of the Authorized Leave of Absence. 
Base Earnings means the gross salary or wages paid by the Employer to the Employee during a specified twelve-month period, including Incentive Pay of Law Enforcement Participants, allowances computed by the Pension Trustee Board, and before-tax or salary deferral contributions made under Code Sections 125, 402(g)(3), 457, 132(f) or 414(h) to the Plan or any other plan of the Employer. Base Earnings does not include overtime pay, comp time or expense reimbursements. For Employees hired on and after June 15, 2005, Base Earnings also excludes accumulated vacation pay paid at Termination of Employment. Effective for plan years prior to June 7, 1994, Base Earnings meant total compensation. 
Except with respect to Qualified Participants (as defined below), in no event shall the Base Earnings of a Participant taken into account under the Plan for any Plan Year exceed (i) $200,000 for Plan Years beginning on or after January 1, 1989, (ii) $150,000 for Plan Years on or after the later of (a) January 1, 1996 or (b) the 90 th day after the opening of the first legislative session that begins on or after January 1, 1996, or (iii) for Plan Years beginning on or after January 1, 2002, the limitations of Code Section 401(a)(17) in effect as of the beginning of the Plan Year (i.e., $200,000 for 2002). For purposes of applying the $150,000 limit for the 1996 Plan Year, if any Employee is the spouse or a lineal descendant of an Employee (provided the lineal descendant is younger than age 19 by the end of the Plan Year) who is one of the ten (10) "highly compensated employees" (within the meaning of Code Section 414(q)) paid the greatest amount of earnings (determined without regard to the $150,000 limit, as adjusted) during the Plan Year, the Employee shall not be treated as a separate Employee. 
The limitations set forth in the preceding paragraph shall be subject to adjustment annually as provided in Code Section 401(a)(17)(B) and Code Section 415(d); provided, however, that the dollar increase in effect on January 1 of any calendar year, if any, is effective for the Plan Year. 
The limit described in the previous paragraphs shall not apply to any Qualified Participant. A Qualified Participant is any Participant who first became a Participant in the Plan before January 1, 1996. 
The Plan Year limitations in effect as of the beginning of the Plan Year in which each twelve-month period used to determine Final Average Monthly Base Earnings begins shall apply to Base Earnings paid during such twelve-month period. 
Beneficiary means for employees hired on and after January 1, 2004, the Participant's Spouse, unless such Spouse has waived all rights under the Plan in a written instrument. If the Spouse effectively waives benefits under the Plan, or the Participant has no Spouse on his date of death, the Participant's children (by birth or adoption) under the age of eighteen will receive any benefits due under the Plan in equal shares until the child reaches the age of eighteen (18) (age twenty-two (22) if the child is a student enrolled full time in an accredited post secondary institution of higher learning). Except as noted below, in the case of a refund of Participant Contributions under Article 4, a Participant may designate only his Spouse or children as his Beneficiary. If a Participant does not have a Beneficiary designated, or if no Beneficiary survives the Participant, no death benefit will be paid (other than the return of Participant Contributions). 
For Employees hired prior to January 1, 2004, who have no Spouse, or whose Spouse has effectively waived all rights to benefits under the Plan, Beneficiary means any individual(s) designated by the Participant in accordance with procedures established by the Pension Trustee Board to receive distributions under the Plan pursuant to Article 9, in the event of the Participant's death before his retirement. For Employees hired prior to January 1, 2004, if the Participant has designated no beneficiary or the designated beneficiary predeceases the Participant or is incompetent, the Pension Trustee Board may direct such payments be made to such person as the Pension Trustee Board may find equitably entitled thereto, including but not limited to a surviving spouse or child of the Participant. 
The Pension Trustee Board may direct payment to or for the benefit of a minor child without the intervention of a guardian. 
A Participant may designate any individual, trust or other entity as his Beneficiary for purposes of receiving a refund of his Participant Contributions under the circumstances described in Article 4. Such a Beneficiary designation shall be made separately from the designation of a Beneficiary to receive a death benefit under Article 9. If the Participant does not designate a Beneficiary for this purpose, or the Beneficiary so designated does not survive the Participant, the Participant's Beneficiary for purposes of receiving any refund of Participant Contributions shall be his Spouse, if the Participant is survived by a Spouse, or the Participant's estate if he is not survived by a Spouse. 
For the purposes of this Section, revocation of prior Beneficiary designations will occur when a Participant files a new valid designation with the Plan Administrator. 
Nothing in this definition of Beneficiary shall be deemed to provide death benefits that are not otherwise provided in this Plan. 
Board or Board of Commissioners means the elected officials comprising the Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Compound Interest means the annual rate of interest to be credited to a Participant's contributions to the Plan, which is set until changed at five percent (5%) per annum and which is compounded as of each January 1 ("Anniversary Date"). 
County or Macon-Bibb County means Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. References to "County" in the Plan prior to January 1, 2014, mean Bibb County, Georgia. 
Deferred Vested Pension means, with respect to a Participant, the benefit described in Article 8 of the Plan. 
Disability or Disabled means a physical or mental condition of a Participant that renders him unable to perform any gainful work or employment for which he is reasonably suited by virtue of his training and education, as determined by the Pension Trustee Board. 
Effective January 1, 2004, a Participant applying for a Disability Pension or receiving Service for a period of Disability must also, first or contemporaneously, apply to the Social Security Administration for disability benefits and must complete an application for disability retirement benefits from the Employer while employed by the Employer. The Participant must authorize complete and unconditional release of all the Participant's physical and mental health records or internal Employer personnel records relating to the Participant to the Pension Trustee Board and up to three (3) physicians selected by the Pension Trustee Board. The Participant must submit to any and all tests, evaluations, and assessments (the cost of which shall be paid by the Employer) and course of treatment recommended by the physicians selected by the Employer for this purpose. The physicians shall, as soon as reasonably practical, present a written report to the Pension Trustee Board, indicating whether the Participant is medically fit to return to service in any capacity. The Pension Trustee Board shall determine whether the Participant is permanently and totally disabled and will either be placed on disability retirement or returned to active service in any capacity with or without reasonable accommodation. If the Participant is found to be capable of returning to service in any capacity, the Participant shall be ineligible for Disability retirement benefits. If a Participant refuses to submit to such medical examination or examinations, he shall not be granted a Disability Pension or receive Service during the continuance of such refusal. 
The Pension Trustee Board's decision on whether a Participant is Disabled shall be final and binding on the Participant. 
Disability Pension means, with respect to a Participant, the benefit described in Article 7 of the Plan. 
Disability Retirement Date means the date the Participant is determined by the Pension Trustee Board to be Disabled and Terminates from Employment with the Employer. 
Early Retirement Date means the first day of any calendar month following the date the Participant has attained at least age fifty-five (55) and has completed at least twenty (20) Years of Service, which precedes the Participant's Normal Retirement Date. For Employees hired before January 1, 2014, Early Retirement Date means the first day of any calendar month that the Participant has attained at least age of fifty (50) and has completed at least twenty (20) Years of Service. 
Early Retirement Pension means, with respect to a Participant, the benefit described in Article 6 of the Plan. 
Effective Date , means, except as otherwise provided in the Plan, January 1, 2015, the date on which this amendment and restatement of the Plan became effective. The Original Effective Date of the Plan is December 17, 1968. 
Eligible Employee means, except as noted in the following paragraph, the following: 
(a)  Any Employee regularly scheduled to work at least thirty (30) hours per week who is employed by the Employer and is receiving remuneration for personal services rendered to the Employer and paid by the Employer by check of its Treasury, whether paid directly to the Participant or to another for transmission or distribution; 
(b)  Any elected and appointed official paid by the Employer by check of its treasurer, whether paid directly to the Participant or to another for transmission or distribution including appointees of the judges of the Superior Court in and for the Employer other than part-time Commissioners who were elected or appointed to an initial term after June 22, 2004; 
(c)  Employees and officers of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission hired on and after January 1, 2014. 
(d)  Tax commissioners first elected on and after July 1, 2012; 
(e)  Tax commissioner's employees hired or rehired on and after July 1, 2012; 
(f)  Judges of the Macon-Bibb County Magistrate Court; 
(g)  Employees of the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority who are regularly scheduled to work at least thirty (30) hours per week and receiving remuneration for personal services rendered to the Authority, whether paid directly to the Participant or to another for transmission or distribution; 
(h)  Judges of the Macon-Bibb County Superior Court. 
(i)  Judges of the Macon-Bibb County State Court. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following Employees shall not be Eligible Employees: 
(a)  officers and employees of the Macon-Bibb County Board of Health; 
(b)  Employees and officers of the Bibb County Department of Family and Children Services; 
(c)  Employees and officers of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission hired prior to January 1, 2014; 
(d)  The Macon-Bibb County Agricultural Agent and employees of the Agricultural Agent; 
(e)  The Macon-Bibb County Home Demonstration Agent and employees of the Home Demonstration Agent; 
(f)  Members and employees of the Macon-Bibb County Hospital Authority; 
(g)  Members and employees of the Macon-Bibb County Economic Opportunity Council; 
(h)  Casual and temporary employees, including court bailiffs who serve for indefinite periods and are paid on a per diem basis; 
(i)  Contractors and agents and their officers, agents and employees, whose employment by the Employer or any of its agencies is casual or temporary, or intermittent, or for the job; 
(j)  All officers and employees, except elected officials, whose main vocation or occupation is not employment by the Employer or its agencies, the Pension Trustee Board being vested with full authority to determine the application of this coverage exception; 
(k)  The district attorney of the Superior Courts for the Macon Judicial Circuit; 
(l)  The Judge and Solicitor of the State Court of the County and personnel of their respective offices, except as provided in Section 5.02 (d); 
(m)  Employees and officials who upon the Original Effective Date were receiving payment of benefits from any of the prior pension plans established by 1949 Ga. Laws, page 1371 and 1953 Ga. Laws, page 2907 as amended, or elected not to participate in the Plan; 
(n)  An employee classified by the Employer as a leased employee, regardless of whether such Employee is a leased employee within the meaning of Code Section 414(n)(2); 
(o)  A person who is classified by the Employer as an independent contractor or leased employee for purposes of the withholding and payment of employment taxes, even if such person is later determined, whether by the Employer or otherwise, to be a common law Employee of the Employer. 
(p)  Employees actively participating in the Macon-Bibb County General Employees' Pension Plan (Plan A), as adopted by Bibb County and who (i) transferred to Bibb County from the City of Macon, Georgia, on July 1, 2012, (ii) were credited with at least five (5) Years of Service under Plan A as of June 30, 2012, and (iii) are actively accruing pension benefits under Plan A. 
(q)  Juvenile Court judges. 
(r)  Effective July 31, 2006, Employees and officers of the Macon, Georgia Cherry Blossom Festival Inc. and the Keep Macon Bibb Beautiful Commission. 
If a Participant transfers employment or has a change in employment status so that he would not be an Eligible Employee in his new position, he shall not remain as an Eligible Employee. 
Employee means any person employed by the Employer as a common law employee, any person on Authorized Leave of Absence from the Employer, any person who is a "leased employee" within the meaning of Code Section 414(n)(2) with respect to the Employer; and any elected official of the Employer. Pursuant to Code Section 414(n)(2), a leased employee is a person who is not an employee of the Employer and who provides services to the Employer if (a) such services are provided pursuant to an agreement between the Employer and any other person; (b) such person has performed such services for the Employer (or for the Employer and related persons) on a substantially full-time basis for a period of at least one year; and (c) such services are performed under the primary direction or control of the Employer. 
Employer means Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. Effective July 1, 2015, Employer shall also mean the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority. 
Excess Annual Leave means accrued annual leave in excess of 480 hours, which is forfeited from use as annual leave and, effective January 1, 2004, is converted to Service credit under this Plan for purposes of calculating a Participant's Years of Service. 
Final Average Monthly Base Earnings means, effective on or after June 22, 2004, the average of the Participant's Base Earnings over the three calendar years during which the Participant received the highest Base Earnings divided by 36. The following rules shall be applied to determine a Participant's Final Average Monthly Base Earnings: 
(i)  Only Base Earnings earned or deemed to have been earned during a period for which the Participant is receiving Service or is an Eligible Employee may be counted towards Final Average Monthly Base Earnings. 
(ii)  Effective, January 1, 2006, the three calendars years described above need not be consecutive but must include whole calendar years. 
(iii)  Base Earnings shall be counted in the year paid, even if earned in a prior year. 
Effective July 26, 2005, solely for purposes of determining a Participant's Disability Pension, Final Average Monthly Base Earnings means the highest 36 months of Base Earnings received by the Participant. 
Effective December 17, 1968 through December 1, 1998, Final Average Monthly Base Earnings means the total Base Earnings received by the Participant during the last five (5) Years of Service divided by 60. 
Effective December 1, 1998 through April 20, 1999, Final Average Monthly Base Earnings means the total Base Earnings received by the Participant during the five (5) highest calendar Years of Service, divided by 60. 
Effective April 20, 1999 through June 22, 2004, Final Average Monthly Base Earnings means the total Base Earnings received by the Participant during the three (3) highest calendar Years of Service. 
Five-year Break in Service means sixty (60) consecutive months after Termination of Employment which will cause a nonvested Participant to lose prior Service. 
Fund means an insurance contract or any other annuity contract or trust, or any combination thereof, or any other pool of assets established by the Employer to hold assets that will be applied to fund benefits under the Plan. The Employer from time to time shall actuarially determine the soundness of the Fund through consultation with the Actuary and shall augment contributions as may be required to ensure that the Plan will remain actuarially sound. Such augmented contributions may be made in payments over a reasonable number of years as permitted by federal or State law. 
Fund Administrator means the custodian of any Fund that is named by the Pension Trustee Board. 
Incentive Pay means compensation paid to Law Enforcement Participants in addition to and apart from Base Earnings. 
Law Enforcement Participant means the Sheriff of the County and the Sheriff's Deputies, County police officers, the Sheriff and Deputies of the Civil Court of the County, and the Probation Officer of the Juvenile Court of the County whose pay is derived from Macon-Bibb County. Effective January 1, 1996, Law Enforcement Participant includes the POST certified investigators of the District Attorney's Office, and the POST certified members of the Lake Tobesofkee Ranger Force 
Limitation Year means the calendar year. 
Macon-Bibb County Commission means the Mayor and the Commissioners of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
Nonforfeitable means a Participant's or Beneficiary's unconditional claim, legally enforceable against the Plan, to the Participant's Accrued Benefit. If a Participant is one hundred percent (100%) vested in any benefit under the Plan, such benefit is considered Nonforfeitable. 
Nontransferable Annuity means an annuity that by its terms provide that it may not be sold, assigned, discounted, pledged as collateral for a loan or security for the performance of an obligation or for any purpose to any person other than the insurance company. If the Fund Administrator distributes an annuity contract, the contract must be a Nontransferable Annuity. 
Normal Retirement Age means (except as otherwise provided below) age sixty-five (65) for Employees hired and non-vested former Participants rehired on and after May 1, 2011. Effective November 5, 1996, for Employees first hired prior to May 1, 2011 (including fully vested former Participants who Terminated Employment before May 1, 2011, and are rehired at a later time), Normal Retirement Age means the earlier of the date the Participant attains age sixty (60) (effective between January 1, 1989 and November 5, 1996, age sixty-two (62)) or completes thirty (30) Years of Service. 
For Law Enforcement Participants hired on and after January 1, 2014, Normal Retirement Age means the earlier of the date the Law Enforcement Participant attains age sixty (60) with ten (10) Years of Service or completes thirty (30) Years of Service. For Law Enforcement Participants hired before January 1, 2014, Normal Retirement Age means the earlier of the date the Law Enforcement Participant attains age fifty- five (55) or completes twenty-five (25) Years of Service. 
In no event shall any Participant's Normal Retirement Age be earlier than the tenth anniversary of the Eligible Employee's first date of participation in the Plan. 
Except for Superior Court Judges and State Court Judges, in no event shall any Participant's Normal Retirement Age be earlier than the tenth anniversary of the Eligible Employee's first date of participation in the Plan. For Superior Court Judges and State Court Judges, in no event shall the Participant's Normal Retirement Age be earlier than the tenth anniversary of the Eligible Employee's first date of hire by the Employer. 
Normal Retirement Date means the means the first day of the calendar month coincident with or next following the later of the Participant's Normal Retirement Age or his Termination of Employment. 
Normal Retirement Pension means, with respect to a Participant, the benefit described in Section 5.01 of the Plan. 
Participant means an Eligible Employee who is eligible to be and becomes a Participant in the Plan in accordance with the provisions of Article 2 of the Plan. An Employee who becomes a Participant shall remain a Participant under the Plan until the Fund Administrator has fully distributed his Nonforfeitable Accrued Benefit to him. 
Pension Trustee Board means the Board as appointed by the Employer in accordance with Section 13.03 of the Plan. 
Plan means the Macon-Bibb County Pension Plan, as set forth herein and as amended from time to time. 
Plan Administrator means the Pension Trustee Board. In addition to its other duties, the Plan Administrator shall have full responsibility for compliance with the reporting and disclosure rules under all laws applicable to this Plan. The Plan Administrator may delegate any of its duties under the Plan to the Actuary and/or third party administrator. The Plan Administrator shall have no authority to amend and/or terminate the Plan. 
Plan Year means the fiscal year, which begins on July 1 each year and ends on June 30. 
Pre-Retirement Survivor Annuity means, with respect to a Participant and his Spouse, the benefit described in Article 9 of the Plan. 
Qualified Military Service means Military Service during which the Employee is entitled to reemployment rights under Chapter 43 Title 38 of the United State Code. "Military Service" means the period of an Employee's active duty for training and service in the Army, Navy, Air Force or Marines of the United States of America, the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard when engaged in active duty for training, inactive duty training, or full-time National Guard duty, the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service, and any other category of persons designated by the President in time of war or national emergency. 
Regular Monthly Benefit means the dollar amount derived from the formula provided in Section 5.01, and paid as a life annuity with no survivor benefit. 
Service means the measurement of a Participant's employment with the Employer that is used to determine the amount of his benefits under the Plan. Service shall be all years and completed months (but not partial months) during which an individual is an Eligible Employee under this Plan and is receiving Base Earnings from the Employer, subject to the following rules: 
(a)  An Employee shall not earn Service for periods during which he is an Eligible Employee but not a Participant except for Accumulated Past Service Credit acquired and retained by the Participant at the time of establishment of the Plan. 
(b)  An Eligible Employee shall not receive Service for periods during which he is absent from employment on account of an Authorized Leave of Absence (other than what is required by federal law for military leave under USERRA) or, except as otherwise provided herein, other conditions that are not treated by the Employer as a Termination of Employment. 
(c)  Effective May 10, 1999, Service shall include periods for which the Eligible Employee is absent from work on account of illness or vacation and receives Base Earnings from the Employer. For Employees hired before May 1, 2011 only, (including fully vested former Participants who Terminated Employment before May 1, 2011, and are rehired at a later time), Service shall also include accumulated sick leave at Termination of Employment. 
(d)  For Employees hired before May 1, 2011 only, (including fully vested former Participants who Terminated Employment before May 1, 2011, and are rehired at a later time), Service shall include Excess Annual Leave. 
(e)  Partial years of Service shall be credited in increments of one-twelfth of a year, with one calendar month equal to one-twelfth of a year. Partial calendar months shall be aggregated by days, with 30 days equal to one-twelfth of a year. 
(f)  Service shall exclude periods during which the Participant is receiving payments from the long-term disability or workers' compensation programs maintained by the Employer and exclude periods during which the Participant is waiting for a determination of Disability unless such periods are counted under another provision of this Section. 
(g)  Service shall exclude any period of service taken into account under any other qualified defined benefit plan and any period during which benefits are received under the Plan or under the plans established by the General Assembly of Georgia under 1949 Ga. Laws, page 1371, or under the plan provided by 1953 Ga. Laws, page 2907. 
(h)  Refer to Sections 2.03 and 2.04 for the rules applicable upon rehire. 
(i)  Eligible Employees who were transferred to Bibb County, Georgia from the City of Macon, Georgia on July 1, 2012, shall receive Service for vesting and benefit accrual based on prior service accrued under the City of Macon General Employees' Pension Plan, but shall be treated as hired on May 1, 2011, for purposes of Section 5.02 of the Plan. 
(j)  Eligible Employees shall receive Service for vesting and benefit accrual based on prior service with Bibb County, Georgia and future service with Macon-Bibb County. 
(k)  For Employees hired on and after January 1, 2014, Service shall not include periods of employment after 34 Years of Service. 
(l)  Eligible Employees of the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority shall not receive Service credit for periods of employment with the Authority prior to July 1, 2015. 
Spouse or Surviving Spouse means the person to whom the Participant is legally married. 'Spouse' and 'surviving spouse' shall not include domestic partners or other similar relationships that are not denominated as marriage. The determination of a Participant's Spouse or Surviving Spouse shall be made as of the earlier of the Participant's Annuity Starting Date or the date of such Participant's death. 
Termination of Employment or Terminates Employment means the earliest of the following dates: 
(a)  The date of the Employee's voluntary resignation from employment with the Employer; 
(b)  The date of the Employee's discharge from employment by the Employer; 
(c)  The date of the Employee's death; or 
(d)  The date the Employee ceases employment with the Employer on account of retirement or Disability. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an Employee who ceases to be actively employed by reason of an Authorized Leave of Absence shall not be considered as having a Termination of Employment. However, any Participant who is receiving benefits under any long-term disability plan for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months may be considered terminated by the Employer. 
USERRA means the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994. 
Year of Service means a twelve (12) month period of Service, or fractions thereof creditable toward retirement and benefits hereunder including those periods counted towards Accumulated Past Service Credit. No period during which benefits are received under this Plan or under the plan established by the General Assembly of Georgia under 1949 Ga. Laws, page 137 or under the plan provided by 1953 Ga. Laws page 2907 shall be included in Years of Service. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ; Ord. No. O-16-0029, §§ 1—3, 3-15-2016 ) 
ARTICLE 2 - ELIGIBILITY 

2.01 - Eligibility. 
An Employee shall become a Participant in the Plan on the first day as of which he is an Eligible Employee, as defined in Article I hereof. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
2.02 - Change in Employment Status. 
If a Participant ceases to be an Eligible Employee but does not Terminate Employment, then during the period that such a Participant is not an Eligible Employee, the Participant shall not accrue Service under the Plan attributable to that period. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
2.03 - Participation and Service Upon Reemployment. 
Except as provided in Section 10.04 (Reemployment of a Retired Participant) or in Sections 2.04 (Reemployment of a Vested Participant) below, a Participant who is reemployed by the Employer as an Eligible Employee following a Five-year Break in Service shall be treated for all purposes as a new Employee (one-year break prior to August 3, 1993). A Participant who is reemployed by the Employer as an Eligible Employee before incurring a Five-year Break in Service shall resume participation in the Plan as of his reemployment date and except as provided in Section 2.05 of the Plan, his Service and Base Earnings from his previous period of Employment as an Eligible Employee shall be combined with any Service, and Base Earnings earned after his rehire date to determine his benefits under this Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
2.04 - Reemployment of a Vested Participant. 
Notwithstanding Section 2.03 above, a Participant who is reemployed by the Employer as an Eligible Employee and who was 100% vested in his benefits under this Plan as of his previous Termination of Employment, shall resume participation in the Plan as a Participant on the first day of his reemployment as an Eligible Employee. Except as provided in Section 2.05 of the Plan, any Service and Base Earnings from the reemployed Participant's previous period of Employment as an Eligible Employee shall be combined with any Service and Base Earnings earned after his reemployment date to determine his benefits under this Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
2.05 - Refund of Contributions to Participant Before Reemployment. 
A Participant who is reemployed by the Employer as an Eligible Employee and who received a refund of his Participant Contributions (if any) must repay the full amount of such refund plus interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum in order for any prior Service and Base Earnings to be restored. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
2.06 - Open Enrollment Period for Certain Participants. 
Employees who are for the first time made eligible for participation as Participants by amendatory provisions adopted in an Ordinance dated December 6, 1988, (which removed age restrictions required under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act) shall be eligible for enrollment and participation provided that such Eligible Employee shall make application to the Board of Commissioners on or before March 15, 1989, for inclusion in the Plan as a Participant. Upon receipt of such application, the Board of Commissioners will cause a calculation to be made of the amount of the contributions which the applicant would have made had said applicant been eligible for inclusion from the date of initial employment or election, and the applicant shall pay to Bibb County such sums as the applicant would have paid had said applicant been a Participant from the date of employment or election (if any). No payment shall be required for breaks in continuous service, but the Years of Service shall mean the total of the actual months of Service with Bibb County divided by 12. In addition to the principal payments to Bibb County by such applicant, the applicant shall also pay to Bibb County interest thereon at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum computed as to each payment from the date which such payment would have been made by such applicant had said applicant been a Participant, and upon such payment such applicant shall be entitled to credit for prior Service as if said applicant had been a Participant from the first date of employment or taking office. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
2.07 - Restructured Government. 
(a)  Any Employee whose employment is transferred from the City of Macon or Bibb County, Georgia, effective January 1, 2014, in connection with the restructured government pursuant to an act of the Georgia General Assembly, and who was actively participating in either the Macon Fire and Police Employees' Retirement System or the Macon Pension and Retirement Systems, Division A, (the "Macon Plans") shall continue to participate in the Macon Plan in which he or she was participating as of December 31, 2013, after his or her employment is transferred to Macon-Bibb County, and shall not participate in this Plan. 
(b)  In no event shall any Eligible Employee accrue benefits under this Plan for periods of Service performed for Bibb County, Georgia, the City of Macon, Georgia, or Macon-Bibb County, if such Service is taken into account for the purposes of benefit accrual under one of the Macon Plans. 
(c)  Any Participant whose job is abolished pursuant to Section 30(e) of HB 1171 and who is rehired by Macon-Bibb County by the end of the calendar year, shall not have a Termination of Employment for purposes of this Plan. 
(d)  Any Eligible Employee who was formerly employed by the City of Macon, Georgia or Bibb County, Georgia, prior to January 1, 2014, and is reemployed by Macon-Bibb County on or after January 1, 2014, shall participate in this Plan as a new Employee as of his date of reemployment and shall come under the terms of the Plan in effect on his or her reemployment date. Provided, however, if such reemployed Eligible Employee (i) was 100% vested in his benefits under the retirement system sponsored by the City of Macon, Georgia or Bibb County, Georgia, as of his previous Termination of Employment or (ii) was not 100% vested in his benefits under such retirement system as of his previous Termination of Employment but has not incurred a Five-Year Break in Service, he shall receive Service credit from his previous period of employment with the City of Macon, Georgia and/or Bibb County, Georgia for vesting purposes only. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
2.08 - Participation by Employees of Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority. 
An Eligible Employee of the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority (as defined in Article 1 hereof), who is actively employed by the Authority on July 1, 2015, may make a one-time irrevocable election to opt out of the Plan. Such election must be made on or before December 31, 2015, and the Eligible Employee must be actively employed by the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority on the date of his or her election. An Eligible Employee hired or rehired by the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority after July 1, 2015, shall become a Participant in the Plan on the first day as of which he is an Eligible Employee. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 3 - EMPLOYER CONTRIBUTIONS 

3.01 - Amount. 
The Employer will make such contributions as are necessary to fund the Plan in accordance with all applicable minimum funding standards for governmental plans under the Code and Georgia law. Each contribution is contingent upon the maintenance of qualified status by the Plan for the year with respect to which such contribution is made. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
3.02 - Determination of Contribution. 
The Employer, from its records and the reports of the Actuary, shall determine the amount of any contribution to be made by it to the Fund under the terms of the Plan. In this regard, the Employer may place full reliance upon all reports, opinions, tables, valuations, certificates and contributions the Actuary furnishes the Employer. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
3.03 - Cherry Blossom Festival, Inc. and the Keep Macon Bibb Beautiful Commission. 
Effective July 31, 2006, the Accrued Benefit of each Participant employed by the Cherry Blossom Festival, Inc. and the Keep Macon-Bibb Beautiful Commission is frozen and no further benefits have accrued to such Participants after such date. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
3.04 - Time of Payment of Contribution. 
The Employer must make its contribution to the Fund Administrator no later than the time required by Georgia law. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
3.05 - Non-vested Accrued Benefit. 
Amounts representing the non-vested Accrued Benefit (and the earnings thereon) of Participants who have terminated employment, died, or forfeited benefits under the Plan for any other reason shall not be used to increase benefits under the Plan. Such amounts shall, instead, be used to reduce administrative expenses and then to reduce Employer contributions for future Plan Year(s). 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 4 - PARTICIPANT CONTRIBUTIONS 

4.01 - Participant Contributions. 
(a)  Participant Contributions. Prior to October, 1981, each Participant was required to make contributions to the Plan. The Plan Administrator shall hold such amounts, for recordkeeping purposes with Compound Interest, in a Participant Contribution Account for each contributing Participant. Such account shall be a notional account only. The Participant may not direct the investment of such account, and such amounts shall be held together with the remaining assets of the Fund. The Participant shall not, on account of the existence of such an account, have any greater or higher-priority claim on the assets of the Fund than any other Participant. 
(b)  Effective October, 1981, no Participant contributions are required or permitted to be made to the Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
4.02 - Refund of Participant Contributions. 
(a)  In General. If a Participant has a Termination of Employment and is not eligible for any benefits under the Plan, or if the Participant dies before his Annuity Starting Date and no death benefit is payable to a Beneficiary, the Participant (or the Beneficiary, if the Participant dies) shall receive a refund of all Participant Contributions with Compound Interest, if any, that is held in the Participant Contribution Account. 
A Participant shall not receive an automatic refund of his Participant Contribution Account if he is eligible for a Deferred Vested Pension, but such a Participant shall receive a refund of his Participant Account if he so requests in writing and executes a Waiver of Deferred Termination Benefit in the form and manner prescribed by the Pension Trustee Board. Such a Participant shall then have no other right to a benefit under this Plan attributable to the period of employment for which the Participant Contributions were made. 
(b)  Death After Annuity Starting Date. If the Participant or Beneficiary is receiving benefits under the Plan and dies before payments from the Plan to the Participant or Beneficiary have been made in an amount equal to or greater than the total of the Participant Contribution Account, and no additional benefits are due from this Plan, then the Beneficiary shall receive the amount by which the Participant Contribution Account (as of the date benefits commenced) exceed such amount. If the Beneficiary receives such a refund, no additional death benefits will be paid from the Plan. 
(c)  Form of Payment. Distribution of the Participant Contribution Account shall be made only in one lump sum in cash. 
(d)  Cost-of-living Adjustments. The cost-of-living adjustments described in Section 5.04 shall not apply to amounts paid under this Article 4. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 5 - NORMAL RETIREMENT 

5.01 - Eligibility for Normal Retirement Pension. 
A Participant shall be eligible for a Regular Monthly Benefit if his employment is terminated on or after his Normal Retirement Age. Payment of a Regular Monthly Benefit shall commence as of the Participant's Normal Retirement Date; provided however, the Participant's retirement will not be effective until the first day of the calendar month following receipt and approval by the Pension Trustee Board of written notice of the Participant's intent to retire. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
5.02 - Amount of Normal Retirement Pension. 
Subject to the Annual Benefit limitations of Article 12 of the Plan, a Participant's Normal Retirement Pension, paid monthly beginning as of the Participant's Normal Retirement Date and ending on the first day of the month, in which the Participant's death occurs, shall be: 
(a)  For Employees (other than Superior Court Judges and State Court Judges) hired prior to May 1, 2011, (including fully vested former Participants who Terminated Employment before May 1, 2011, and are rehired at a later time): 
(i)  2% of Final Average Monthly Base Earnings, multiplied by 
(ii)  the Participant's number of whole and partial Years of Service. 
(b)  For Employees (other than Superior Court Judges and State Court Judges) hired or non-vested former Participants rehired on and after May 1, 2011: 
(i)  1.5% of Final Average Monthly Base Earnings, multiplied by 
(ii)  the Participant's number of whole and partial Years of Service. 
(c)  For Superior Court Judges, two-thirds of the amount paid as a local supplement to active Superior Court Judges by Macon-Bibb County for the life of such Superior Court Judge. 
(d)  For State Court Judges, two-thirds of the amount paid to active State Court Judges by Macon-Bibb County in excess of the pensionable salary used by the Georgia Judicial Retirement System for retirement benefits under that retirement system, for the life of such State Court Judge. 
Refer to Section 5.04 below for information on a cost of living adjustment that may increase the amount provided under the formula above, and to the definition of Service and Years of Service in Article 2 for the way in which Service, including partial years, is calculated. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ; Ord. No. O-16-0029, §§ 4, 3-15-2016 ) 
5.03 - Retirement After Normal Retirement Age. 
If a Participant continues in employment past his Normal Retirement Age, his benefit shall commence upon his actual retirement, the date of which shall be his Late Retirement Date. The benefit shall be calculated using the Participant's Service and Final Average Monthly Base Earnings through his Late Retirement Date. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
5.04 - Cost of Living Adjustment. 
Effective January 1, 2017, and each January 1 thereafter, the Plan shall provide for a one and one-half (1.5%) ad-hoc cost of living adjustment to the monthly amount payable to a Participant or, if applicable, his Beneficiary(-ies) who is receiving a retirement benefit from this Plan, except that no such increase shall be effective as to any year for which such increase is disapproved by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, based on the financial soundness of the plan. 
Effective February 22, 2004, and each January 1 thereafter until January 1, 2017, no cost of living adjustments shall be made to benefit payments from this Plan that are currently provided to Participants or their Beneficiaries unless authorized by the Macon-Bibb County Commission following an actuarial study. 
Effective January 1, 2003, and each January 1 thereafter until February 22, 2004, subject to review and approval by the Board of Commissioners, the Plan shall provide for a one and one-half (1.5%) ad-hoc cost of living adjustment to the monthly amount payable to a Participant or, if applicable, his Beneficiary(-ies) who is receiving a retirement benefit from this Plan. 
Effective October 1, 1996, and each January 1 thereafter until January 1, 2003, subject to review and approval by the Board of Commissioners, the Plan shall provide for a four percent (4%) ad-hoc cost of living adjustment every three (3) years to the monthly amount the Participant or, if applicable, his Beneficiary(-ies) who is receiving a retirement benefits from this Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ; Ord. No. O-16-0044, § 1, 4-5-2016 ) 
5.05 - Minimum Payment. 
Participants who qualify for retirement based on age or Years of Service may qualify for a minimum Regular Monthly Benefit. For purposes of this section, Years of Service prior to December 20, 1968, are not considered for anyone who as not a member of the pension plan created by the Act of 1953 immediately prior to December 20, 1968, and who was eligible for that pension plan under the terms of the Act of 1953, as amended, but for any reason was not a member of such plan, unless such person, upon becoming a Participant in this Plan, purchased such past service as provided in the ordinance effective December 20, 1968. 
Effective prior to October 2, 1990, the minimum Regular Monthly Benefit is $200 per month. 
Effective between October 2, 1990 and January 12, 1997, the minimum Regular Monthly Benefit is $300.00 per month. Effective from January 21, 1997, to July 12, 2005, the minimum Regular Monthly Benefit is $500.00 per month provided the Participant qualified for retirement at Termination of Employment based on age or Years of Service. Effective July 12, 2005, minimum Regular Monthly Benefit is eliminated; provided however, any Participant whose right to a minimum benefit was vested and accrued on July 12, 2005, will continue to be entitled to such minimum. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
5.06 - Act of 1953. 
A Participant who participated in the pension plan contained in the Act of 1953 as of December 20, 1968, and whose benefits under that plan are greater than the benefits provided to the Participant under this Plan, may elect to retire under the provisions of the plan contained in the Act of 1953. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
5.07 - Choice of Plans. 
Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of this Plan, whenever a Participant is entitled to receive benefits from two or more plans, the cost of which is borne from the County treasury, the Participant shall be entitled to receive benefits under the plan that provides the greater benefits but shall not be entitled to receive benefits from any other plan or plans; provided, however, that if a Participant is entitled to receive benefits from a pension or retirement plan or plans mandated by Georgia law, he shall be entitled to receive full benefits as provided by that law, and no benefits shall be payable under the provisions of this Plan unless such benefits are larger than those received under the State-mandated plan, in which event the Participant shall be entitled to receive from this Plan the difference between the amount payable under this Plan and the amount received from the state-mandated Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
5.08 - Treasurer Emeritus. 
Effective December 1, 1988 until January 1, 2004, any person who has served as Treasurer of the County for a period of fifteen (15) years and who shall have attained age sixty-five (65) shall have the title of Treasurer Emeritus and shall upon retirement be entitled to receive retirement pay for life at the rate of $300.00 per month from his date of retirement. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 6 - EARLY RETIREMENT PENSION 

6.01 - Eligibility for Early Retirement. 
A Participant shall be eligible for an Early Retirement Pension if his employment as an Eligible Employee is terminated on or after his Early Retirement Age. An Early Retirement Pension shall commence as of the Participant's Normal Retirement Date, unless the Participant requests, in the form and manner prescribed by the Plan Administrator, to commence his payments as of his Early Retirement Date, or as of the first day of any subsequent month that precedes his Normal Retirement Date. 
A Participant who Terminates from Employment after satisfying the service requirement but not the age requirement for an Early Retirement Pension may not elect to receive an Early Retirement Pension upon satisfying the age requirement 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
6.02 - Amount of Early Retirement Pension. 
Subject to the Annual Benefit limitations of Article 12 of the Plan, a Participant's Early Retirement Pension shall equal his Normal Retirement Pension, except that, effective November 5, 1996, the Early Retirement Pension shall be reduced by two percent (2%) for each year between the date payments commence and his Normal Retirement Date. Effective prior to November 5, 1996, the Early Retirement Pension is reduced by one-half of one percent [½ %] for each year (prorated based on months for partial years). 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
6.03 - Early Retirement Incentive. 
Effective pursuant to an Ordinance passed on February 27, 2001, Bibb County, Georgia implemented an early retirement incentive program as follows: 
(a)  Employees eligible for the early retirement incentive program may retire from Bibb County, Georgia without the two percent (2%) early retirement reduction and will be credited with three (3) additional Years of Service for purposes of calculating retirement benefits, including those eligible Employees with more than thirty (30) Years of Service. 
(b)  Eligible Employees may elect to participate in the early retirement incentive program between March 12, 2001, and April 13, 2001. Any election may be revoked within 7 days of the date the election form is signed. Thereafter, all elections are final. 
(c)  Each Employee electing to participate in the early retirement incentive program will designate the first day of any month between July 1, 2001, and December 31, 2001, as his Normal Retirement Date. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 7 - DISABILITY PENSION 

7.01 - General Disability Pension. 
(a)  Eligibility for Disability Pension. A Participant is eligible for a Disability Pension under this Section 7.02 if he becomes Disabled (i) before he has satisfied the requirements for a Normal Retirement Pension, (ii) while he is an active Eligible Employee or is on an Authorized Leave of Absence, and (iii) after he has completed ten (10) years of continuous Service; provided however, any Participant hired by Bibb County, Georgia prior to July 1, 2003, shall be required to have only five (5) years of continuous Service to be eligible for a Disability Pension as described in Section 7.02(b). Such a Participant's Disability Pension shall commence as of the first day of the month coincident with or next following the Participant's Disability Retirement Date, and shall continue until the first day of the month in which the Participant's death occurs unless the Participant recovers from the Disability before his Normal Retirement Age, in which case Disability Pension payments shall cease as of the first day of the month in which such recovery occurs. 
(b)  Amount of Disability Pension. The Disability Pension payable under Section 7.02(a) above shall equal the Participant's Normal Retirement Pension, calculated using his Years of Service and Final Average Monthly Base Earnings as of his Disability Retirement Date. Effective July 26, 2005, solely for purposes of determining Disability Pension, Final Average Monthly Base Earnings means the highest 36 months of Base Earnings received by the Participant. Notwithstanding anything in the Plan to the contrary, Participants hired by Bibb County, Georgia after November 5, 1996 and prior to July 1, 2003, who are eligible for a Disability Pension shall receive a minimum monthly benefit of $250.00. Effective June 7, 1994 to November 5, 1996, the minimum Disability Pension is $50.00 per month. Effective June 7, 1994, amounts payable hereunder shall be reduced by any amounts received by the Participant under Social Security Disability. Effective January 1, 2004, the Participant shall also apply for federal Social Security benefits before or contemporaneously with the application for a Disability Pension under this section. The Disability Pension will be paid until the Participant begins receiving federal Social Security benefits at which time the Disability Pension will be reduced by the amount of federal Social Security benefits received by the Participant. The Disability Pension shall be paid in the form of benefit selected by the Participant in accordance with section 10.01 of the Plan. 
(c)  Employees with less the Required Number of Years of Service. Any Participant who becomes Disabled and is not eligible for a Disability Pension shall be entitled to receive an amount equal to his Participant Contributions to the Plan (if any) plus Compound Interest paid in one lump sum. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
7.02 - Line of Duty Disability Pension. 
(a)  Eligibility for Line of Duty Disability. A Law Enforcement Participant who becomes Disabled from accidental, violent and external causes suffered in the line of duty and in the performance of duty while he is an Eligible Employee shall be eligible for a Disability Pension as described in Section 7.01(b). Such a Law Enforcement Participant's Disability Pension shall commence as of the first day of the month coincident with or next following the Law Enforcement Participant's Disability Retirement Date, and shall continue until the first day of the month in which the Participant's death occurs unless the Participant recovers from the Disability before his Normal Retirement Age, in which case Disability Pension payments shall cease as of the first day of the month in which such recovery occurs. 
(b)  Amount of Law Enforcement Disability Pension. For Law Enforcement Participants, the Disability Pension payable under Section 7.01(a) above shall be a monthly benefit equal to sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3%) of the Participant's Final Average Monthly Base Earnings as of his Disability Retirement Date. Effective July 26, 2005, solely for purposes of determining Disability Pension, Final Average Monthly Base Earnings means the highest 36 months of Base Earnings received by the Participant. Effective June 7, 1994, amounts payable hereunder shall be reduced by any amounts received by the Participant under Social Security Disability. Effective October 28, 2003, the Participant shall apply for federal Social Security benefits before or contemporaneously with application for a Disability Pension under this section. The Disability Pension will be paid until the Participant begins receiving federal Social Security benefits at which time the Disability Pension will be reduced by the amount of federal Social Security benefits received by the Participant. The Disability Pension shall be paid in the form of benefit selected by the Participant in accordance with section 10.01 of the Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
7.03 - Employment While Receiving Disability Pension. 
If a Participant is receiving a Disability Pension under Section 7.01 or 7.02, and accepts employment of any kind, including temporary, part-time or full-time employment, with any entity, or is demonstrably capable of gainful employment of any kind (as determined in the sole discretion of the Pension Trustee Board), his Disability Pension shall immediately cease and any payments improperly received by the Participant while engaged in such gainful employment or capable of same, shall be required to be repaid to the Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
7.04 - Willful Misconduct or Self-inflicted Injury. 
A Disability Pension shall not be paid if the Participant's Disability was caused by the Participant's willful misconduct or self-inflicted injury, or grows out of a Participant's attempt to unlawfully injure another or the Participant's attempt at or commission of a felony under the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
7.05 - Recovery From Disability. 
If a Participant recovers from Disability prior to his Normal Retirement Age, and his Disability Pension ceases, his years of Service to Disability Retirement Date shall be restored, and he shall be eligible for a Pension, or not, on the same terms as any other Participant who experienced a Termination of Employment. If the Participant is reemployed as an Eligible Employee, the Participant then shall commence to accrue benefits under the Plan based upon his Final Average Monthly Base Earnings and Years of Service before his Disability Retirement Date and after his reemployment. The Participant shall not receive Service for the period during which he received a Disability Pension. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
7.06 - Continuing Evidence of Disability. 
Any Participant receiving a Disability Pension who has not reached his Normal Retirement Age shall be subject to physical reexaminations in the same manner as provided for the original determination of the Disability. If the Participant is then found able to perform active service in any capacity, with or without reasonable accommodation, so that the Participant is no longer permanently and totally Disabled, the Pension Trustee Board may order that the Participant return to active service with the Employer and the Disability Pension shall cease. Should any such Participant refuse to submit to such medical examination or refuse to return to active employment within thirty (30) days of written notice to do so by the Pension Trustee Board, his Disability Pension shall cease. If such Participant returns to active employment with the Employer, any contributions required by the Plan shall resume and the Participant will receive future Service during the time he remains in active service of the Employer. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 8 - DEFERRED VESTED PENSION 

8.01 - Deferred Vested Pension. 
A Participant who Terminates Employment for any reason other than death, Disability, eligibility for an Early Retirement Pension, or attaining Normal Retirement Age shall be eligible to receive a Deferred Vested Pension to the extent that he satisfies the vesting requirements below. If a Participant Terminates Employment for any reason other than death, Disability, eligibility for an Early Retirement Pension, or attaining Normal Retirement Age and does not have sufficient Service to receive a Deferred Vested Pension, he shall not receive a benefit from this Plan except to the extent that he is rehired or otherwise earns additional Service to be added to his previous period of Service; provided however the Participant will be entitled to receive Participant Contributions, if any, plus Compound Interest. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
8.02 - Amount of Deferred Vested Pension. 
(a)  Prior to Normal Retirement Age. The Participant's Deferred Vested Pension shall be calculated and paid in the same manner as his Normal Retirement Pension, considering his Years of Service and Final Average Monthly Base Earnings as of his Termination of Employment, but adjusted as follows: 
If the Participant's first date of employment with the Employer is on or before January 16, 1996: 

 
If the Participant's first date of employment with the Employer is after January 16, 1996, the Participant's Normal Retirement Pension shall be adjusted as follows: 

 
(b)  At Normal Retirement Age. The Participant's right to his Normal Retirement Pension is nonforfeitable upon attainment of his Normal Retirement Age. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 9 - DEATH BENEFITS 

9.01 - Pre-retirement Death Benefit. 
(a)  Eligibility. If a Participant's employment is terminated by reason of death prior to his or her Annuity Starting Date, and the Participant has at least ten (10) Years of Service, the Participant's Beneficiary shall be entitled to death benefit as described in paragraph (b) below for life, or until remarriage if the Spouse is the Beneficiary. 
(b)  Death Benefit. Effective January 16, 1990; the Participant's Beneficiary may elect to receive one of the following: 
(i)  a monthly payment from the Plan equal to fifty percent (50%) of the Normal Retirement Pension that the Participant would have received at his Normal Retirement Date had he lived to that date, commencing as of the Participant's Normal Retirement Date (if he had lived), or 
(ii)  a monthly payment from the Plan equal to fifty percent (50%) of the Normal Retirement Pension that the Participant would have received at his Normal Retirement Date had he lived to that date, commencing as of the first day of the month following his death, but effective November 5, 1999, reduced by two percent (2%) per year for each year the benefit commences prior to the Participant's Normal Retirement Date (if he had lived) (reduced by one half of one percent (1/2%) effective prior to November 5, 1999). 
(c)  Commencement of Benefit. The benefit described in (b)(i) and (b)(ii) above shall continue for the lifetime of the Beneficiary or if the Beneficiary is the Participant's Spouse until the month in which the Spouse remarries, if earlier. 
(d)  Non-Spouse Beneficiary. Effective for Eligible Employees hired on and after January 1, 2004, the Participant's Beneficiary shall be the Participant's Spouse, unless such Spouse has explicitly waived all rights under the Plan in a written instrument. If the Spouse effectively waives benefits under the Plan, or the Participant has no Spouse on his date of death, the Participant's children (by birth or adoption) under the age of eighteen will receive any benefits due in equal shares until the child reaches the age of eighteen (18) (age twenty-two (22) if the child is student enrolled full time in an accredited post secondary institution of higher learning). If the Participant is not married and has no children under the age of eighteen (18) (age twenty-two (22) if the child is student enrolled full time in an accredited post secondary institution of higher learning) no death benefit shall be paid. 
For purposes of (ii) above, a child is a full-time student if he is enrolled as a full-time student at an educational institution during any five months of a calendar year. This enrollment status shall be redetermined each calendar year. 
Only enrollment in a school that has a regular teaching staff and course of study and is a junior or senior high school, college, university, technical or mechanical school shall satisfy the requirements above. Enrollment in a night school that satisfies the requirement in the preceding sentence and in which the child is enrolled for the number of hours or classes equivalent to full-time attendance at a similar day school also shall satisfy this requirement. On-the-job training courses, correspondence schools or other home education do not satisfy this requirement. 
The Pension Trustee Board shall determine whether a particular child is a full-time student, and its decision thereon shall be final. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
9.02 - Death After Normal Retirement Date but before Annuity Starting Date 
If a Participant dies after his Normal Retirement Date but before he actually retires from employment with the Employer, the Participant shall be deemed to have retired immediately before his death and elected a 100 % joint and survivor annuity. Effective for Eligible Employees hired on and after January 1, 2004, the Participant's Beneficiary shall be the Participant's Spouse, unless such Spouse has explicitly waived all rights under the Plan in a written instrument. If the Spouse effectively waives benefits under the Plan, or the Participant has no Spouse on his date of death, the Participant's children (by birth or adoption) under the age of eighteen will receive any benefits due in equal shares until the child reaches the age of eighteen (18) (age twenty-two (22) if the child is student enrolled full time in an accredited post secondary institution of higher 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
9.03 - Death After Annuity Starting Date. 
If a Participant dies after his Annuity Starting Date, whether the Participant's Spouse or any other person receives a survivor's benefit shall be determined according to the form of benefit in which the Participant's benefit was being paid or which the Participant had elected. For example, if the Participant elected a single life annuity form of benefit, no survivor's benefit shall be paid. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 10 - OPTIONAL FORMS OF PAYMENT 

10.01 - Optional Form of Payment. 
In lieu of receiving a monthly payment for life, the Participant may elect any of the following options. Any amount received by the Participant under an option selected below shall be the Actuarial Equivalent of the Regular Monthly Benefit described in Section 5.02 (i.e. life annuity with no survivor benefits). 
(a)  Life Annuity with Guaranteed Payments. This is a reduced monthly amount payable to the Participant for life with a certain number of monthly payments guaranteed. The Participant may elect a guaranteed payment of either 60 or 120 months. 
(b)  Joint and Survivor Annuity Options. This is a reduced monthly payment made to the Participant for his life and, upon the Participant's death, a percentage of the Participant's benefit shall be paid to the Participant's designated Beneficiary. The Participant shall elect the percentage that will be payable to the Participant's designated Beneficiary when electing this form of benefit. Payments shall cease as of the later of the death of the Participant or the death of the Participant's designated Beneficiary. 
(c)  Death of Beneficiary Before Annuity Starting Date. If a Participant elects the Joint and Survivor Annuity but the designated Beneficiary dies before the Annuity Starting Date, the Participant may revoke his election. His benefit shall be paid as a Regular Monthly Benefit under Section 5.02 unless the Participant elects a new Beneficiary. If the designated Beneficiary dies after the Participant's Annuity Starting Date but before the Participant starts receiving his monthly payments, the Participant shall receive the reduced monthly benefits in accordance with his election of this option. 
(d)  Electing the Optional Form of Payment. At least thirty (30) days, but no more than ninety (90) days, before the Participant's Annuity Starting Date, a Participant who wishes to elect the optional form of payment shall submit a written election in the form prescribed by the Plan Administrator. If a Participant does not properly elect an optional form of benefit, his benefit shall be paid as a Regular Monthly Benefit for life as described in Section 5.02. 
A Participant may revoke an option prior to his Annuity Starting Date by filing a revocation, or a new election, with the Plan Administrator prior to his Annuity Starting Date. A Participant may not revoke or change an election after his benefits begin. 
(e)  MDIB Rules. Any optional form of benefit and any designated Beneficiary named by the Participant must comply with the minimum distribution incidental benefit requirement of proposed Treasury Regulation 1.401(a)(9)-2, or its successor. This rule ensures that the retirement benefits payable under the Plan are more than incidental. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
10.02 - Commencement of Benefits. 
(a)  Age 70 ½. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the Plan Administrator shall direct that payment of a Participant's Normal Retirement Pension commence by the first day of April in the calendar year following the later of (a) the calendar year in which the Participant attains age 70-1/2, or (b) the calendar year in which the Participant retires. If, as of the date that this amended and restated Plan is adopted, a Participant in active employment with the Employer is receiving distributions on account of his attaining age 70 ½, the Participant shall continue to receive Plan distributions. 
(b)  Normal Retirement Date. Payment of a Participant's retirement benefit shall begin no later than his Normal Retirement Date or, if he continues in employment past his Normal Retirement Age, his actual or late retirement date. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
10.03 - Continued Employment After Normal Retirement Age. 
A Participant who continues in the employ of an Employer after his Normal Retirement Age may not elect to begin receiving his Accrued Benefit until after he has Terminated Employment with the Employer. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
10.04 - Reemployment of a Retired Participant. 
(a)  Election to continue Payments. Except as provided in subsection (b) below, any Participant who (i) retired or otherwise Terminated Employment, (ii) is receiving a Normal or Early Retirement Pension or payments under the Early Retirement Incentive described in section 6.03 of the Plan, and (iii) is thereafter rehired, elected or appointed to fill an unexpired term as an Eligible Employee with the Employer, shall make the following election upon rehire, election or appointment: 
(1)  Continue to be considered retired under the provisions of the Plan and continue to receive his Normal or Early Retirement Pension hereunder during the period of any such reemployment but accrue no more benefits under the Plan, or 
(2)  Discontinue payment of his Normal or Early Retirement Pension hereunder during the period of reemployment and be entitled to any additional benefits which may accrue during the reemployment period. 
(b)  Rehire Within Two Months. Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, any Participant who is rehired within two (2) months of his or her Termination of Employment and prior to Normal Retirement Age, shall cease payment of any Early Retirement Pension being paid to him hereunder during his period of reemployment, regardless of whether such Participant is eligible to accrue benefits under the Plan during his reemployment. 
Any increases in benefits after rehire shall be offset by the Actuarial Equivalent of the payments already received by the Participant. Participants whose payments are suspended may elect a different form of benefit payment upon subsequent retirement. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
10.05 - Rollovers. 
(a)  General Rule. This provision shall be effective January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a Distributee's election under this section, a Distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Plan Administrator, to have any portion of an Eligible Rollover Distribution paid directly to an Eligible Retirement Plan specified by the Distributee in a direct rollover. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Eligible Rollover Distribution. An Eligible Rollover Distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the Distributee, except that an Eligible Rollover Distribution does not include (i) any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the Distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the Distributee and the Distributee's designated Beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; (ii) any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Code Section 401(a)(9). A Distributee may not elect a direct rollover with respect to an Eligible Rollover Distribution during the Plan Year that is less than $200. If the Distributee elects to have only a portion of an Eligible Rollover Distribution paid to an Eligible Retirement Plan, that portion must be equal to at least $500. 
Effective for distributions after December 31, 2001, a portion of a distribution shall not fail to be an Eligible Rollover Distribution merely because the portion consists of after-tax employee contributions, which are not includible in gross income. However, such portion may be transferred only to an individual retirement account or annuity described in Code Section 408(a) or (b) or to a qualified defined contribution plan described in Code Section 401(a) or 403(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution that is includible in gross income and the portion that is not. Effective for distributions made on and after January 1, 2007, after-tax amounts may also be transferred to an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b) that agrees to the separate accounting rules described above. 
Effective January 1, 2010, Eligible Rollover Distribution includes a distribution to a non-spouse Beneficiary 
(2)  Eligible Retirement Plan. An Eligible Retirement Plan is an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Code, an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Code, an annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Code, or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Code, that accepts the Distributee's Eligible Rollover Distribution. If the distribution is made after December 31, 2001, Eligible Retirement Plan also includes an annuity contract described in Code Section 403(b), and an eligible deferred compensation plan under Code Section 457(b) that is maintained by a state, political subdivision or agency or instrumentality of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred to such plan from this Plan. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of an Eligible Rollover Distribution to the Participant's Spouse or the Participant's non-spouse Beneficiary who is his designated Beneficiary within the meaning on Code Section 401(a)(9)(E), an Eligible Retirement Plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. Effective as of January 1, 2008, "Eligible Retirement Plan" shall include a Roth IRA described in Code Section 408A. 
(3)  Distributee. A Distributee includes a Participant, former Participant spouse, former spouse or effective as of January 1, 2010, a non-spouse beneficiary. 
(4)  Direct Rollover. A Direct Rollover is a payment by the Plan to the Eligible Retirement Plan specified by the Distributee. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
10.06 - Conformance to Section 401(a)(9). 
(a)  Effective Date. The rules set forth in this amended and restated Section 10.06 shall apply for purposes of determining the Required Minimum Distribution to Participants and Designated Beneficiaries (as defined below) for calendar years beginning on and after January 1, 2006 even if, in the case of a Beneficiary, the Participant died before 2006. A Participant or Beneficiary who would have been required to receive required minimum distributions for 2009 but for the enactment of Code Section 401(a)(9)(H) shall not receive those distributions for 2009 unless the Participant or Beneficiary chooses to receive such distributions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary any required minimum distribution made in 2009 shall be treated as Eligible Rollover Distribution. 
(b)  Commencement of Distribution. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, distribution to a Participant shall commence not later than the Required Beginning Date. The Required Beginning Date shall be April 1 of the calendar year following the later of (i) the calendar year in which the Participant attains age 70½ or (ii) the calendar year in which occurs the Participant's Retirement Date. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Required Beginning Date for any Participant who has attained or will attain age 70 1/2 on or before December 31, 1998, and has an Accrued Benefit under the Plan (including any Prior Plan) as of December 31, 1996, shall be April 1 following the calendar year in which the Participant attains age 70½, regardless of whether the Participant is then employed by the Employer. 
Nothing in this Section 10.06 shall be deemed to extend any death benefit or permit any Beneficiary designation or payment form not otherwise provided or permitted under this Plan. This Section 10.06 shall, instead, be deemed to limit and modify any provision of this Plan to the extent that such limitation or modification is necessary to ensure that the Plan complies with this Section 10.06, Code Section 401(a)(9) and the Regulations thereunder. 
(c)  Period of Distribution. The entire interest of each Participant in this Plan will be distributed, beginning not later than the Required Beginning Date described in paragraph (b) above, over the life of such Participant or over the lives of such Participant and his Designated Beneficiary, or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of such Participant or the life expectancy of such Participant and his Designated Beneficiary. 
(d)  Death of Participant After Distribution has Begun. If distribution of a Participant's interest has begun in accordance with paragraph (b) above (i.e., distributions on or after the Required Beginning Date), and if the Participant dies before his entire interest has been distributed to him, then the remaining portion of such interest will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used under paragraph (b) as of the date of the Participant's death. 
(e)  Death of Participant Before Distribution has Begun. If a Participant dies before distribution of the Participant's interest has begun in accordance with paragraph (b) above (i.e., no distributions have been made on or after the Required Beginning Date), the entire interest of the Participant must be paid over whichever of the following periods is applicable: 
(i)  If one or more Designated Beneficiaries is not the Participant's Spouse, the distribution period shall be the Designated Beneficiary's remaining life expectancy. 
(ii)  If the sole Designated Beneficiary is the Participant's Spouse, the distribution period shall be the Spouse's remaining life expectancy. 
(iii)  If there is no Designated Beneficiary, the entire Account shall be distributed by the end of the calendar year that includes the fifth anniversary of the Participant's death. 
Distributions under this Section 10.06(e) above shall commence as follows: 
(i)  Distributions under 10.06(e)(i) (i.e., distribution to a non-Spouse Designated Beneficiary) shall begin on or before the end of the calendar year that begins immediately after the calendar year in which the Participant died. 
(ii)  Distributions under Section 10.06(e)(ii) (i.e., distribution to a Spousal Designated Beneficiary) shall begin on or before the later of the end of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the Participant died and the end of the calendar year in which the Participant would have attained age 70 1/2. 
(f)  Form of Distribution. For a Participant who is employed by an Employer after his Required Beginning Date, any distribution payable under this Section 10.06 may be paid in any optional form of benefit that is available under the Plan, provided that all consent requirements under the Plan are satisfied. Any form of distribution payable under this Plan, however, must: 
(i)  be in the form of a periodic annuity for the Participant's life, or for the joint life expectancy of the Participant and Designated Beneficiary or over a period certain that does not exceed the maximum length of the period certain determined under the Regulations; 
(ii)  the interval between payments must be uniform over the entire distribution period and must not exceed one year; 
(iii)  if payments have commenced over a period certain, the period certain may not be changed; 
(iv)  distributions in the form of a life annuity must satisfy the minimum distribution incidental benefit (MDIB) requirement of Code Section 401(a)(9)(G) and Treasury Regulation 1.401(a)(9)-6, A-2, or any successor regulation thereto; and 
(v)  all payments, either in the form of a life annuity or over a period certain must either be nonincreasing or increase only in accordance with the rules set forth in Treasury Regulation 1.401(a)(9)-6, A-1. 
For purposes of this Section 10.06, references to a life annuity shall include an annuity for the joint life expectancy of the Participant and the Designated Beneficiary. 
(g)  Lump Sum Distributions. In the case of a lump sum distribution from this Plan that is distributed in or after the calendar year in which the Participant attains or would have attained age 70 1/2, the amount of the lump sum that equals the Participant's or Designated Beneficiary's Required Minimum Distribution and thus is not an Eligible Rollover Distribution within the meaning of Section 10.06 of the Plan shall be determined using either of the methods set forth in the Regulations. The Plan Administrator shall have the sole discretion to elect the calculation method but shall apply the same method to all lump sum distributions made in the same calendar year. 
(h)  Incidental Death Benefit Requirement. Any optional form of benefit elected by the Participant or Designated Beneficiary must comply with the minimum distribution incidental benefit requirement of Code Section 401(a)(9)(G). This rule insures that the retirement benefits payable under the Plan are more than incidental. 
(i)  Actuarial Increase After Age 70 1/2. 
(1)  Except with respect to a Participant who is a 5% owner (as defined in Code Section 401(a)(9) and Treasury Regulations thereunder), a participant's Accrued Benefit shall be actuarially increased to take into account the period after age 70-1/2 in which the employee does not receive any benefits under the plan. The actuarial increase shall commence on April 1 following the calendar year in which the employee attains age 70-1/2, and end on the date on which benefits commence after retirement in an amount sufficient to satisfy Code Section 401(a)(9). 
The Accrued Benefit payable to such a Participant as of the end of the period for which the actuarial increase is required shall not be less than: 
(i)  the Actuarial Equivalent of the employee's Accrued Benefit as of April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the Participant attained age 70 1/2, plus 
(ii)  the Actuarial Equivalent of any additional benefits accrued after the date described in (i) above, less 
(iii)  the Actuarial Equivalent of any distributions made with respect to the Participant's Accrued Benefit after such date. 
(2)  The actuarial increase described above may reduce the benefit accrual otherwise required under Code Section 411(b)(1)(H)(i). 
(3)  The actuarial adjustment described above shall be made even during a period for which benefits are suspended pursuant to Article 10. 
(j)  Plan Administrator's Discretion. The Plan Administrator shall have the sole authority and full discretion to apply the provisions of this Section 10.06 to any benefit option elected by the Participant. The Plan Administrator may, for example, modify a Participant's selection of an optional form of benefit to satisfy the incidental death benefit requirement by requiring, at its discretion, that the Participant select another form of benefit or another contingent annuitant, or by modifying the form of benefit so that it complies with the applicable rules. 
(k)  Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this Section 10.06, notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary. 
(i)  Designated Beneficiary. The term "Designated Beneficiary" shall be determined in accordance with the definition of "Beneficiary" in the Regulations, notwithstanding that this definition may be different from that set forth elsewhere in this Plan, provided that any individual who is a Designated Beneficiary must also be a Beneficiary (but not necessarily all of the Beneficiaries) as defined in this Plan. Each Beneficiary, as defined in the Plan, however, need not be a Designated Beneficiary in the event, for example, that a Beneficiary disclaims his interest under this Plan. 
(ii)  Spouse. "Spouse" shall mean "Spouse" as defined in the Regulations. Nothing in this Section 10.06 shall be deemed, however, to extend any death benefit or permit any Beneficiary designation or payment form not otherwise provided or permitted under this Plan. 
(iii)  Regulations. "Regulations" shall refer to the Treasury Regulations (including temporary Regulations) promulgated under Code Section 401(a)(9), as set forth in Treasury Regulations 1.401(a)(9)-1 through 1.401(a)(9)-6T, and any additional guidance issued by the IRS in the form of revenue rulings, notices and other guidance published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin or any successor thereto. 
(l)  Provisions applicable to Plan Years beginning January 1, 1989 until December 31, 1993. 
Distribution of a Participant's entire interest will commence not later than the April 1 following the calendar year in which the Participant attains age 70-1/2 (the Participant's "required commencement date"); provided, however, that the required commencement date of a Participant who attained age 70-1/2 prior to January 1, 1988 shall be April 1 of the calendar year next following the later of the calendar year in which he attained age 70-1/2 or the calendar year in which he retires, and the required commencement date of a Participant who attained age 70-1/2 in calendar year 1988 shall be April 1, 1990. In the event a Participant dies before benefits commence, his interest may be paid to the Participant's surviving spouse over a period certain not to exceed the spouse's life expectancy. If a Participant dies before benefits commence and his surviving spouse is not the beneficiary, the entire remaining interest must be distributed to the Participant's beneficiary within five years. However, if distributions have commenced to the Participant before the Participant's death, distributions to the Participant's beneficiary may continue according to the option selected by the Participant. 
(m)  Provisions applicable to Plan Years beginning January 1, 1994 until December 31, 2001. 
(i)  Age 70-1/2 Rule. Distribution of a Participant's benefits will commence not later than the April 1 following the calendar year in which the Participant attains age 70-1/2 (the Participant's "required commencement date"). In the event a Participant dies before benefits commence, his interest may be paid to the Participant's surviving spouse over a period certain not to exceed the spouse's life expectancy and must commence by the later of (A) the end of the calendar year next following the calendar year in which the Participant dies or (b) the end of the calendar year in which the Participant would have attained age 70-1/2. If a Participant dies before benefits commence and his surviving spouse is not the beneficiary, the entire remaining interest must be distributed to the Participant's beneficiary in a manner satisfying one of the following: 
(A)  If distributions are to be made to the beneficiary over a period which will end after the end of the sixth calendar year ending on or after the death of the Participant, then such payments must commence by the end of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the Participant died and must be paid over a period which does not exceed the life expectancy of the beneficiary and which complies with the requirements of Subsection (b) below. 
(B)  The entire amount owed to the beneficiary must be paid to the beneficiary before the end of the fifth calendar year following the calendar year in which the Participant died. 
However, if distributions have commenced to the Participant before the Participant's death, distributions to the Participant's beneficiary may continue according to the option selected by the Participant. In the event benefit payments are required to commence to a Participant under this Section and the payments are made pursuant to a form of benefit payment elected by the Participant, payments under this Section shall not reduce future benefit payments. However, if a Participant continues accruing Service after payments commence under this Section, a Participant's Accrued Benefit shall be redetermined as of each December 31st in which additional benefits accrued and such Accrued Benefit shall be reduced by the Equivalent Actuarial Value of benefits previously paid. Such adjusted Accrued Benefit shall be used for the purposes of determining payments required to be made after such December 31st. 
(n)  Distribution Requirements. 
Notwithstanding anything in this Plan or any Appendix to the contrary, distributions under this Plan shall be adjusted, if necessary, for good faith compliance with Code Section 401(a)(9) and Regulations issued under such Code Section, including the minimum distribution incidental death benefit requirements of proposed Regulation Section 1.401(a)(9)-2. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 11 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AFFECTING THE PAYMENT OF BENEFITS 

11.01 - General. 
In general, the Fund Administrator shall make payment of any pension directly to the Participant entitled to the payment. However, the Plan Administrator, in lieu of instructing the Fund Administrator to pay the pension which a Participant is to receive directly from the Fund, may instruct the Fund Administrator to purchase from an insurance company selected by the Plan Administrator a Nontransferable Annuity contract to provide the benefits a Participant would receive under this Plan. In the event the Fund Administrator purchases a Nontransferable Annuity contract for the benefit of a Participant, the Fund Administrator may either assign the contract to the Participant or hold the contract for the benefit of the Participant pursuant to the instructions of the Plan Administrator. The Fund Administrator also may purchase a Nontransferable Annuity contract for the benefit of a Beneficiary or Surviving Spouse entitled to a distribution of all or a portion of the Participant's Nonforfeitable Accrued Benefit. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
11.02 - Plan Merger. 
The Plan shall not participate in any merger or consolidation with another plan, and no Plan assets or liabilities shall be transferred to another plan, unless immediately after the merger, consolidation or transfer, the surviving Plan provides each Participant a benefit equal to or greater than the benefit each Participant would have received had the Plan terminated immediately before the merger or consolidation or transfer. The Plan Administrator may enter into a merger agreement or a direct transfer of assets agreements with the trustees or administrators of other retirement plans described in Code Section 401(a), and may accept the direct transfer of plan assets, or to transfer plan assets, as a party to any such agreement. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
11.03 - The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 ("USERRA"). 
Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits, and service credit with respect to Qualified Military Service will be provided in accordance with Code Section 414(u). A Participant who dies during a period of Qualified Military Service, shall be treated as having returned to employment with the Employer on the day before his death and died the next day for purposes of any survivor benefits including pre-retirement survivor benefits and any accelerated vesting. Such Participant shall receive service for vesting purposes for such period of Qualified Military Service but shall not receive service for purposes of accruing benefits for such period of Qualified Military Service. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
11.04 - Forfeiture of Benefits. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan to the contrary, a Participant's entire Accrued Benefit under the Plan shall be forfeited in the manner and to the extent provided under O.C.G.A. Section 47-1-20 through Section 47-1-24, if a Participant is convicted of a public employment, drug related, or other covered crime. In addition, no benefits shall be payable under this Plan to a Participant or Beneficiary if the Participant Terminates Employment with the Employer as a result of embezzlement of Employer funds, theft of property or other malpractice in office, and the Plan's liability to such Participant shall be limited to the return of the Participant's Contributions, if any, without Compound Interest, less any sums due to the Employer. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
11.05 - Payments to Legally Incompetent Distributee. 
Whenever any benefit is to be paid to or for the benefit of any person who is a minor or determined to be incompetent by qualified medical advice, the Pension Trustee Board need not require the appointment of a guardian or custodian, but may cause the benefit to be paid to the person having custody of the minor or incompetent, or to the minor or incompetent without the intervention of a guardian or custodian, or to the legal guardian or custodian if one has been appointed, or may cause the benefit to be used for the benefit of the minor or incompetent. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
11.06 - Unclaimed Payments. 
If the Plan Administrator cannot ascertain the whereabouts of any Participant to whom a payment is due, the Plan Administrator may direct that the payment and all remaining payments otherwise due to the Participant be cancelled on the records of the Plan and the amount thereof treated as a forfeiture and shall be used to reduce Employer contributions to the Plan. If the Participant later notifies the Plan Administrator of his whereabouts and requests the payments due to him, the Employer shall contribute to the Plan an amount equal to the payment to be paid to him as soon as administratively feasible. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
11.07 - Assignment or Alienation. 
Except as noted below, neither a Participant nor a Beneficiary shall anticipate, assign or alienate (either at law or in equity), and no third-party may attach, garnish or otherwise subject to legal process, any benefit provided under the Plan, and the Plan Administrator shall not recognize any such anticipation, assignment, alienation, attachment, garnishment or other legal process. This prohibition against anticipation, assignment, alienation, attachment, garnishment or other legal process shall not apply to money lawfully owed by the Participant or Beneficiary to the Employer but only to the extent of such Participant benefit payments and Participant contributions to the Plan. Domestic relations orders shall not be recognized by the Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
11.08 - Overfunding. 
If the Employer has overfunded the Plan at the time it terminates the Plan, the Fund Administrator may return the amount by which the Employer has overfunded the Plan to the Employer. The Employer shall state by written request to the Fund Administrator the amount of the overfunding it wishes the Fund Administrator to return to it upon termination of the Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
11.09 - Offset by Workers' Compensation Benefits. 
Effective November 7, 1989, a Participant's monthly benefit payments under the Plan (regardless of whether it is payable on account of his Normal Retirement, Early Retirement, Deferred Vested Retirement or Disability Retirement) shall be reduced by the amount of any Workers' Compensation payments made to the Participant arising from the employment relationship with the Employer or, effective June 7, 1994, any federal Social Security Disability payments made to the Participant. Upon discontinuance of Workers Compensation or Social Security Disability payments, the offset shall discontinue and the Participant shall be entitled to receive amounts as originally calculated under the Plan. 
If the Participant dies, the monthly benefit otherwise payable to the Beneficiary, if any, shall be reduced by the amount of the monthly Workers' Compensation or Social Security Disability payments made to the Beneficiary, to the extent that such Workers' Compensation or Social Security Disability payments are attributable to Participant. 
Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Section 11.09, any benefit payable under this Plan that is a refund of Participant Contributions plus Compound Interest shall not be reduced on account of any Workers' Compensation or Social Security Disability payments. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 12 - LIMITATIONS ON BENEFITS 
Refer to Section 12.05 for the definitions of certain terms used in this Article 12. This Article 12 shall be effective beginning January 1, 1987. 

12.01. - General Rule. 
The Annual Benefit payable under this Plan to a Participant at any time shall not exceed the Maximum Permissible Amount. "Maximum Permissible Amount" shall mean the lesser of (i) $90,000 ($210,000, effective for Limitation Years beginning on and after January 1, 2015), as adjusted by the Secretary of the Treasury for each calendar year, with the new limitation to apply to Limitation Years ending within the calendar year of the date of the adjustment (the "Dollar Limitation"); or (ii) for Limitation Years beginning prior to January 1, 1995, 100% of the Participant's average Compensation for the period of three consecutive years during which the Participant has the highest aggregate Compensation from the Employer. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
12.02 - Reduction for Less than Ten Years of Participation or Employment. 
If the Annual Benefit commences when the Participant has less than ten years of participation in this Plan or any predecessor plan to this Plan, the Dollar Limitation shall be reduced by one-tenth for each year less than ten, but in no event shall be less than one-tenth of the unreduced Dollar Limitation. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
12.03 - Adjustment if the Annual Benefit Commences Before Age 62 or After Age 65. 
If the payment of benefits under this Plan commences before age 62 or after age 65, the Dollar Limitation shall be adjusted as provided in this Section 12.03. 
Generally, the age-adjusted Dollar Limitation is the actuarial equivalent of the Dollar Limitation payable at age 62 or age 65, as calculated under (i) or (ii) following, whichever is applicable: 
(i) If the age at which the benefit is payable is less than 62: 
If the Annuity Starting Date for the Participant's benefit is prior to age 62 and occurs in a Limitation Year beginning before July 1, 2007, the Dollar Limitation for the Participant's Annuity Starting Date is the annual amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the Participant's Annuity Starting Date that is the actuarial equivalent of the Dollar Limitation (adjusted for years of participation less than 10, if required) with actuarial equivalence computed using whichever of the following produces the smaller annual amount: (1) the interest rate specified in the Plan for adjusting benefits for early commencement and the mortality table (or other tabular factor) specified in the Plan; or (2) a 5-percent interest rate assumption and the Applicable Mortality Table as defined in the Plan. 
If the Annuity Starting Date for the Participant's benefit is prior to age 62 and occurs in a Limitation Year beginning on or after July 1, 2007, and the Plan does not have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 62 and the age of benefit commencement, the Dollar Limitation for the Participant's Annuity Starting Date is the annual amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the Participant's Annuity Starting Date that is the actuarial equivalent of the Dollar Limitation (adjusted for years of participation less than 10, if required) with actuarial equivalence computed using a 5 percent interest rate assumption and the Applicable Mortality Table for the Annuity Starting Date as defined in the Plan (and expressing the Participant's age based on completed calendar months as of the Annuity Starting Date). 
If the Annuity Starting Date for the Participant's benefit is prior to age 62 and occurs in a Limitation Year beginning on or after July 1, 2007, and the Plan has an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 62 and the age of benefit commencement, the Dollar Limitation for the Participant's Annuity Starting Date is the lesser of the limitation determined under subsection (i) and the Dollar Limitation (adjusted for years of participation less than 10, if required) multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at the Participant's Annuity Starting Date to the annual amount of the immediately commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at age 62, both determined without applying the limitations of this section 
Effective on and after January 1, 1997, if a Participant is a "qualified participant" as defined under Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b)(2)(G), such Participant may retire before age sixty-two (62), without a reduction in the Dollar Limitation if at least fifteen (15) years of service is required to receive a full benefit under the Plan. 
(ii) If the age at which the benefit is payable is greater than age 65: 
If the Annuity Starting Date for the Participant's benefit is after age 65 and occurs in a Limitation Year beginning before July 1, 2007, the Dollar Limitation for the Participant's Annuity Starting Date is the annual amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the Participant's Annuity Starting Date that is the actuarial equivalent of the Dollar Limitation (adjusted for years of participation less than 10, if required) with actuarial equivalence computed using whichever of the following produces the smaller annual amount: (1) the interest rate specified in the Plan and the mortality table (or other tabular factor) specified the Plan; or (2) a 5-percent interest rate assumption and the Applicable Mortality Table. 
If the Annuity Starting Date for the Participant's benefit is after age 65 and occurs in a Limitation Year beginning on or after July 1, 2007, and the Plan does not have an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 65 and the age of benefit commencement, the Dollar Limitation at the Participant's Annuity Starting Date is the annual amount of a benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity commencing at the Participant's Annuity Starting Date that is the actuarial equivalent of the Dollar Limitation (adjusted for years of participation less than 10, if required), with actuarial equivalence computed using a 5 percent interest rate assumption and the Applicable Mortality Table for that Annuity Starting Date (and expressing the Participant's age based on completed calendar months as of the Annuity Starting Date). 
If the Annuity Starting Date for the Participant's benefit is after age 65 and occurs in a Limitation Year beginning on or after July 1, 2007, and the Plan has an immediately commencing straight life annuity payable at both age 65 and the age of benefit commencement, the Dollar Limitation at the Participant's Annuity Starting Date is the lesser of the limitation determined under subsection (i) above, and the Dollar Limitation (adjusted for years of participation less than 10, if required) multiplied by the ratio of the annual amount of the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at the Participant's Annuity Starting Date to the annual amount of the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at age 65, both determined without applying the limitations of this Section. For this purpose, the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at the Participant's Annuity Starting Date is the annual amount of such annuity payable to the Participant, computed disregarding the Participant's accruals after age 65 but including actuarial adjustments even if those actuarial adjustments are used to offset accruals; and the adjusted immediately commencing straight life annuity under the Plan at age 65 is the annual amount of such annuity that would be payable under the Plan to a hypothetical Participant who is age 65 and has the same accrued benefit as the Participant. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
12.04 - Special Rules. 
(a)  All plans a single plan. For purposes of the maximum limitations of this Article, all defined benefit plans maintained by the Employer shall be considered as a single defined benefit plan, and all defined contribution plans maintained by the Employer shall be considered a single defined contribution plan. 
(b)  Combined plan limitations. If the Employer maintains, or has at any time maintained, one or more qualified defined contribution plans covering any Participant in this Plan, the sum of the Participant's Defined Contribution Fraction and Defined Benefit Fraction shall not exceed 1.0 in any limitation year, and the annual benefit otherwise payable to the Participant under this Plan, and not the defined contribution plan, shall be frozen or reduced to the extent necessary so that the sum of such fractions shall not exceed 1.0. The combined plan limitation described in the preceding sentence shall not apply for any Plan Year beginning on or after January 1, 2000. 
(c)  Total Annual Benefits Not in Excess of $10,000. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the Annual Benefit payable to a Participant shall not be deemed to exceed the limits of this Article 12 if the Annual Benefit payable to the Participant under this Plan and all other defined benefit plans maintained by the Employer does not exceed $10,000 for the Plan Year or any prior Plan Year, and the Employer has not at any time maintained a defined contribution plan in which the Participant participated. 
(d)  Exceptions for Disability or Survivors' Benefits. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the adjustment prescribed by Section 12.03(i) for benefits that commence before age 62, and the reduction described in Section 12.02 for fewer than ten (10) years of participation shall not apply to any benefit paid from this Plan on account of a Participant's becoming disabled by reason of personal injuries or sickness, or amounts received by a Beneficiary as a result of the Participant's death. This paragraph shall be interpreted in accordance with Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b)(2)(I) and any regulations thereunder. 
(e)  Protection of pre-1987 benefits. For any Limitation Year before 1987, the limitations prescribed by Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code as in effect before enactment of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 shall apply, and no pension earned under this Plan prior to 1987 shall be reduced on account of the provisions of this Article 12 if it would have satisfied those limitations under such prior law. 
(f)  Protection of TRA '86 Benefits. In the case of an individual who was a Participant as of the first day of the first Limitation Year beginning after December 31, 1986, the application of the limitations of this article shall not cause the maximum permissible amount for such individual under all such defined benefit plans to be less than the individual's Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA '86) accrued benefit. 
(g)  Protection of RPA '94 benefits. In the case of an individual who was a Participant as of the first day of the first limitation year beginning after December 31, 1994, the application of the limitations of this Article shall not cause the maximum permissible amount for such individual under all such defined benefit plans to be less than the Individual's Retirement Protection Act of 1994 (RPA '94) old law benefit." 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
12.05 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Article 12, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  " Annual Additions " means the sum of the following amounts credited to a Participant's account under a defined contribution plan for the limitation year: 
(i)  Employer contributions; 
(ii)  Forfeitures; 
(iii)  Nondeductible employee contributions; provided, however, that the annual addition for any limitation year beginning before January 1, 1987 shall not be recomputed to treat nondeductible employee contributions as an annual addition; and 
(iv)  Amounts described in Internal Revenue Code Sections 415(1)(1) and 419A(d)(2). 
(b)  " Annual Benefit " means effective January 1, 1998, a retirement benefit under the Plan which is payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity. If a Participant's benefit is payable in a Non-Annuity Benefit Form, whether as the normal form of benefit or as an optional form which the Participant or his Beneficiary elects, the Non-Annuity Benefit Form is adjusted to an Annual Benefit as described below. No actuarial adjustment to the Non-Annuity Benefit Form is required for (i) the value of a qualified joint and survivor annuity; (ii) the value of benefits that are not directly related to retirement benefits (such as a disability benefit, pre-retirement death benefits, and post-retirement medical benefits); or (iii) the value of post-retirement cost-of-living increases provided that the amount payable to the Participant under the Non-Annuity Benefit Form in any limitation year cannot be greater than the Section 415(b) limit applicable at the annuity starting date as increased in subsequent years pursuant to Code Section 415(d) and Section 1.415(d)-1 of the Treasury Regulations. The determination of the Annual Benefit shall disregard benefits attributable to employee contributions or rollover contributions or the assets transferred from a qualified plan that was not maintained by an Employer. 
Effective for distributions in Limitation Years beginning after December 31, 2003, the determination of actuarial equivalence for Non-Annuity Benefit Forms shall be made in accordance with the following. 
(i)  Limitation years beginning before July 1, 2007. For Limitation Years beginning before July 1, 2007, the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity is equal to the annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the participant's form of benefit computed using whichever of the following produces the greater annual amount: (I) the interest rate and the mortality table (or other tabular factor) specified in Article I of the plan for adjusting benefits in the same form; and (II) a 5 percent interest rate assumption and the applicable mortality table defined in Article I of the Plan for that annuity starting date. With respect to annuity starting dates on or after January 1, 2004, and prior to January 1, 2006, the five and one half percent (5.5%) shall be substituted for 5 percent for purposes of any adjustment of a benefit subject to Code Section 417(e)(3). 
(ii)  Limitation Years beginning on or after July 1, 2007. For Limitation Years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, the actuarially equivalent straight life annuity is equal to the greater of (1) the annual amount of the straight life annuity (if any) payable to the participant under the plan commencing at the same annuity starting date as the participant's form of benefit; and (2) the annual amount of the straight life annuity commencing at the same annuity starting date that has the same actuarial present value as the participant's form of benefit, computed using a 5 percent interest rate assumption and the applicable mortality table defined in Article I of the Plan for that annuity starting date. 
(c)  " Applicable Mortality Table " is the table prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, which prior to the first day of the Plan Year beginning on or after January 1, 2008, is the table specified in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 and on and after that date is the applicable Code Section 417(e)(3) mortality table. 
(d)  " Compensation " means a Participant's wages as defined in Code Section 3401(a) (wages subject to income tax withholding at the source) but without regard to exceptions contained in Code Section 3401(a) for wages based on the nature of location of the employment or the services performed. For Limitation Years beginning on or after December 31, 1997, for purposes of applying the limitations of this Article, compensation shall include any elective deferral (as defined in Code Section 402(g)(3)), and any amount which is contributed or deferred by the Employer at the election of the Participant and which is not includible in the gross income of the Participant by reason of Code Section 125 or 457. For Limitation Years beginning after December 31, 2000, compensation will also include any elective amounts that are not includible in the Participant's gross income by reason of Code Section 132(f) (related to qualified transportation plan). For Limitation Years beginning on and after January 1, 2007, compensation also includes compensation paid by that later of 2 ½ months after the Participant's severance from employment or the end of the Limitation Year that includes the date of the Participant's severance from employment if: 
(i)  the payment is regular compensation for services during the Participant's regular working hours or compensation for services outside the Participant's regular working hours (such as overtime or shift differential) commissions, bonuses or other similar payments and absent a severance from employment, the payment would have been paid to the Participant while he or she continued in employment with the Employer; or 
(ii)  the payment is for unused accrued bona fide sick, vacation, or the leave that the Participant would have been able to use if employment had continued 
The intent of this definition is to comply with the alternative definition of compensation described in Treasury Regulation Section 1.415-2(d)(11)(ii). 
(e)  " Defined Benefit Fraction " means a fraction, the numerator of which is the sum of the Participant's Projected Annual Benefits under all the defined benefit plans (whether or not terminated) maintained by the Employer, and the denominator of which is the lesser of (i) 125 percent of the Dollar Limitation in effect for the limitation year under Internal Revenue Code Section 415(b)(1)(A); or (ii) 140 percent of the Participant's Highest Average Compensation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Participant was a Participant in a plan maintained by the Employer and in existence on July 1, 1982, the denominator of this fraction shall not be less than 125 percent of the sum of the annual benefits under such plans which the Participant had accrued as of the end of the last limitation year beginning before January 1, 1983, but determined without regard to changes in the Plan or cost-of-living increases occurring after July 1, 1982. The preceding sentence applies only if the defined benefit plans individually and in the aggregate satisfied the requirements of Internal Revenue Code Section 415 for all limitation years beginning before January 1, 1983. 
(f)  " Defined Contribution Fraction " means a fraction, the numerator of which is the sum of the Annual Additions to the Participant's account under all the defined contribution plans (whether or not terminated) maintained by the Employer for the current and all prior limitation years, and the denominator of which is the sum of the maximum aggregate amounts for the current and all prior limitation years of Employment with the Employer (regardless of whether a defined contribution plan was maintained by the Employer). 
The maximum aggregate amount in any limitation year is the lesser of (i) 125 percent of the Dollar Limitation in effect under Internal Revenue Code Section 415(c)(1)(A); or (ii) 35 percent of the Participant's Compensation for such year. 
If the Employee was a participant in one or more defined contribution plans maintained by the Employer which were in existence on July 1, 1982, the numerator of this fraction shall be adjusted if the sum of this fraction and the defined benefit fraction would otherwise exceed 1.0 under the terms of this Plan. Under the adjustment, an amount equal to the product of (1) the excess of the sum of the fractions over 1.0 times and (2) the denominator of this fraction, will be permanently subtracted from the numerator of this fraction. The adjustment is calculated using the fractions as they would be computed as of the end of the last limitation year beginning before January 1, 1983. 
(g)  " Employer " means the Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
(h)  Limitation Year means the calendar year. 
(i)  " Projected Annual Benefit " means the annual benefit to which the Participant would be entitled under the terms of the Plan assuming (i) the Participant will continue Employment until Normal Retirement Age under the Plan (or current age, if later), and (ii) the Participant's Compensation for the current limitation year and all other relevant factors used to determine benefits under the Plan will remain constant for all future limitation years. 
(j)  " RPA '94 Old Law Benefit " means the Participant's Accrued Benefit under the terms of the Plan as of December 31, 1999, (the RPA '94 freeze date), for the Annuity Starting Date and optional form and taking into account the limitations of Code Section 415 as in effect on December 7, 1994, including the participation requirements under Code Section 415. In determining the amount of a Participant's RPA '94 old law benefit, the following shall be disregarded: 
(i)  any Plan amendment increasing benefits adopted after the RPA '94 freeze date; and 
(ii)  any cost of living adjustments that become effective after such date. 
A Participant's RPA '94 old law benefit is not increased after the RPA '94 freeze date, but if the limitations of Code Section 415, as in effect on December 7, 1994, are less than the limitations that were applied to determine the Participant's RPA '94 old law benefit on the RPA '94 freeze date, then the Participant's RPA '94 old law benefit will be reduced in accordance with such reduced limitation. If, at any date after the RPA '94 freeze date, the Participant's total plan benefit, before the application of Section 415, is less than the Participant's RPA '94 old law benefit, the RPA '94 old law benefit will be reduced to the Participant's total plan benefit. 
(k)  " RPA '94 Old Law Benefit " means the Participant's Accrued Benefit under the terms of the Plan as of December 31, 1999, (the RPA '94 freeze date), for the annuity starting date and optional form and taking into account the limitations of Code Section 415 as in effect on December 7, 1994, including the participation requirements under Code Section 415. In determining the amount of a Participant's RPA '94 old law benefit, the following shall be disregarded: 
(i)  any Plan amendment increasing benefits adopted after the RPA '94 freeze date; and 
(ii)  any cost of living adjustments that become effective after such date. 
A Participant's RPA '94 old law benefit is not increased after the RPA '94 freeze date, but if the limitations of Code Section 415, as in effect on December 7, 1994, are less than the limitations that were applied to determine the Participant's RPA '94 old law benefit on the RPA '94 freeze date, then the Participant's RPA '94 old law benefit will be reduced in accordance with such reduced limitation. If, at any date after the RPA '94 freeze date, the Participant's total plan benefit, before the application of Section 415, is less than the Participant's RPA '94 old law benefit, the RPA '94 old law benefit will be reduced to the Participant's total plan benefit. 
(l)  " TRA '86 accrued benefit " means a Participant's accrued benefit under the Plan, determined as if the Participant had separated from service as of the close of the last limitation year beginning before January 1, 1987, when expressed as an annual benefit within the meaning of Code Section 415(b)(2). In determining the amount of a Participant's TRA '86 accrued benefit, the following shall be disregarded: 
(i)  any change in the terms and conditions of the Plan after May 5, 1986; and 
(ii)  any cost of living adjustments occurring after May 5, 1986. 
(m)  "Year of participation" means each accrual computation period for which the following conditions are met: (1) The Participant is credited with at least the number of hours of service (or period of service if the elapsed time method is used) for benefit accrual purposes, required under the terms of the Plan in order to accrue a benefit for the accrual computation period, and (2) the Participant is included as a Participant under the eligibility provisions of the Plan for at least one day of the accrual computation period. If these two conditions are met, the portion of a year of participation credited to the Participant shall equal the amount of benefit accrual service credited to the Participant for such accrual computation period. A Participant who is permanently and totally disabled within the meaning of Code Section 415(c)(3)(C)(i) for an accrual computation period shall receive a year of participation with respect to that period. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 13 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

13.01 - No Liability. 
The Employer assumes no obligation or responsibility to any of its Eligible Employees, Participants or Beneficiaries for any act of, or failure to act, on the part of the Plan Administrator (unless the Employer is the Plan Administrator) or the Fund Administrator. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
13.02 - Amendment to Vesting Schedule. 
Though the Employer reserves the right to amend the vesting schedule at any time, the Plan Administrator shall not apply the amended vesting schedule to reduce the Nonforfeitable percentage of any Participant's Accrued Benefit derived from Employer contributions (determined as of the later of the date the Employer adopts the amendment, or the date the amendment becomes effective) to a percentage less than the Nonforfeitable percentage computed under the Plan without regard to the amendment. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
13.03 - Pension Trustee Board. 
The Pension Trustee Board will consist of a seven (7) member board comprised as follows: two active vested Macon-Bibb County employees (as defined by Section 8.02) that are members of this Plan, two vested Macon-Bibb County retirees that are members of this Plan, one Macon-Bibb County resident at large (with a financial background), and two Macon-Bibb County Commissioners; where said members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of the majority of the Macon-Bibb County Commission. All members of the Pension Trustee Board shall serve at the pleasure of the Macon-Bibb County Commission and may be removed by the Mayor prior to the expiration of their respective terms with the approval of the majority vote of the Macon-Bibb County Commission. All Pension Trustee Board members shall serve a two-year term beginning December 9, 2014, and ending December 31, 2016. Each successor thereafter will serve a two year term which shall begin January of the respective year. 
(a)  The Pension Trustee Board shall administer the Plan and act as trustee, and shall have full power and authority to pass all reasonable rules and regulations of the administration of the Plan. 
(b)  All rules and decisions of the Pension Trustee Board shall be uniformly and consistently applied to all Employees in similar circumstances. Any rule or decision that is not inconsistent with this Plan shall be conclusive and binding upon all persons affected by it. 
(c)  The Pension Trustee Board shall have complete control of the administration of the Plan with all powers necessary to enable it to properly carry out the provisions of the Plan. In addition to all implied powers and responsibilities necessary to carry out the objectives of the Plan, the Pension Trustee Board shall have the following specific powers and responsibilities: 
(i)  To construe the Plan and any agreement with a Fund Administrator and to determine all questions arising in the administration, interpretation and operation of the Plan; 
(ii)  To decide all questions relating to the eligibility of Employees to participate in the benefits of the Plan; 
(iii)  To determine the amount, manner and time of payment of any benefits of the Plan to which any Participant, Beneficiary or other person may be entitled, and to afford any person dissatisfied with such determination the right to a hearing thereon; 
(iv)  To keep records of all acts and determinations of the Pension Trustee Board, and to keep all such records, books of accounts, data and other documents as may be necessary for the proper administration of the Plan; 
(v)  To prepare and distribute to all Plan Participants and Beneficiaries information concerning the Plan and their rights under the Plan, including, but not limited to, all information that is required to be distributed by any applicable law; 
(vi)  To prescribe procedures to be followed by Participants in filing applications for benefits. 
(vii)  To file with the state of Georgia and/or the Secretary of the Treasury all reports and information required to be filed by the state, the Internal Revenue Service or other applicable law; 
(viii)  To receive and review the annual valuation of the Plan made by an actuary; 
(ix)  To receive and review reports of the financial condition of the Plan, and of the receipts and disbursements of the Plan assets; 
(x)  To appoint or employ an administrator for the Plan and any other agents it deems advisable, including actuarial and legal counsel; 
(xi)  To do all things necessary to operate and administer the Plan in accordance with its provisions and in compliance with applicable provisions of federal law; 
(xii)  To authorize payment of benefits from the Fund; shall keep on file, in such manner as it may deem convenient or proper, all reports of the Fund; and 
(xiii)  To authorize the payment from the Fund of the reasonable expenses of administrating the Plan and the Trust. 
(d)  To enable the Pension Trustee Board to perform its functions, Macon-Bibb County shall supply full and timely information of all matters relating to the compensation and length of service of all Participants, their retirement, death or other cause of termination of employment, and such other pertinent facts as the Pension Trustee Board may require. The Pension Trustee Board shall advise the Fund Administrator of such facts and issue to the Fund Administrator such instructions as may be required by the Fund Administrator in the administration of the Plan. The Pension Trustee Board and Macon-Bibb County shall be entitled to rely upon all certificates and reports made by a Certified Public Accountant, actuary or legal counsel selected or approved by Macon-Bibb County. The Pension Trustee Board, Macon-Bibb County and its officers shall be fully protected in respect of any action suffered by them in good faith in reliance upon the advice or opinion of any accountant, actuary or attorney, and all action so taken or suffered shall be conclusive upon each of them and upon all other persons interested in the Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 14 - PARTICIPANT ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

14.01 - Personal Data to Plan Administrator. 
Each Participant and each Beneficiary of a deceased Participant must furnish to the Plan Administrator such evidence, data or information as the Plan Administrator considers necessary or desirable for the purpose of administering the Plan. The provisions of this Plan are effective for the benefit of each Participant upon the condition precedent that each Participant will furnish promptly full, true and complete evidence, data and information when requested by the Plan Administrator, provided the Plan Administrator shall advise each Participant of the effect of his failure to comply with its request. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
14.02 - Address for Notification. 
Each Participant and each Beneficiary of a deceased Participant shall file with the Plan Administrator from time to time, in writing, his post office address and any change of post office address. Any communication, statement or notice addressed to a Participant, or Beneficiary, at his last post office address filed with the Plan Administrator, or shown on the records of the Employer, shall bind the Participant, or Beneficiary, for all purposes of this Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
14.03 - Litigation Against the Fund. 
If any legal action filed against the Plan Administrator, or against any individual(s) acting as the Plan Administrator, by or on behalf of any Participant or Beneficiary, results adversely to the Participant or to the Beneficiary, the Fund Administrator shall reimburse the Plan or the Employer for all costs and fees expended by it or them by surcharging all costs and fees against the sums payable under the Plan to the Participant or to the Beneficiary, but only to the extent a court of competent jurisdiction specifically authorizes and directs such surcharges and only to the extent the Code does not prohibit any such surcharges. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
14.04 - Information Available. 
Any Participant in the Plan or any Beneficiary, may examine copies of the Plan, the Plan description, or any other instrument under which the Plan was established or is operated. The Employer will maintain all of the items listed is this Section 14.04 in its human resources office, or in such other place or places as the Employer may designate from time to time in order to comply with all applicable regulations, for examination during reasonable business hours. Upon the written request of a Participant or Beneficiary, the Plan Administrator shall furnish him with a copy of any item listed in this Section 14.04. The Plan Administrator may make a reasonable charge to the requesting person for the copy so furnished. The Plan Administrator may provide Participants with any information required under any applicable federal or State of Georgia law via electronic communication, provided the electronic communication is not prohibited under such laws and the method of electronic communication is reasonably calculated to provide accurate results. A Beneficiary's right to (and the Plan Administrator's duty to provide to the Beneficiary) information or data concerning the Plan, shall not arise until he first becomes entitled to receive a benefit under the Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
14.05 - Limitation of Liability; Legal Action. 
Any legal action to recover a benefit under this Plan must be filed within 60 days of the Plan Administrator's decision denying such benefit. Failure to file suit within this time period shall extinguish any right to benefits under the Plan. In no event may any legal action arising under this Plan be commenced later than the first anniversary of the date as of which a benefit first should have been paid or commenced. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of a dispute regarding a Participant's years of Service, no legal action may be commenced after the first anniversary of the date the Participant receives his first benefit statement (or other documentation) showing the amount of Service used to calculate his eligibility or vesting percentage under the Plan. 
Neither the Employer nor the Pension Trustee Board shall be in any way subject to suit or litigation, or to any legal liability, for any cause or reason or thing whatsoever, in connection with this Plan or its operation, and each Participant and Beneficiary agrees to release the Employer, the members of the Board and all of its officers and agents from any and all liability or obligation. 
To any action or proceeding involving the Plan or the Fund, the Employer, the Board and the Fund Administrator shall be the only necessary parties, and no employees or former employees of the Employer or their beneficiaries or other person having or claiming to have an interest in the Plan shall be entitled to any notice or process regarding such action or proceeding. Any final judgment that is not appealed or appealable that may be entered in any such action or proceeding shall be binding and conclusive on the parties hereto, the Board and all persons having or claiming to have any interest in the Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 15 - TRUST FUND AND CONTRIBUTIONS 

15.01 - Trust Fund. 
(a)  There is created a Trust Fund which consists of contributions made to the Plan by the Employer and the Participants and any funds that may be transferred to the Plan from funds of other pension plans, as well as the income and return from investment of such contributions and transfers. The Pension Trustee Board shall act as trustees to the Plan. 
(b)  All contributions and other monies becoming a part of the Fund shall be paid to the Fund Custodian who shall be named by the Pension Trustee Board. The Fund Custodian need not have investment powers and shall exercise no such powers unless authorized by the Pension Trustee Board. In general, the duties of the Fund Custodian shall be to receive from Pension Trustee Board monies to be added to the Fund and to allocate the same to the accounts of investment advisors as directed by the Pension Trustee Board. Such Fund Custodian shall likewise be empowered to retain, hold, allocate to investment advisors and distribute the Funds as the same may from time to time be directed. The Pension Trustee Board shall enter into a contract with the Fund Custodian to provide for the duties, compensation and other relevant terms of employment which shall be terminable at any time by the Pension Trustee Board. Charges made by the Fund Custodian shall be payable from the Trust Fund. 
(c)  In addition to the Fund Custodian, there shall be one or more investment advisors who shall have such powers of investment as are specified from time to time by the Pension Trustee Board. Generally, the investment advisors shall have the right to direct the purchase of securities and other investments for the account of the Fund, utilizing funds assigned to their respective accounts by the Fund Custodian, and to sell or exchange securities all in accordance with general limitations established from time to time by the Pension Trustee Board. All contributions paid over to the Plan or the Fund shall be invested in accordance with Georgia state law, federal law, and the terms of the Plan and the Fund to which they are contributed. The rights and obligations of the Pension Trustee Board shall be set out in a contract or contracts which shall specify fees to be paid and contain such other provisions as may be appropriate. All such contracts shall be terminable at any time by Pension Trustee Board. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
15.02 - Employer Contributions. 
(a)  Amount of Contributions. The Employer shall contribute to the Fund such amounts as are necessary to fund benefits under the Plan, and shall contribute such additional amounts as the Pension Trustee Board (based on the recommendation of the Actuary) deems necessary or desirable to maintain the actuarial soundness of the Plan. 
(b)  Form of Contributions. The Employer may pay its contributions to the Fund Administrator in cash or cash equivalent or, if acceptable to the Fund Administrator, marketable securities. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
15.03 - Exclusive Benefit. 
Except as specifically provided herein, the Employer shall have no beneficial interest in any asset of the Fund and no part of any asset in the Fund shall ever revert to or be repaid to the Employer either directly or indirectly, or be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than the exclusive benefit of Plan Participants and their Beneficiaries prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to the Participants and their Beneficiaries under the Plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
15.04 - Bond. 
Any portion of the Fund that is held in a trust shall be covered by the bond of the Pension Trustee Board to the extent required by law. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
15.05 - Refund of Contributions Upon a Mistake of Fact. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if and to the extent permitted by the Code and other applicable laws and regulations thereunder, upon the Employer's written request, a contribution that is made by a mistake of fact shall be returned to the Employer making the contribution within one (1) year after the mistaken payment of the contribution. The amount of any such contributions returned to the Employer shall be reduced by any losses attributable thereto but shall not be increased by any earnings. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
15.06 - Prohibited Transactions. 
In no event shall the parties to the Plan exercise any powers in a manner that will constitute a prohibited transaction, as defined in Code Section 4975, for which an exemption does not exist. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 16 - MISCELLANEOUS 

16.01 - Evidence. 
Anyone required to give evidence under the terms of the Plan may do so by certificate, affidavit, document or other information which the person to act in reliance may consider pertinent, reliable and genuine, and to have been signed, made or presented by the proper party or parties. The Plan Administrator shall be fully protected in acting and relying upon any evidence described under the immediately preceding sentence. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
16.02 - No Responsibility for Participant Actions. 
Neither the Employer nor the Plan Administrator shall have any obligation or responsibility with respect to any action required by the Plan to be taken by any Participant, Employee or Beneficiary, nor for the failure of any such person to act or not act. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
16.03 - Word Usage. 
Words used in the masculine shall apply to the feminine where applicable, and wherever the context of the Plan dictates, the plural shall be read as the singular and the singular as the plural. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
16.04 - State Law. 
The laws of the State of Georgia shall determine all questions arising with respect to the provisions of this Agreement except to the extent Federal statute supersedes State law. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
16.05 - No Guarantee of Employment. 
Nothing contained in this Plan, or any modification or amendment to the Plan, or in the creation of any account, or the payment of any benefit, shall give any Employee, Participant, or Beneficiary any right to continue employment, any legal or equitable right against the Employer, or an Employee of the Employer, except as expressly provided by the Plan or by a separate agreement. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 17 - AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION 

17.01 - Amendment. 
The Plan may be amended at any time and from time to time, in the sole discretion of the Employer, and without the consent of any Participant, by a written instrument authorized by the Macon-Bibb County Commission. Each amendment shall state the date to which it is either retroactively or prospectively effective. Any amendment that is required by the Internal Revenue Service in order for the Plan or Fund to qualify or continue to be qualified under the applicable provisions of the Code, or which in the judgment of the Employer is necessary or appropriate to such qualifications or continued qualification, may be made effective retroactively. 
No amendment (including a change in the actuarial assumptions in Article 1) shall have the effect of decreasing the vested portion of a Participant's Accrued Benefit. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
17.02 - Termination. 
(a)  Right to Terminate. The Macon-Bibb County Commission reserves the right to terminate the Plan at any time. 
(b)  Distribution Upon Plan Termination. If the Employer terminates the Plan, the Plan Administrator shall determine the value of the Plan's assets. The Plan Administrator shall then allocate assets of the Plan according to the following priorities: 
(i)  Benefits payable as an annuity, in the case of the benefit of a Participant or Beneficiary who was in pay status as of the termination date of the Plan; 
(ii)  All other Nonforfeitable benefits under the Plan; and 
(iii)  Any other benefits under the Plan. 
If assets are insufficient to provide all benefits under the Plan, the Plan Administrator shall allocate such assets to satisfy obligations within each category by order of priority. If assets are insufficient to provide all benefits under a priority category, the Plan Administrator shall allocates assets to Participants within that category in the ratio which each Participant's total benefit bears to the total benefits of all Participants within that category. 
(c)  Full Vesting on Termination. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Plan to the contrary, upon the termination of the Plan, the Accrued Benefit of those Participants, who are in active employment on the date of the termination shall become one hundred percent (100%) vested and Nonforfeitable to the extent funded, and to the extent required by Code Section 401(a)(7), as such Section was in effect on September 1, 1974. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE 18 - EARLY RETIREMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM 

18.01 - Early Retirement Incentive Program 
An enhanced early retirement benefit shall be made available to certain Plan Participants on a one-time basis, in accordance with and subject to the following requirements, and shall be referred to herein as the Early Retirement Incentive Program or "ERIP": 
(a)  Eligibility for Enhanced Early Retirement Benefit under ERIP. 
A Law Enforcement Participant is eligible to elect to participate in the ERIP and receive an enhanced Normal Retirement Pension, if assuming the Law Enforcement Participant worked through December 31, 2015, he or she attained age fifty-three (53) and at least eight (8) Years of Service; or he or she earned at least twenty-three (23) Years of Service on or before December 31, 2015. A general Participant is eligible to elect to participate in the ERIP and receive an enhanced Normal Retirement Pension, if, assuming the Participant worked through December 31, 2015, he or she attained age fifty-eight (58) and at least eight (8) Years of Service; or he or she earned at least twenty-eight (28) Years of Service on or before December 31, 2015. Any Participant is eligible to elect to participate in the ERIP and receive an enhanced Early Retirement Pension if, assuming the Participant worked through December 31, 2015, he or she attained age forty-eight (48) and at least eighteen (18) Years of Service. Terminated Participants and elected officials are not eligible to elect to participate in the ERIP. 
(b)  Description of Enhanced Benefits. 
Subject to the applicable limitations of Code Section 415, the enhanced early retirement incentive benefit payable to a Participant who elects to participate in the ERIP shall be computed by substituting a multiplier of two and one-fourth percent (2.25%) for benefits determined under Section 5.02 or 6.02, and assuming the Participant worked for the Employer until December 31, 2015. Therefore, the Participant's benefit shall be based upon the Participant's service and his average compensation as of December 31, 2015, times 2.25%; provided, however an enhanced Early Retirement Pension shall be subject to the reductions as provided in Section 6.02 of the Plan. 
(c)  Additional Benefits. 
A supplemental benefit will be paid from the Plan to a Participant who elects to participate in the ERIP equal to $200 per month until the Participant attains age 65. 
(d)  Window Period for Election. 
A Participant, who satisfies the eligibility requirements of the ERIP in Section (a) above, may elect to terminate employment, retire and receive the enhanced early retirement benefit described in this Section by submitting the required forms to the designated individual no later than 5:00 p.m. on July 31, 2015. A Participant may not make an election to retire under the ERIP after he or she has terminated employment with the Employer. 
(e)  7-Day Revocation Period. 
A Participant electing to retire early under the ERIP may revoke his or her election by providing written notice of the revocation to the designated individual within seven (7) days after he or she submitted the election form (the revocation period). If the Participant does not revoke his or her election within the 7-day revocation period, the election to terminate employment, retire and receive an enhanced retirement benefit pursuant to ERIP shall become irrevocable when the revocation period ends. 
(f)  Termination of Employment; Retirement Date. 
Participants who irrevocably elect to participate in the ERIP shall be required to retire no later than September 30, 2015. Benefits for a Participant who elects to participate in the ERIP shall commence on the first day of the month following his or her termination of employment and shall be paid on the first day of each succeeding month thereafter for as long as the Participant remains eligible to receive such benefits. If a Participant dies before commencement of benefits under this ERIP, the Participant's election to participate in the ERIP shall be null and void, notwithstanding any provisions herein to the contrary. 
(g)  Voluntary Election. 
The election to retire and receive enhanced early retirement benefits pursuant to the ERIP shall be completely voluntary. 
The effective date of this provision is May 31, 2015. The rights and obligations under the Plan with respect to Participants whose employment with the Employer is terminated for any reason whatsoever prior to the effective date of this Plan Amendment shall be governed by the Plan as it existed and was in effect at the time of such termination. 
Appendix I 

 

 
( Ord. No. O-15-0062, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Charter Appendix II. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT SYSTEM, DIVISION A[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, adopted December 15, 2015 , repealed and replaced app. II, arts. I—XI, in its entirety. See Code Comparative Table for history of derivation. 
State Law reference— Power to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Const. Ga. Art. 9, Sec. 2, Par. 3 (a)(14); public retirement standards law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS AND CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 1.1. - Definitions 
Where the following words and phrases appear in this plan, they shall have the respective meanings set forth below, unless their context clearly indicates to the contrary: 
(a)  Plan: Division A of the Macon-Bibb County Pensions and Retirement System. 
(b)  Pension Fund: The fund established to receive and invest contributions of the employer and from which benefits are paid. 
(c)  Employer: The City of Macon, Georgia. Effective as of July 1, 2012, the term 'Employer' shall also include Bibb County, Georgia, but only with respect to those employees of Bibb County who are eligible to continue to participate in the plan in accordance with Section 2.5. Effective January 1, 2014, the term "Employer" shall mean "Macon-Bibb County" with respect to those employees of Macon-Bibb County who are eligible to continue to participate in the Plan in accordance with Section 2.6. 
(d)  Committee: The persons appointed to administer the plan. 
(e)  Employee: Any person not specifically excluded in Article II, Section 2.3. 
(1)  Who is regularly employed by the employer and receiving remuneration for personal services rendered to the employer; and 
(2)  Whose customary employment is for more than 30 hours per week; and 
(3)  Who was first employed by the Employer before January 1, 2014. 
(f)  Pension: A series of monthly amounts which are payable to a person who is entitled to receive benefits under the plan. 
(g)  Retirement: Termination of employment after an employee has fulfilled all requirements for a pension. Retirement shall be considered as commencing on the first day of the month immediately following an employee's last day of employment (or authorized leave of absence, if later). 
(h)  Service: All years and complete months in the employ of the Employer and while a member of this Plan, subsequent to this amendment, plus all service accrued under the provisions of the Plan prior to the date of this amendment, plus any accumulated service credits. 
Employees who have been ineligible for membership in this plan, but who, because of a change in the eligibility requirements, have become eligible, shall be entitled to accumulate past service credits by electing, within 60 days after first becoming eligible, to pay into the pension fund a sum of money equal to that which would have been paid had they been eligible at the time of their employment. 
Each employee who is a member of this plan who has worked for a joint city-county office or who has worked for the City of Macon, and has service for which credit has not been granted in the past due to a break in service may re-establish his or her service effective as of January 1, 1977 by paying within sixty (60) days after said date the amount of employee contributions, as determined by the retirement committee in order to establish and reinstate any broken service not previously credited. 
(i)  Compensation: The remuneration paid to an employee by the employer for services which are rendered during the period considered as service. Compensation for a year shall include salary and wages as reported on the Employee's Federal Income Tax Withholding Statement (Form W-2) plus any additional compensation paid by the employer as salary during that year, including, but not limited to, deferred compensation. 
(j)  Average Monthly Compensation: The result obtained by dividing the total compensation paid to an employee during a considered period by number of months for which compensation was received. The considered period shall be the three years of service which yield the highest average, or such shorter period if service is less than three years. 
Except with respect to Qualified Participants (as defined below), for Plan Years beginning on and after January 1, 1996, the compensation taken into account during a Plan Year in calculating a Participant's benefit under this Plan shall not exceed the limitations of Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(17) in effect as of the beginning of the Plan Year (e.g., $150,000.00 in 1996, $200,000.00 in 2002). For purposes of applying the Section 401 (a)(17) limit, as adjusted, if any Employee is the spouse or a lineal descendant of an Employee (provided the lineal descendant is younger than age 19 by the end of the Plan Year) who is one of the ten (10) "highly compensated employees" (within the meaning of Internal Revenue Code Section 414(q)) paid the greatest amount of earnings (determined without regard to the $150,000.00 limit, as adjusted) during the Plan Year, the Employee shall not be treated as a separate Employee. The preceding sentence shall not, however, apply to any Plan Year that begins on or after January 1, 1997. 
The limit described in the previous paragraph shall not apply to any Qualified Participant. A Qualified Participant is any Participant who first became a Participant in the Plan before January 1, 1996. 
Notwithstanding the general rule that the provision of this amendment do not apply to individuals who had a termination of employment before January 1, 1997, this limit on Compensation shall be effective as to such Participants, as well as to individuals who are Participants on and after January 1, 1997. 
(k)  Normal Retirement Date: The first day of the month coinciding with or next following an employee's 60th birthday. 
(l)  Actuarial Equivalent: The term 'Actuarial Equivalent' shall mean equality in value of the aggregate amounts expected to be received under different forms of payment. For this purpose, 'actuarial equivalence' for annuity forms of payment will be based on a 7% interest per annum and, for periods prior to July 1, 2013, a 50%/50% blend of the male and females rates set forth in the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table and, for periods on and after July 1, 2013, the 'applicable mortality table' promulgated under section 417(e)(3) of the Code in effect at such time. 
(m)  Social Security Wage Base: The term 'Social Security Wage Base' shall mean, with respect to any year, the maximum amount of earnings which may be considered wages for such year under Section 3121 (a) (I) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(n)  Primary Social Security Benefit: The term 'Primary Social Security Benefit' shall mean the monthly amount available at age 65 (or actual retirement, if later) for the benefit of a retired member (excluding any benefit available on behalf of a spouse or dependent) under the provisions of Title II of the Federal Social Security Act in effect on the date of his or her retirement, whether or not such amount is actually paid. If the exact primary social security benefit is not known at retirement, it shall be estimated in accordance with uniform rules adopted by the committee. If a member retires prior to age 65, in accordance with the provisions of Article IV, or terminates employment with a deferred termination benefit in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.1, the amount of his or her primary social security benefit shall be computed by assuming he or she receives no wages after his or her retirement or termination of employment. 
(o)  Spouse or Surviving Spouse means the person to whom the Participant is legally married. 'Spouse' and 'surviving spouse' shall not include domestic partners or other similar relationships that are not denominated as marriage. 
(p)  Effective Date of Amended Plan: July 1, 2015, except as otherwise indicated. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 1.2. - Construction. 
The masculine gender, where appearing in the plan, shall be deemed to include the feminine gender, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. The words 'hereof', 'herein', 'hereunder', and other similar compounds of the word 'here' shall mean and refer to the entire plan, not to any particular provision or section. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE II. - ELIGIBILITY AND PARTICIPATION 

Sec. 2.1. - Eligibility. 
Each employee shall be eligible to participate in the plan on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date of his or her employment with the employer, except as provided by section 2.6(b) of the Plan, no employee hired or rehired on or after January 1, 2014, shall be eligible to participate in the Plan 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 2.2. - Participation. 
Each employee shall automatically become a participant hereunder when he or she meets the eligibility requirements as described in Section 2.1 of this Article II. Once an employee has become a participant he or she will continue to be a participant as long as he or she continues to be an employee thereafter as long as he or she retains any right to benefits under the plan. 
All employees of the Planning and Zoning Commission are eligible to participate in the plan on January 1, 1977 and will remain a participant if he or she so elects, as long as he or she continues to be an employee and thereafter, as long as he or she retains any rights to benefits under the plan. Each employee will have the right to establish his or her years of past service prior to January 1, 1977, by making the appropriate employee contribution to the plan as determined by the retirement committee. If the employee elects not to make such a contribution, then service for benefit purposes as well as eligibility purposes will commence with January 1, 1977. An employee electing to receive past service credits, shall pay within sixty (60) days into the pension fund the sum of money equal to the amount so determined by the retirement committee. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 2.2(a). - Recoupment of credit for prior service. 
During a sixty (60) day window beginning on the effective date of the charter amendment adding this Section 2.2(a), any current employee who is an active member of the plan who previously terminated his or her employment with the City of Macon and then was subsequently re-hired by the City of Macon or who though employed by the City of Macon was excluded for a time, may recoup credit for past service in any position for which credit is now allowed by applying and paying into the system the amount equal to a sum determined by a calculation by the Committee and Actuary for such employee for his or her prior employment with the City of Macon, plus five per cent (5%) interest, plus administrative costs as determined by the Committee. 
The Employee shall make application and pay the total amount due in one lump sum within the sixty (60) day window period. No credit shall be recouped by the employee until such time as payment has been made in full. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 2.3. - Exclusions. 
The following persons are excluded from participation in the plan unless specifically included by action of mayor and council: 
(a)  Officers and employees of the Medical Center of Central Georgia, Macon-Bibb County Hospital Authority, Macon-Bibb County Water and Sewerage Authority, Macon-Bibb County Board of Health, and any and all other boards and authorities of like kind and character acting as quasi-entities apart from the City of Macon but exercising some municipal function; provided however, this exclusion section shall not apply to employees of the Planning and Zoning Commission or the employees transferred from the City of Macon to Bibb County described in Section 2.5 of this Article II; 
(b)  The mayor and city council members; 
(c)  Sworn officers of the fire and police departments; 
(d)  Management interns; and 
(e)  Any employees who are not classified as full-time and permanent; and 
(f)  Any employee hired or rehired on or after January 1, 2014 
The above exclusions notwithstanding, once a participant has attained eligibility, he or she shall remain eligible so long as full-time employment with the city is maintained. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ; Ord. of 3-7-2017(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 2.4. - Withdrawal of the present value of accrued benefits of participating former City of Macon Transit employees. 
In consideration of the transfer of City of Macon Transit employees to the Macon/Bibb County Transit Authority, the Macon Pensions and Retirement System shall on the effective date of this Charter Amendment transfer to the Macon/Bibb County Transit Authority Employees' Pension Plan two hundred fourteen thousand, four hundred seventeen and 00/100 ($214,417.00) dollars (plus any interest accrued on that amount of money from May 1,1981 to the effective date of this amendment), that two hundred fourteen thousand, four hundred seventeen and 00/100 ($214,417.00) dollar amount of money being the present value of accrued benefits for City of Macon Transit employees participating in the Macon Pensions and Retirement System as computed by A. S. Hansen, Actuary, in a report dated April 28, 1981 to the City of Macon. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 2.5. - Continued participation by certain employees transferred to Bibb County. 
Each employee whose employment is transferred from the City of Macon to Bibb County, Georgia, effective as of July 1, 2012, in connection with the Service Delivery Strategy Agreement entered into between the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County and the City of Macon, dated May 9, 2011, and who is credited with five or more years of Service as of July 1, 2012, or who is otherwise entitled to a vested Pension under the Plan as of such date, shall continue to participate in the Plan after his or her employment is transferred to Bibb County. Such employees' Average Monthly Compensation and years of Service shall include his or her compensation and service with Bibb County on and after July 1, 2012, and he or she shall not be deemed to have retired or otherwise separated from service for purposes of the Plan until such time as he or she retires or separates from service from Bibb County. Such employees' Pension shall be calculated in accordance with the Pension formula and other terms and conditions of the Plan as in effect on June 30, 2012, except to the extent required by applicable law. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 2.5. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2.6. - Continued participation by certain employees of Macon-Bibb County 
(a)  Each employee whose employment is transferred from the City of Macon or Bibb County, Georgia, effective as of January 1, 2014, in connection with the restructured government pursuant to an act of the Georgia General Assembly, and who was participating in the Plan on December 31, 2013, shall continue to participate in the Plan after his or her employment is transferred to Macon-Bibb County. Such employees' Average Monthly Compensation and years of Service shall include his or her Compensation and Service with Macon-Bibb County on and after January 1, 2014, and he or she shall not be deemed to have retired or otherwise separated from service for purposes of the Plan until such time as he or she retires or separates from service from Macon-Bibb County. Such employee's Pension shall be calculated in accordance with the Pension formula and other terms and conditions of the Plan as in effective on December 31, 2013, except to the extent required by applicable law. 
(b)  Any Participant whose job is abolished pursuant to Section 30(e) of HB 1171 and who is rehired by Macon-Bibb County before the end of the calendar year, shall not have a termination of employment for purposes of this Plan. 
(c)  In no event shall any eligible employee accrue benefits under this Plan for periods of Service performed for Bibb County, Georgia, the City of Macon, Georgia, or Macon-Bibb County, if such service is taken into account for the purposes of benefit accrual under another qualified defined benefit plan sponsored by Bibb County, Georgia, the City of Macon, Georgia, or Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE III. - CONTRIBUTIONS 

Sec. 3.1. - Employer contributions. 
The City of Macon shall appropriate to the Pension Fund annually a sum sufficient to maintain the Plan on a sound financial basis, as determined by a qualified actuary or firm of actuaries. All City contributions shall be paid to the fund and shall be irrevocable except as herein provided and shall be used only for the benefit of the employees and their beneficiaries. No reversion of the assets of the fund may be made other than in accordance with applicable law. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIREMENTS FOR RETIREMENT BENEFITS 

Sec. 4.1. - Normal retirement. 
An employee shall become fully vested and eligible for a normal pension if his or her employment is terminated on or after his or her 60th birthday provided said employee has completed five or more years of service. Payment of a normal pension shall commence as of the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date of retirement, and if the employee has received 60 monthly payments, the last payment thereof shall be made as of the first day of the month in which the death of the retired employee occurs. 
Every employee may retire on his or her normal retirement date (subject to the service requirement for a normal pension); however, at the employee's option, an employee may continue working after his or her normal retirement date for an extended period or periods. All employees working beyond the normal retirement date shall provide the employer a minimum of sixty (60) days' notice of intent to retire from employment. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 4.2. - Early retirement. 
An employee shall become fully vested and eligible for an early pension if his or her employment is terminated on or after his or her 55th birthday provided said employee has completed five or more years of service. Payment of an early pension shall commence as of the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date of retirement, or such later date as the employee may elect but in no event later than the first day of the month following his or her normal retirement date, and if the employee has received 60 monthly payments, the last payment shall be made as of the first day of the month in which the death of the retired employee occurs. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 4.3. - Disability retirement. 
An employee shall be eligible for a disability pension if his or her employment is terminated by reason of total and permanent disability, provided said employee has completed five or more years of service. Payment of a disability pension shall commence as of the first day of the seventh month coinciding with or next following the date of retirement. If the employee has received 60 monthly payments, the last payment shall be made as of the first day of the month in which the death of the retired employee occurs, or if disability ceases prior to his or her normal retirement date the last payment shall be made on the first day of the month in which disability ceases. 
Disability under the plan shall be considered total and permanent if the employee is eligible for and receives disability benefits under the Social Security Act. 
Where an employee is not eligible for disability benefits under the Social Security Act, he or she may be otherwise considered totally disabled under the plan if, in the opinion of the Committee, relying on the advice of a licensed physician or physicians, said employee is wholly prevented by his or her physical and/or mental condition from discharging his or her usual or comparable duties in an efficient manner. Any employee shall be considered permanently disabled, if, in the opinion of the Committee, relying on the advice of a licensed physician or physicians, said employee is likely to remain so disabled continuously and permanently. The Committee may require an employee, applying for retirement on the basis of total and permanent disability, under the terms of this paragraph, to undergo a medical examination by a physician or physicians designated by the Committee, the expense thereof to be borne by the Committee. Should any such employee refuse to submit to such medical examination or examinations, he or she shall not be granted any retirement benefits during the continuance of such refusal. Once each year the Committee may require an employee receiving a disability benefit under this paragraph who has not reached his or her normal retirement date to undergo a medical examination by a physician or physicians designated by the Committee. If it appears from such medical examination that the disability of an employee who has not reached his or her normal retirement date has ceased, his or her disability benefit shall be discontinued by the Committee. Should any such employee refuse to submit to such medical examination and should he or she fail to undergo such medical examination for a year, all his or her rights in and to his or her disability benefit shall cease. The decision of the committee on these questions shall be final and binding and may not be appealed. 
If disability ceases before a retired employee attains his or her normal retirement date and the employee is reemployed by the employer, the pension payable upon his or her subsequent retirement shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.2 hereof. 
ARTICLE V. - AMOUNT OF RETIREMENT BENEFIT 

Sec. 5.1. - Normal pension. 
An employee who meets the requirements for a normal pension shall receive a monthly amount determined as the sum of (i) and (ii) below then multiplied by (iii) below, in accordance with the following: 
(i)  1- 52/100% (.0152) of Average Monthly Compensation up to $1,250.00, 
(ii)  1- 9/10% (.019) of Average Monthly Compensation in excess of $1,250.00, 
(iii)  number of years of Service. 
If employment continues after an employee's normal retirement date, his or her pension shall commence upon his or her actual retirement, and the amount of such employee's pension shall be computed in accordance with this Section 5.1 and in so computing such pension his or her service and compensation up to his or her actual retirement date shall be used. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 5.2. - Early pension. 
An employee who meets the requirements for an early pension shall receive a monthly amount determined as follows: 
(a)  The early pension commencing at the employee's normal retirement date shall be a monthly amount determined as the sum of (i) and (ii) below then multiplied by (iii) below, in accordance with the following: 
(i)  1- 52/100% (.0152) of Average Monthly Compensation up to $1,250.00, 
(ii)  1- 9/10% (.019) of Average Monthly Compensation in excess of $1,250.00, 
(iii)  number of years of Service. 
(b)  If payment of an early pension commences prior to the employee's normal retirement date, the monthly amount shall be the pension computed in subsection 5.2(a) above, reduced by five-twelfths of one percent (5/12 of 1 %) for each month between the date payments commence and his or her normal retirement date. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 5.3. - Disability pension. 
An employee who meets the requirements for a disability pension shall receive a monthly amount equal to fifty (50%) percent of his or her average monthly compensation less an amount equal to the amount of fifty (50%) percent of his or her actual monthly Primary Social Security disability benefit. In addition, he or she shall receive a monthly amount equal to one-half (1/2) of one (1%) percent of his or her average monthly compensation for each completed year of service in excess of five (5) years. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 5.4. - No loss of benefit. 
In no event will an employee who was a participant of the plan on an amendment date receive an amount less than he or she would have received had the plan not been amended, considering his or her total years of service to normal retirement and base earnings in effect at the time of the amendment. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 5.5. - Reduction of benefits by workers' compensation benefits. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, with respect to any employee whose employment with the City terminates after October 1, 1995, the following monthly benefits shall be reduced: 
(a)  The monthly benefit otherwise payable to the employee for any calendar month under any of the following sections of this Plan (irrespective of whether or not the amount of benefit is computed under Sections 6.1 through 6.4, due to the employee's election of an optional benefit): 
(1)  Normal Pension under Section 5.1; 
(2)  Early Pension under Section 5.2; 
(3)  Disability Pension under Section 5.3; 
(4)  Deferred Termination Benefit under Section 7.1. 
shall be reduced by the amount of the monthly Workers' Compensation Benefit (not including Medical Expense Reimbursement Benefits or Lump Sum Benefits) otherwise paid to the Employee by the City or third party on behalf of the City for any such calendar month. 
(b)  In the event of the employee's death, the monthly benefit otherwise payable to the surviving spouse of any such employee for any calendar month under Section 7.2 or 7.3 shall be reduced by the amount of the monthly Workers' Compensation Benefit (not including Medical Expense Reimbursement Benefits or Lump Sum Benefits) otherwise paid to the surviving spouse of such employee by the City or a third party on behalf of the City for any such calendar month. In the event of the employee's death, the monthly benefit otherwise payable to a minor child of any such employee for any calendar month under Section 7.2 or 7.3 shall be reduced by the amount of the Workers' Compensation Benefit (not including Medical Expense Reimbursement Benefits or Lump Sum Benefits) otherwise paid to said minor child of such employee by the City, for any such calendar month. In the event of the employee's death, the monthly benefit otherwise payable to any other beneficiary of any such employee for any calendar month under Section 7.2 or 7.3 shall be reduced by the amount of the monthly Workers' Compensation Benefit (not including Medical Expense Reimbursement Benefits or Lump Sum Benefits) otherwise paid to such beneficiary of such Employee by the City or any third party on behalf of the City for any such calendar month. 
(c)  In no event, where the only benefit payable under any provision of this plan is the refund of employee contributions, shall the amount of such refund be reduced under this section. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE VI. - OPTIONAL RETIREMENT BENEFITS 

Sec. 6.1. - Joint and survivor option. 
By filing an application with the committee, an employee may designate his or her spouse (or any dependent approved by the committee) as his or her contingent pensioner and elect to receive a pension payable in accordance with one of the following options, in lieu of the pension to which he or she may otherwise become entitled upon retirement: 
(a)  Option 1: The employee shall receive a reduced pension payable for life, and payments in the amount of 100% of such reduced pension shall, after the employee's death, be continued to the contingent pensioner during the latter's lifetime. 
(b)  Option 2: The employee shall receive a reduced pension payable for life, and payments in the amount of 66 2/3% of such reduced pension shall, after the employee's death, be continued to the contingent pensioner during the latter's lifetime. 
(c)  If an employee dies after becoming eligible to retire but before applying for retirement, and such member is survived by a spouse, the surviving spouse shall be entitled to receive a benefit as if the member had elected to receive one hundred percent (100) of the member's benefits as provided in Art. VI, section 6.1 (a) such benefits to commence on the first day of the month immediately following the death of the employee. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 6.2. - Ten years certain option—Option 3. 
The employee may elect to receive a reduced pension payable for life with 120 monthly payments guaranteed. In the event the employee should die before having received 120 monthly payments, the remaining payments will be made to his or her contingent pensioner. 
The aggregate of the pension payments expected to be paid to an employee and his or her contingent pensioner under any of the above options shall be the actuarial equivalent of the pension which the employee is otherwise entitled to receive upon retirement. 
An employee may elect or revoke an option prior to retirement by filing such election or revocation in writing with the committee prior to retirement. Under no circumstances may an option be changed or revoked after the employee's retirement. 
An election made pursuant to this section shall become inoperative in the event that (a) the employee's death occurs prior to actual retirement; or, (b) the death of the contingent pensioner occurs before the employee's actual retirement. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 6.3. - Level income option—Option 4. 
If payment of a pension commences prior to the earliest age as of which the employee will become eligible for an Old-Age Insurance Benefit under the Social Security Act, the amount of the pension may be adjusted so that an increased amount will be paid prior to such age and a reduced amount thereafter; the purpose of this adjustment is to enable the employee to receive, from this plan and under the Social Security Act, an aggregate income in approximately a level amount for life. Such adjusted pension payments shall be the actuarial equivalent of the pension otherwise payable to such employee. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 6.4. - Other forms of payment—Option 5. 
If a pension payable under this plan is less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month, the committee may direct that, in lieu of such pension, the actuarial equivalent thereof shall be paid in a lump sum, or in a series of uniform monthly, quarterly, or annual amounts for life or for a designated period of time. 
The time during which payment shall be made of any of the other forms of payment provided for in this Article shall be limited to a period not exceeding the life or the life expectancy of the Employee and/or contingent pensioner. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if the actuarial value of an Employee's benefit under any optional benefit is less than 50% of the value of the benefit otherwise payable to the Employee, the optional benefit shall be adjusted so that the value of the Employee's benefit under the option will be equal to an amount not less than 50% of the value of the benefit otherwise payable to the Employee. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 6.5. - Direct Rollovers. 
Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a Distributee's election under this Section 6.5, a Distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Committee, to have any portion of an Eligible Rollover Distribution paid directly to an Eligible Retirement Plan specified by the Distributee in a Direct Rollover. 
For purposes of this Section the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  Eligible Rollover Distribution: The term 'Eligible Rollover Distribution' means any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the Distributee, except that an Eligible Rollover Distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the Distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the Distributee and the Distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; and any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  Eligible Retirement Plan: The term 'Eligible retirement Plan' means an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in Section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, or an individual retirement plan described in Section 408A of the Internal Revenue Code (Roth IRA) that accepts the Distributee's Eligible Rollover Distribution. However, in the case of an Eligible Rollover Distribution to the surviving spouse, an Eligible Retirement Plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. For these purposes, an Eligible Retirement Plan shall also mean an annuity contract described in Section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code and an eligible plan under Section 457(b) of the Internal Revenue Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this Plan. The definition of Eligible Retirement Plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution to a surviving spouse. 
(c)  Distributee: The term 'Distributee' includes an Employee or former Employee. In addition, the Employee's or former Employee's surviving spouse are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse. For distributions after December 31, 2009, a non-spouse beneficiary who is a "designated beneficiary" under Section 401(a)(9)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder, may, in accordance with Section 402(c)(11) of the Internal Revenue Code, by a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer ("direct rollover"), roll over all or any portion of his or her distribution to an Individual Retirement Account (IRA) the beneficiary establishes for purposes of receiving the distribution. In order to be able to roll over the distribution, the distribution otherwise must satisfy the definition of an "eligible rollover distribution" under Section 401(a)(31) of the Internal Revenue Code. Although a non-spouse beneficiary may roll over directly a distribution, the distribution is not subject to the direct rollover requirements of Section 401(a)(31) of the Internal Revenue Code, the notice requirements of Section 402(f) of the Internal Revenue Code or the mandatory withholding requirements of Section 3405(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. If a non-spouse beneficiary receives a distribution from the Plan, the distribution is not eligible for a 60-day (non-direct) rollover. If the Participant's named beneficiary is a trust, the Plan may make a direct rollover to an IRA on behalf of the trust, provided the trust satisfies the requirements to be a "designated beneficiary" within the meaning of Section 401(a)(9)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(d)  Direct Rollover: The term 'Direct Rollover' means a payment by the Plan to the Eligible Retirement Plan specified by the Distributee. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - OTHER BENEFITS 

Sec. 7.1. - Deferred termination benefit. 
Upon an employee's termination of employment for any reason other than death or retirement, he or she shall be entitled to a deferred monthly benefit commencing as of his or her early or normal retirement date, as defined in Article IV. 
The benefit shall be computed in the same manner as an early pension, as defined in Article V, Section 5.2, Paragraph (a), considering compensation and service up to the date of termination, and in accordance with the following vesting percentages: 
TABLE INSET: 

 
If the payment of an employee's deferred termination benefit commences as of his or her early retirement date, the benefit as described in this section shall be reduced as defined in Article V, Section 5.2, Paragraph (b). 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 7.2. - Death benefit. 
If the death of an employee who has a surviving spouse occurs before actual retirement, and such employee has at least five (5) years of service, a benefit equal to fifty (50) percent of the employee's benefit, computed in accordance with section 5.1(a) considering average monthly compensation and service at date of death, shall be payable to such spouse. For purposes of this section 7.2, surviving spouse or spouse shall be the person to whom the employee was married on the date of his or her death. The spouse's benefit shall commence on the first day of the month following the employee's death, with payment continuing for the lifetime of the spouse. If the spouse dies before receiving benefits equal to the amount of the employee's contribution to the plan, the difference between the employee's own contributions and the actual benefits paid will be refunded to the spouse's estate. 
If there is no surviving spouse or if there is a surviving spouse but the employee had less than five (5) years of service and the death of the employee occurs after his or her normal retirement date but prior to his or her retirement, and if the employee would have been entitled to a pension if his or her retirement had occurred immediately prior to his or her death, a pension shall be payable to the employee's beneficiary designated pursuant to section 7.3 for sixty (60) months in an amount equal to the pension which the employee would have received if his or her retirement had taken place immediately prior to his or her death. If an optional benefit under section 6.1 is in effect at the time of the employee's death, any death benefit payable will be in accordance with the option elected. After the sixty (60) monthly payments have been made to the beneficiary, the beneficiary will receive an amount equal to the excess, if any, of the employee's own contributions over the actual benefits paid. 
If there is no surviving spouse or if there is a surviving spouse but the employee had less than five (5) years of service and if termination of employment is caused by the death of an employee and if death occurs before attainment of an employee's normal retirement date, but after becoming eligible for early retirement, a pension shall be payable to the employee's beneficiary, designated pursuant to section 7.3, for sixty (60) months. The amount of such pension shall be equal to the pension which the employee would have received if his or her retirement had taken place immediately prior to his or her death. After the sixty (60) monthly payments have been made to the beneficiary, the beneficiary will receive an amount equal to the excess, if any, of the employee's own contributions over the actual benefits paid. 
If there is no surviving spouse and the death of an employee occurs before age fifty-five (55), no benefit is payable under the plan with the exception of the return of the employee's contributions, if any. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 7.3. - Post-retirement death benefit. 
If an optional benefit under Article VI is in effect at the time of the employee's retirement or death, any death benefit payable will be in accordance with the option elected. 
If a retired employee is receiving a pension under Article V and no option was elected and if his or her death occurs before he or she has received payments for 60 months, the employee's beneficiary shall be entitled to a monthly pension for the remainder of the 60 month period, that is, until such time as 60 monthly payments have been made to the employee and his or her beneficiary. The monthly amount payable to the beneficiary shall be equal to the monthly amount of pension which the employee was receiving prior to his or her death. 
Every employee shall designate the beneficiary who shall receive the benefit, if any, which is payable upon his or her death under this Section 7.3. An employee may change or revoke his or her designation of beneficiary at any time and from time to time. The designation of a beneficiary, and any change or revocation thereof, shall be made in writing on forms approved by the committee. An employee may also designate a contingent beneficiary to receive benefits under this section in the event the primary beneficiary's death occurs before all payments under this Section 7.3 have been made. If an employee fails to designate a beneficiary, or if no designated beneficiary survives the employee, or if all designated beneficiaries die before all payments required by this Section 7.3 have been made, the remaining payments shall be paid in accordance with the following order of precedence: 
(a)  to the employee's surviving spouse; or, if there be none surviving, 
(b)  to the employee's surviving children (in equal shares); or, if there be none surviving, 
(c)  to the employee's surviving parents (in equal shares); or, if there be none surviving, 
(d)  to the employee's estate. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 7.4. - Cost of living adjustment. 
Beginning sixty (60) days immediately following the effective date of this ordinance and each January 1 thereafter, all retired employees and beneficiaries thereof eligible to receive a monthly retirement payment shall receive an annual cost of living adjustment increase of 1.5% of their monthly retirement benefit, except that no such increase shall be effective as to any year for which such increase is disapproved by the governing body of the City of Macon, based on the financial soundness of the plan. The monthly retirement payment shall be adjusted by multiplying the amount of the monthly payment by 1.5%. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 7.5. - Refund of employee contributions. 
In no event will the total amount paid to or on account of an employee under Articles V and VII of the plan be less than the amount he or she has contributed to the pension fund, if any. 
Upon the termination of an employee who is not eligible for any benefit under the plan, such employee shall receive a refund of his or her employee contributions, if any said contributions were made by employee. Any employee entitled to a deferred termination benefit, as defined under Section 7.1, shall not ordinarily receive a refund of employee contributions, if any such contributions have been made. However, should any employee entitled to a deferred termination benefit request a refund of his or her employee contributions, if any, then said employee shall sign a Waiver of Deferred Termination Benefit before such refund is granted and shall have no other remaining rights or interest in the plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 8.1. - Appointment, composition and terms. 
The Plan shall be administered by a retirement committee who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the Macon-Bibb County Commission. All usual and reasonable expenses of the committee may be paid by the Employer. The members of the committee shall not receive compensation with respect to services rendered as committee members. 
The committee shall be comprised of seven (7) members as listed below. The individual members of the committee serving immediately prior to January 1, 2014, shall continue to serve for the respective terms of their post as determined prior to January 1, 2014, unless said appointee ceases to meet the eligibility requirement set out for the Post, in which case such appointee shall serve until a successor has been selected and qualified. 
Post 1, Post 2, and Post 3 shall be filled by employees of the Employer who are participants in the Plan. 
Post 4 and Post 5 shall be filled by two (2) Macon-Bibb County Commissioners. 
Post 6 shall be filled by a retired participant in the Plan. 
Post 7 shall be filled by a citizen of Macon-Bibb County who is knowledgeable in investment finance. 
Appointments to the committee shall be made for terms of four (4) years, or until a successor is appointed and qualified, or said member ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for his or her post. Qualified members shall be eligible for reappointment. Provided, however, that no member who has served three (3) full terms shall be eligible for reappointment until a minimum of three (3) years has elapsed. Appointments made to fill vacancies occurring during a term shall be made for the unexpired portion of the term. Filling more than one half of an unexpired term shall constitute a full term. 
All members of the committee shall serve at the pleasures the Employer and may be removed by the mayor prior to the expiration of their respective terms with approval of a majority vote of Commissioners. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 8.2. - Committee powers and duties. 
The committee shall have such powers as may be necessary to discharge its duties hereunder, including, but not by way of limitation, the following powers and duties: 
(a)  to construe and interpret the plan, decide all questions of eligibility and determine the amount, manner and time of payment of any benefits hereunder; 
(b)  to prescribe procedures to be followed by employees in filing applications for benefits; 
(c)  to make a determination as to the right of any person to a benefit and to afford any person dissatisfied with such determination the right to a hearing thereon; 
(d)  to receive from the employer and from employees such information as shall be necessary for the proper administration of the plan; 
(e)  to prepare and distribute, in such manner as the committee determines to be appropriate, information explaining the plan; 
(f)  to furnish the employer, upon request, such annual reports with respect to the administration of the plan as are reasonable and appropriate; 
(g)  to receive and review the annual evaluation of the plan made by the actuary; 
(h)  to receive and review reports of the financial condition and of the receipts and disbursements of the pension fund; 
(i)  to appoint or employ an administrator for the plan and any other agents it deems advisable, including an actuarial and legal counsel. 
The committee shall have no power to add to, subtract from, or modify any of the terms of the plan, nor to change or add to any benefits provided by the plan, nor to waive or fail to apply any requirement of eligibility for a pension under the plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 8.3. - Rules and decisions. 
The retirement committee may adopt such rules and actuarial tables as it deems necessary or desirable. All rules and decisions of the committee shall be uniformly and consistently applied to all employees in similar circumstances. 
Any rule or decision which is not inconsistent with the provisions of the plan shall be conclusive and binding upon all persons affected by it and there shall be no appeal from any ruling by the committee which is within its authority. 
When making a determination or calculation, the committee shall be entitled to reply upon information furnished by the employer, the legal counsel of the employer, or the actuary for the plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 8.4. - Selection of Agents. 
(a)  Pursuant to sub-section (i) of Sec. 8.2 above which authorizes the retirement committee to appoint agents to perform duties on the retirement committee's behalf, the board shall be required to enter into a written agreement with any agents selected to perform duties on the retirement committee's behalf. The retirement committee is hereby authorized to enter into and to sign a written agreement with an agent, without the approval of the city, provided that the agent certifies to the retirement committee in the written agreement that the agent does not reasonably expect the cost of its services to exceed Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00). 
(b)  An agreement with an agent whose services are reasonably expected to exceed Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00) or the continued engagement of any agent whose cost of services for the previous twelve months have exceeded Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00) without the approval of the city shall require the consent of the city by adoption of a resolution of mayor and council. As a condition of seeking approval from the city, the retirement committee shall demonstrate to mayor and council that it has made a competitive selection based upon relevant criteria established and published as part of the selection process. 
(c)  Any written agreement entered into by the retirement committee on or after November 1, 2012, which does not comply with the requirements of this section as set forth above shall be null and void. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 8.5. - Committee procedures. 
The committee shall adopt such bylaws as it deems desirable. The committee shall elect one of its members as chairman, one of its members as vice chairman, and one of its members as committee secretary. The secretary of the committee shall keep a record of all meetings and forward all necessary communications to the actuary. The secretary shall perform any other duties as may be prescribed by the bylaws. The committee may also select a recording secretary who may not be a member of the committee and who shall perform duties as prescribed by the bylaws. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 8.6. - Authorization of benefit payments. 
The committee shall issue directions concerning all benefits which are to be paid from the pension fund pursuant to the provisions of the plan. The committee shall keep on file, in such manner as it may deem convenient or proper, all reports of the pension fund. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 9.1. - Reemployment of former employees. 
If an employee's employment is terminated prior to becoming eligible for a pension and the employee is subsequently reemployed by the employer, the employee shall not receive any credit for his or her previous period of employment. Such an employee shall be treated in the same manner as a person who was not previously in the employer's employ. In no event shall the plan, in its operation, allow for any duplication of benefits. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 9.2. - Reemployment of retired employees. 
If a retired employee is reemployed by the employer, no pension payments shall be made during the period of such reemployment. Upon the subsequent termination of employment by such an employee, the employee shall be entitled to receive a pension based on his or her service and compensation prior to the date of his or her previous retirement, as well as his or her service and compensation during the period of his or her reemployment. In the case of reemployment of a retired employee who received any pension payments prior to his or her reemployment, the pension payable upon his or her subsequent retirement shall be reduced by the actuarial equivalent of any pension payments he or she previously received. Provided, however, a retired employee who is receiving pension payments and is reemployed by the Employer on or after January 1, 2014, shall not be eligible to accrue any future benefits under this Plan after such reemployment. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 9.3. - Nonalienation of benefits. 
Except with respect to any indebtedness owing to the employer, the Macon Firemen's Credit Union, the Macon Police Credit Union, Macon Transit Employees' Federal Credit Union, or the City Employees' Credit Union, benefits payable under this plan shall not be subject in any manner to anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge, encumbrance, charge, garnishment, execution, or levy of any kind, either voluntary or involuntary, including any such liability which is for alimony or other payments for the support of a spouse or former spouse, or for any other relative of the employee, prior to actually being received by the person entitled to the benefit under the terms of the plan, and any attempt to anticipate, alienate, sell, transfer, assign, pledge, encumber, charge or otherwise dispose of any right to benefits payable hereunder, shall be void. The pension fund shall not in any manner be liable for, or subject to, the debts, contracts, liabilities, engagements of torts of any person entitled to benefits hereunder. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 9.4. - Military Service. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits, and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code. In the case of a death or disability occurring on or after January 1, 2007, if a Participant dies while performing qualified military service (as defined in Section 414(u) of the Code), the survivors of the Participant are entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) provided under the Plan as if the Participant had resumed and then terminated employment on account of death. For years beginning after December 31, 2008, (a) an individual receiving a differential wage payment, as defined by Section 3401(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code, shall be treated as an employee of the Employer making the payment, (b) the differential wage payment shall be treated as Compensation, and (c) the Plan shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of any provision described in Section 414(u)(1)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code by reason of any contribution or benefit which is based on the differential wage payment. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 9.5. - Forfeiture of Benefits. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan to the contrary, a Participant's entire Accrued Benefit under the Plan shall be forfeited in the manner and to the extent provided under O.C.G.A. § 47-1-21 through § 47-1-24, if a Participant is convicted of a public employment, drug related, or other covered crime. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 9.6. - Benefits Supported only by Trust Fund. 
Any person having any claim under the Plan will look solely to the assets of the Pension Fund for satisfaction. In no event will the city or any of its officials, members of its commission or agents, be liable in their individual capacities to any person whomsoever under the provisions of the Plan. Upon complete or partial termination of the Plan, the rights of all affected employees to benefits accrued as of the date of such termination shall become nonforfeitable to the extent the system is then funded. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 9.7. - Exclusive Benefit and Governmental Plan Status. 
The Plan and trust will be maintained and administered for the exclusive benefit of participants and their beneficiaries. The Plan is intended to satisfy the requirements of Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code by meeting the requirements of Section 414(d) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION RULES 

Sec. 10.1. - Required Minimum Distribution Rules. 
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the Committee shall direct that payment of a member's Pension commence by the first day of April in the calendar year following the later of (a) the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70-1/2), or (b) the calendar year in which the member retires. The foregoing requirement shall be administered by the Committee in accordance with a reasonable and good faith interpretation of Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code pursuant to Treas. Reg. Section 1.401(a)(9)-1, A-2(d). 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 10.2. - Limitation on benefits. 
The annual benefit payable under this system to an employee at any time shall not exceed the maximum permissible amount. "Maximum permissible amount" shall mean $160,000.00, as adjusted by the Secretary of the Treasury for each calendar year under Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code, with the new limitation to apply to limitation years ending within the calendar year of the date of the adjustment. The limitations, adjustments, and other requirements set forth in this Article X shall comply with the provisions of Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code (specifically including any special rules under Sections 415(b)(2)(G) and 415(b)(11) of the Internal Revenue Code) and the final regulations promulgated thereunder, the terms of which are specifically incorporated herein by reference for Limitation Years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, except where an earlier effective date is otherwise provided in the final regulations or in this Article X. The application of the provisions of this Article X shall not cause the maximum permissible amount for any employee to be less than the employee's accrued benefit under all the defined benefit plans of the employer or a predecessor employer as of the end of the last limitation year beginning before July 1, 2007, under provisions of the plans that were both adopted and in effect before April 5, 2007 (provided such provisions were both adopted and in effect before April 5, 2007, and satisfied the applicable requirements of statutory provisions, regulations, and other published guidance relating to Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code in effect as of the end of the last limitation year beginning before July 1, 2007). 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE XI. - EARLY REITREMENT EINCENTIVE [RETIREMENT INCENTIVE] 

11.1 - Early Retirement Incentive Program 
An enhanced early retirement benefit shall be made available to certain employees participating in this Plan on a one-time basis, in accordance with and subject to the following requirements, and shall be referred to herein as the Early Retirement Incentive Program or "ERIP". 
An employee participating in this Plan is eligible to elect to participate in the ERIP and receive a normal pension, if, assuming the employee worked through December 31, 2015, he or she attained age fifty-eight (58) and earned at least three (3) years of service on or before December 31, 2015. An employee is eligible to elect to participate in the ERIP and receive an early pension if, assuming the Participant worked through December 31, 2015, he or she attained age fifty-three (53) and earned at least three (3) years of service. Terminated employees and elected employees are not eligible to elect to participate in the ERIP. 
Subject to the applicable limitations of Code Section 415, the enhanced early retirement incentive benefit payable to an employee who elects to participate in the ERIP shall be computed by substituting a multiplier of two percent (2.0%) for benefits determined under Section 5.1 and 5.2, and assuming the employee worked for the employer until December 31, 2015. Therefore, the pension benefit shall be based upon the employee's service and his average compensation as of December 31, 2015, times 2.0%; provided, however the early pension shall be subject to the reductions as provided in Section 5.2 of the Plan. 
A supplemental benefit will be paid from the Plan to an employee who elects to participate in the ERIP equal to $200 per month for the life of the employee. 
Any employee, who satisfies the eligibility requirements of the ERIP in Section (a) above, may elect to terminate employment, retire and receive the enhanced early retirement benefit described in this Section by submitting the required forms to the designated individual no later than 5:00 p.m. on July 31, 2015. An employee may not make an election to retire under the ERIP after he or she has terminated employment with the Employer. 
Any employee electing to retire early under the ERIP may revoke his or her election by providing written notice of the revocation to the designated individual within seven (7) days after he or she submitted the election form (the revocation period). If the employee does not revoke his or her election within the 7-day revocation period, the election to terminate employment, retire and receive an enhanced retirement benefit pursuant to the ERIP shall become irrevocable when the revocation period ends. 
Employees who irrevocably elect to participate in the ERIP shall be required to retire no later than September 30, 2015. Benefits for an employee who elects to participate in the ERIP shall commence on the first day of the month following his or her termination of employment and shall be paid on the first day of each succeeding month thereafter for as long as the employee remains eligible to receive such benefits. If the employee dies before commencement of benefits under this ERIP, the employee's election to participate in the ERIP shall be null and void, notwithstanding any provisions herein to the contrary. 
The election to retire and receive enhanced early retirement benefits pursuant to the ERIP shall be completely voluntary. 
The rights and obligations under the Plan with respect to employees whose employment with the Employer is terminated for any reason whatsoever prior to the effective date of this Plan Amendment shall be governed by the Plan as it existed and was in effect at the time of such termination 
( Ord. No. O-15-0063, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
CHARTER APPENDIX III. - MACON FIRE AND POLICE EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, adopted December 15, 2015 , repealed and replaced app. II, arts. I—XI, in its entirety. See Code Comparative Table for history of derivation. 
State Law reference— Public retirement systems standards law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
As used in this section [chapter], the following words shall have the meaning as set forth below unless as otherwise required by the context: 
(1)  'System' shall mean the Macon Fire & Police Department Employees' Retirement System as provided herein. 
(2)  'Effective date '—July 1, 1969. The effective date of this amended and restated system document shall be July 1, 2015, except as otherwise indicated. The retirement benefits under the system as of the effective date of this amendment and restatement shall not be reduced as a result of the changes made by the amendment and restatement. 
(3)  'City' shall mean the City of Macon, Georgia. 
Effective January 1, 2014, the term "City" shall mean "Macon-Bibb County" with respect to those employees of Macon-Bibb County who are eligible to continue to participate in the Plan in accordance with Section 3 of Article II. 
(4)  'Board' shall mean the Retirement Board of Trustees provided for in Article VIII of this section [chapter]. 
(5)  'Basic compensation' shall mean actual monthly compensation paid during any month to an employee exclusive of reimbursed expenses, overtime, and all other unusual compensation except that worker's compensation benefits (not including medical expense reimbursement benefits or any lump sum payments) paid in lieu of salary in accordance with Ga. Code Section 114-404 [O.C.G.A. § 34-9-261] to an employee shall be basic compensation up until the employee's retirement date; 
(6)  'Average compensation' shall mean the annual average of basic compensation paid by the city to an employee based on the three calendar years of service, whether consecutive or nonconsecutive, which yields the highest average prior to his or her retirement. 
Except with respect to Qualified Employees (as defined below), for calendar years beginning on and after January 1, 1996, the compensation taken into account during a calendar year in calculating an employee's benefit under this system shall not exceed the limitations of section 401(a)(17) of the Code in effect as of the beginning of the calendar year (e.g., $150,000.00 in 1996, $200,000.00 in 2002). 
The limit described in the previous paragraph shall not apply to any Qualified Employee. A 'Qualified Employee' is any employee who first became an employee in the system before January 1, 1996. 
(7)  'Fund' shall mean the medium to which employee contributions and city contributions made under the terms of the system are accumulated and out of which all benefits under the terms of the system are paid. 
(8)  'Employee' shall mean all full-time permanent firefighters and police officers employed by the City prior to January 1, 2014. 
(9)  'Service' shall mean all years and completed months (expressed as a fraction of a year, but six or more months shall be considered as a full year) of employment, whether continuous or not, of an employee of the city, excluding any period of employment during which the employee was on authorized leave of absence without pay for more than 30 days. 
Effective January 1, 2014, service shall include all years and complete months of employment with Macon-Bibb County while a member of this Plan, excluding any period of employment during which the employee is on authorized leave of absence without pay for more than 30 days. 
(10)  'City contributions' shall mean payments by the city to the system as determined by the actuary as necessary to maintain an actuarially sound system. 
(11)  'Employee contributions' shall mean payments deducted from the basic compensation of an employee and credited to his or her individual account in the system. 
(12)  'Accumulated contributions' shall mean with respect to any employee, the aggregate of his or her employee contributions. 
(13)  'Actuarial equivalent' shall mean the condition of equilibrium which exists between two or more benefits of different incidence of payment valued at the same point in time and under the same actuarial assumptions. For this purpose, 'actuarial equivalence' for annuity forms of payment will be based on a 7% interest per annum and, for periods prior to July 1, 2013, a 50%/50% blend of the male and females rates set forth in the RP-2000 Mortality Table for annuitants and, for periods on and after July 1, 2013, the 'applicable mortality table' promulgated under section 417(e)(3) of the Code in effect at such time. 
(14)  'Individual account' shall mean the detailed records kept of the amount of employee contributions credited or charged to each employee under the system in accordance with the terms of the system. 
(15)  'Beneficiary' shall mean the person or persons entitled to receive any benefits at the death of the employee and who has been designated by the employee by written notice to the board. If no person or persons so designated are living at the time of the death of the employee, the beneficiary shall be the estate of the employee. 
(16)  'Prior system' shall mean the retirement system for police and fire department employees in effect prior to the enactment of the system. 
(17)  'Widow', where used, shall mean surviving spouse. 
(18)  'Code' shall mean the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
(19)  'Spouse or Surviving Spouse' means the person to whom the Participant is legally married. 'Spouse' and 'surviving spouse' shall not include domestic partners or other similar relationships that are not denominated as marriage. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE II. - ELIGIBILITY AND MEMBERSHIP 
(1)  - Eligibility. 
Each employee shall be eligible to participate in the system on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date of his or her employment. 
No employee hired or rehired on or after January 1, 2014, shall be eligible to participate in the Plan. 
(2)  - Membership. 
Each employee who becomes a member or a prior system member on the effective date of this system, and each new member after the effective date, shall make application for membership in the system. Such application shall include designation of beneficiaries to receive any death benefits paid in accordance with the system. 
Such application shall also include the employee's acceptance of the terms and conditions of the system and the fund. 
Once an employee has become a member, he or she shall continue to be a member as long as he or she continues to be an employee and thereafter as long as he or she retains any rights to benefits under the system. 
Participation in the system will not give any employee the right to be retained in the employ of the city nor upon dismissal to have any rights or interest in the system other than as herein provided. 
(3)  - Continued participation by certain employees of Macon-Bibb County. 
(a)  Each employee whose employment is transferred from the City of Macon or Bibb County, Georgia, effective as of January 1, 2014, in connection with the restructured government pursuant to an act of the Georgia General Assembly, and who was participating in the Plan on December 31, 2013, shall continue to participate in the Plan after his or her employment is transferred to Macon-Bibb County. Such employees' Average Monthly Compensation and years of Service shall include his or her Compensation and Service with Macon-Bibb County on and after January 1, 2014, and he or she shall not be deemed to have retired or otherwise separated from service for purposes of the Plan until such time as he or she retires or separates from service from Macon-Bibb County. Such employee's Pension shall be calculated in accordance with the Pension formula and other terms and conditions of the Plan as in effect on December 31, 2013, except to the extent required by applicable law. 
(b)  In no event shall any eligible employee accrue benefits under this Plan for periods of service performed for Bibb County, Georgia, the City of Macon, Georgia, or Macon-Bibb County, if such service is taken into account for the purposes of benefit accrual under another qualified defined benefit plan sponsored by Bibb County, Georgia, the City of Macon, Georgia, or Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE III. - RETIREMENT DATES 
(1)  - Normal retirement date. 
The normal retirement of an employee shall be the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date which is twenty-five (25) years from the date the employee became a member of the system and the attainment of age fifty (50), whichever is later. A participant shall become fully vested upon attaining his or her normal retirement date. 
Any employee may retire from the employment of the city on his or her normal retirement date, except as otherwise provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this Article III. 
(2)  - Delayed retirement date. 
An employee may choose to remain in the active employ of the city beyond his or her normal retirement date for an extended period or periods provided he or she demonstrates his or her ability to perform the functions of the job adequately. The employee may retire from the city on the first day of any month during such extended period and such date shall be the delayed retirement date of the employee. All employees working beyond the normal retirement date shall provide the city a minimum of sixty (60) days' notice of intent to retire from employment. An employee shall retire from the employment of the city on the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the attainment of age seventy (70). 
(3)  - Early retirement date. 
An employee may retire from the employment of the city on the first day of any month prior to his or her normal retirement date, provided the employee has completed twenty-five (25) years of service. Such date of retirement shall be the early retirement date of the employee. 
The early retirement date for the purpose of a deferred benefit under Article V, Section (3) shall be the first day of the month coinciding with or next following the date which is twenty- five (25) years from the date the employee became a member of the system. 
(4)  - Disability retirement date. 
(a)  In Line of Duty. An employee who becomes totally and permanently disabled, as hereinafter defined, from causes arising out of and in the course of his or her employment, shall be retired on the first day of the month next following the date upon which the board makes a determination that the employee is permanently and totally disabled, or upon the day the board makes such determination if made on the first day of a month. 
(b)  Not in Line of Duty. An employee who becomes totally and permanently disabled from causes not arising out of and in the course of his or her employment, but after the completion of fifteen (15) years of service, shall be retired on the first day of the month next following the date upon which the board makes a determination that the employee is permanently and totally disabled or upon the day the board makes such determination if made on the first day of a month. Should an employee become disabled prior to completion of five (5) years of service, except as provided in (a) above, the employee shall receive only a refund of his or her accumulated contributions, if he or she has made such contributions. 
(c)  Determination of Total and Permanent Disability. An employee shall be considered totally disabled if, in the opinion of the board, relying on the advice of a licensed physician or physicians, he or she is wholly prevented by his or her physical and mental condition from discharging his or her usual duties in an efficient manner. An employee shall be considered permanently disabled if, in the opinion of the board, relying on the advice of a licensed physician or physicians, such employee is likely to remain so disabled continuously and permanently from a cause other than specified in Section (4)(d) below. The decision of the board on these questions shall be final and binding and shall not be appealed. 
The board may require an employee, applying for retirement on the basis of total and permanent disability, whether in the line of duty or not, to undergo a medical examination by a physician or physicians designated by the board, the expense thereof to be borne by the board. Should any such employee refuse to submit to such medical examination or examinations, he or she shall not be granted any retirement benefits during the continuance of such refusal. 
The board shall consider heart and respiratory diseases as a cause of total disability in the line of duty in the case of an employee, relying on the advice of a licensed physician, or physicians, if the employee is wholly prevented by such disease, or diseases, from discharging his or her usual duties in an efficient manner, but no employee shall be entitled to disability benefits as a result of disability from heart disease or respiratory disease unless such employee shall have served at least five consecutive years as an employee immediately preceding the date of disability. 
(d)  An employee shall not be entitled to receive any disability retirement income if the disability is a result of the following: 
(1)  Injury or disease sustained by the employee while willfully and illegally participating in acts of violence, riots, civil insurrections or while committing a felony; 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained by the employee while serving in any armed forces of any country; 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained by the employee after his or her employment has terminated; 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained by the employee while working for anyone other than the city and arising out of such employment; or 
(5)  Intentional, self-inflicted injury. 
(e)  Termination of Disability Retirement Benefit. Once each year the board may require any employee receiving a disability benefit who has not reached his or her normal retirement date to undergo a medical examination by a physician or physicians designated by the board. If it appears from such medical examination that the disability of an employee who has not reached his or her normal retirement date has ceased, his or her disability benefit shall be discontinued by the board. Should any such employee refuse to submit to such medical examination and should he or she fail to undergo such medical examination for a year, all his or her rights in and to his or her disability benefit shall cease. 
If the disability retirement benefit of an employee is discontinued prior to the normal retirement date of the employee because the disability of the employee has ceased and if such employee is reemployed by the city within six months following the date such disability ceases, then automatically after such reemployment the employee shall accumulate benefits as an employee and any benefits to which the employee thereafter may become entitled under any of the provisions of the system will be subject to the provision that average compensation during such period of disability shall be considered as being at the same rate as was in effect on the date the participant became totally and permanently disabled. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - RETIREMENT BENEFITS 
(1)  - Normal retirement benefit. 
An employee shall, upon retirement on his or her normal retirement date, receive a monthly retirement benefit equal to one-twelfth (1/12) of fifty (50) percent of his or her average compensation. An employee with more than twenty-five (25) years of service shall have included in the computation of his or her normal retirement benefit an additional two percent (2%) of average compensation for each year of service in excess of twenty-five (25) years; provided, however, that the total amount of average compensation to be considered shall not exceed seventy percent (70%). The first of said monthly retirement payments shall be made on his or her normal retirement date and subsequent such payments shall be made on his or her normal retirement date and subsequent such payments shall be made on the first day of each calendar month thereafter during the employee's lifetime. The minimum normal retirement benefit to be paid under this section [article] shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month. 
(2)  - Delayed retirement benefit. 
An employee shall, upon retirement on his or her delayed retirement date, receive a monthly retirement benefit, the amount of which shall be computed in the same manner as for his or her normal retirement benefit, based on average compensation as of his or her delayed retirement date. The first of said monthly retirement payments shall be made on his or her delayed retirement date and subsequent such payments shall be made on the first day of each calendar month thereafter during the employee's lifetime. 
The monthly delayed retirement benefit to be paid under this section [article] shall be $500.00 per month. 
(3)  - Early retirement benefit. 
An employee shall, upon retirement on his or her early retirement date, receive a monthly retirement benefit, the amount of which shall be computed in the same manner as for his or her normal retirement benefit, based on average compensation as of his or her early retirement date, except that such amount shall be reduced by five twenty-fourths of one percent for each month by which the early retirement date precedes the normal retirement date. The first of said monthly retirement payments shall be made on his or her early retirement date and subsequent such payments shall be made on the first day of each calendar month thereafter during the employee's lifetime. 
(4)  - Disability retirement benefit. 
(a)  In Line of Duty. An employee, upon retirement on his or her disability retirement date, as defined in Article 111(4)(a), shall receive a monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on the employee's disability retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter during the lifetime and continued disability of the employee. The amount of such immediate monthly benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for a normal retirement benefit, except that average compensation shall be computed as of the disability retirement date of the employee. 
(b)  Not in Line of Duty. An employee, upon retirement on his or her disability retirement date, as provided in Article III(4)(b), shall receive an immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on the employee's disability retirement date and shall be payable on the first day of each month thereafter during the lifetime and the continued disability of the employee. The amount of such immediate monthly benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for a normal retirement benefit except that average compensation shall be determined as of the employee's disability retirement date, but reduced in accordance with his or her length of service as set forth in the following schedule: 

 
If an employee has less than five (5) years of service, he or she shall receive a refund of his or her accumulated contributions, if he or she has made such contributions. 
(5)  - Reduction of benefits by workers' compensation benefits. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, with respect to any employee whose employment with the City terminates after October 1, 1995, the following monthly benefits shall be reduced: 
(1)  The monthly benefit otherwise payable to the employee for any calendar month under any of the following sections of this Plan: 
(i)  Normal Retirement Benefit under Section (1) of Article IV. 
(ii)  Delayed Retirement Benefit under Section (2) of Article IV. 
(iii)  Early Retirement Benefit under Section (3) of Article IV. 
(iv)  Disability Retirement Benefit under Section (4) of Article IV. 
(v)  Termination under Section (3) of Article V. 
shall be reduced by the amount of the monthly Workers' Compensation Benefit (not including Medical Expense Reimbursement Benefits or Lump Sum Benefits) otherwise paid to the employee by the City or third party on behalf of the City for any such calendar month. 
(2)  The monthly benefit otherwise payable to the surviving spouse of any such employee for any calendar month under Section (1) or (2) shall be reduced by the amount of the monthly Workers' Compensation Benefit (not including Medical Expense Reimbursement Benefits or Lump Sum Benefits) otherwise paid to the surviving spouse of such employee by the City for any such calendar month. In the event of the employee's death, the monthly benefit otherwise payable to a minor child of any such employee for any calendar month under Section (1) or (2) shall be reduced by the amount of the Workers' Compensation Benefit (not including Medical Expense Reimbursement Benefits or Lump Sum Benefits) otherwise paid to said minor child of such employee by the City, for any such calendar month. In the event of the employee's death, the monthly benefit otherwise payable to any other beneficiary of any such employee for any calendar month under Section (1) or (2) shall be reduced by the amount of the monthly Workers' Compensation Benefit (not including Medical Expense Reimbursement Benefits or Lump Sum Benefits) otherwise paid to such beneficiary of such employee by the City or any third party on behalf of the City for any such calendar month. 
(6)  - Cost of living adjustment. 
Beginning May 12, 2003 and each January 1 thereafter, all retired employees and beneficiaries thereof eligible to receive a monthly retirement payment shall receive an annual cost of living adjustment increase of 1.5% of their monthly retirement benefit, except that no such increase shall be effective as to any year for which such increase is disapproved by the governing body of the City of Macon, based on financial soundness of the plan. The monthly retirement payment shall be adjusted by multiplying the amount of the monthly payment by 1.5%. This ordinance shall also apply to all employees who retired prior to May 12, 2003. 
(7)  - Supplemental benefit. 
A supplemental benefit of $100.00 per month shall be paid to current and future retirees (but not including spouses or other beneficiaries) with twenty-five (25) years of full time service credit with the City of Macon or who become eligible for disability retirement except that no such supplemental benefit shall be effective as to any year for which such supplemental benefit is disapproved by the governing body of the City of Macon, based on the financial soundness of the plan. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE IV-A. - OPTIONAL RETIREMENT BENEFITS 
(1)  - Joint and survivor option. 
By filing an application with the Board, any employee may designate his or her spouse (or any dependent approved by the Board) as his or her contingent pensioner and elect to receive a pension payable in accordance with one of the following options, in lieu of the pension to which he or she may otherwise become entitled upon retirement. 
(a)  Option 1: The employee shall receive an actuarial equivalent pension payable for life, and payments in the amount of 662/3% of such actuarial equivalent pension shall, after the employee's death, be continued to the contingent pensioner during the latter's lifetime. 
(b)  Option 2: The employee shall receive an actuarial equivalent pension payable for life, and payments in the amount of 100% of such actuarial equivalent pension shall, after the employee's death, be continued to the contingent pensioner during the latter's lifetime. 
(c)  Option 3: The employee may elect to receive an actuarial equivalent pension, payable for life with 120 monthly payments guaranteed. In the event the employee should die before having received 120 monthly payments, the remaining payments will be made to his or her contingent pensioner. 
(2)  - Aggregate payments. 
The aggregate of the pension payments expected to be paid to an employee and his or her contingent pensioner under any of the above options shall be the actuarial equivalent of the pension which the employee is otherwise entitled to receive upon retirement. 
(3)  - Election of options. 
An employee may elect or revoke an option prior to retirement by filing such election or revocation in writing with the Board prior to retirement. Under no circumstances may an option be changed or revoked after the employee's retirement. 
(4)  - Death before retirement. 
An election made pursuant to this section shall become inoperative in the event that: 
(a)  the employee's death occurs prior to actual retirement; or 
(b)  the death of the contingent pensioner occurs before the employee's actual retirement. 
(c)  If an employee dies after becoming eligible to retire but before applying for retirement, and such member is survived by a spouse, the surviving spouse shall be entitled to receive a benefit as if the member had elected to receive one hundred percent (100%) of the member's benefits as provided in Art. IV-A (1)(b) Option 2, such benefits to commence on the first day of the month immediately following the death of the employee. 
(5)  - Direct rollovers. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this system to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this Article IV, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
For purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  'Eligible rollover distribution' shall mean any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, including any portion of the distribution that is not includable in gross income to the extent permitted by the Code, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period often (10) years or more; and any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the Code. 
(b)  'Eligible retirement plan' shall mean an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Code, a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the Code, or an individual retirement plan described in Code Section 408A (Roth IRA), that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. For these purposes, an eligible retirement plan shall also mean an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Code and an eligible plan under section 457(b) of the Code which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from this system. The definition of eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution to a surviving spouse. 
(c)  'Distributee' shall include an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. For distributions after December 31, 2009, a non-spouse beneficiary who is a "designated beneficiary" under section 401(a)(9)(E) of the Code and the regulations thereunder, may by a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer ("direct rollover"), roll over all or any portion of his or her distribution to an individual retirement account (IRA) the beneficiary establishes for purposes of receiving the distribution. In order to be able to roll over the distribution, the distribution otherwise must satisfy the definition of an "eligible rollover distribution" under section 401(a)(31) of the Code. Although a non-spouse beneficiary may roll over directly a distribution, the distribution is not subject to the direct rollover requirements of section 401(a)(31) of the Code, the notice requirements of section 402(f) of the Code or the mandatory withholding requirements of section 3405(c) of the Code. If a non-spouse beneficiary receives a distribution from the system, the distribution is not eligible for a 60-day (non- direct) rollover. If the employee's named beneficiary is a trust, the system may make a direct rollover to an IRA on behalf of the trust, provided the trust satisfies the requirements to be a "designated beneficiary within the meaning of section 401(a)(9)(E) of the Code. 
(d)  'Direct rollover' shall mean a payment by the system to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE V. - DEATH OR TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT 
(1)  - Death before retirement. 
(a)  In Line of Duty. If any employee shall lose his or her life or later die from injuries received while in the discharge of his or her duties, and shall leave a widow and/or child or children under the age of eighteen (18) years, and unmarried, the board shall authorize and direct payment of a monthly benefit to the widow, child or children, but only in the following amounts and on the following conditions: 
(i)  The widow shall receive a monthly income of fifty per cent (50%) of the normal retirement benefit the employee would otherwise have received (average compensation being based on the thirty-six (36) months immediately preceding death), plus an additional fifteen per cent (15%) for the first minor child, twenty per cent (20%) for two minor children, and twenty-five per cent (25%) for three or more minor children. 
(ii)  If there be no widow, one (1) unmarried child under the age of eighteen (18) years shall receive a monthly income of fifty per cent (50%) of the normal retirement benefit the employee would otherwise have received (average compensation being based on the thirty-six (36) months immediately preceding death); two children shall receive fifty-five per cent (55%) of said benefit; three or more children shall receive sixty per cent (60%) of said benefit. 
(iii)  If there be a surviving widow and she subsequently dies, then the child or children shall receive the benefit applicable under Article V, Section (1)(a)(ii), just as if there had been no widow at member's death. 
(iv)  If there be a surviving widow and she remarries, then the child or children shall receive the benefit applicable under Article V, Section (1)(a)(i). 
(b)  Not in Line of Duty. If an employee dies from causes not attributed to his or her active duties, providing that such employee shall have fifteen (15) or more years service prior to the date of his or her death, the board shall authorize and direct payment of a monthly benefit to the widow, child or children, in the following amounts: 
(i)  The widow shall receive a monthly income of fifty per cent (50%) of the non-service disability retirement benefit as provided in Article IV, Section (4)(b), that the employee would otherwise have received (average compensation being based on the thirty-six (36) months immediately preceding death), plus an additional fifteen per cent (15%) for the first minor child, twenty per cent (20%) for two minor children, and twenty-five per cent (25%) for three or more minor children. 
(ii)  If there be no widow, one (1) unmarried child under the age of eighteen (18) years shall receive a monthly income of fifty per cent (50%) of the non-service disability retirement benefit as provided in Article IV, Section (4)(b) that the employee would otherwise have received (average compensation being based on the thirty-six (36) months immediately preceding death); two children shall receive fifty-five per cent (55%) of said benefit; three or more children shall receive sixty per cent (60%) of said benefit. 
(iii)  If there be a surviving widow and she subsequently dies, then the child or children shall receive the benefit applicable under Article V, Section (1)(b)(ii), just as if there had been no widow at member's death. 
(iv)  If there be a surviving widow and she remarries, then the child or children shall receive the benefit applicable under Article V, Section (1)(b)(i). 
If an employee dies from causes not attributed to his or her active duties, but has less than fifteen (15) years of service, the employee's accumulated contribution, if any, shall be paid to the employee's beneficiary in a lump sum. 
(2)  - Death benefit after retirement. 
If an employee dies subsequently to actual retirement, his or her widow shall receive a benefit equal to fifty (50) percent of the benefit the employee was receiving at the time of his or her death; provided, however, the minimum benefit to be paid under this section [article] shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month. 
(3)  - Termination of employment. 
Upon an employee's termination of employment for any reason other than death, disability or retirement, he or she shall be entitled to a deferred monthly benefit commencing as of his or her early or normal retirement date, as defined in Article III. 
The benefit shall be computed in the same manner as defined in Article IV, Section (1), considering average compensation at the date of termination. The benefit shall then be multiplied by a fraction (not greater than 1), the numerator of which shall be the employee's years of service at date of termination not to exceed twenty-five (25) years, and the denominator of which shall be twenty-five (25) years. In addition, the benefit, as determined above, is adjusted in accordance with the vesting percentages, as follows: 

 
If the payment of an employee's deferred termination benefit commences as of his or her early retirement date, the benefit described in this section [article] shall be reduced by five-twelfths (5/12) of one (1) percent for each month by which the early retirement date precedes the normal retirement date. 
Upon the termination of an employee who is not eligible for any benefit under the plan, such employee shall receive a refund of his or her employee contributions, if any said contributions were made by employee. Any employee entitled to a deferred termination benefit, as defined under this section [article], shall not ordinarily receive a refund of employee contributions, if any such contributions have been made. However, should any employee entitled to a deferred termination benefit request a refund of his or her employee contributions, if any, then said employee shall sign a waiver of deferred termination benefit before such refund is granted and shall have no other remaining rights or interest in the plan. 
(4)  - Reemployment. 
Between the dates of January 1, 1977 and December 31, 1977, should a former employee who previously had participated in this system be re-employed, he or she may recoup credit for his or her past service under the system by applying and paying into the system the amount which the system had refunded to such employee upon his or her prior termination plus any administrative costs all as determined by the board. The board shall be furnished with a copy of the result of a physical examination taken by said employee. Said board shall notify applicant of the sum required to be paid into the fund and the method of payment and re-admit said employee to said system with prior service credit in said system upon payment of said sum. 
(5)  - Recoupment of credit for prior service. 
Within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this Section 5 of Article V, any full-time employee of the Macon-Bibb County Fire and Police Departments currently employed by those departments on that date who contributed to the Macon-Bibb County Fire and Police Retirement System Fund and terminated his or her employment and was subsequently reemployed, may recoup credit for his or her past service under the system by applying and paying into the system a lump sum amount which the system had refunded to such employee upon his or her prior termination, plus five percent (5%) of the total refunded amount plus any administrative costs, as determined by the board. 
The employee shall make application and pay the total amount due in one lump sum within the window period. No credit shall be recouped by the employee until such time as payment has been made in full. Provided however, any employee who is reemployed by Macon-Bibb County on or after January 1, 2014, may not pay any amounts into the system to recoup credit for past service nor will such employee be eligible to participate in the Plan after reemployment. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE VI. - CONTRIBUTIONS 
(1)  - Employee contributions. 
For any employee who on the effective date of this system was a member of the General Employee's Retirement System of the City of Macon and who made contributions to that system, the board shall have such contributions transferred to the fund and created under this system and such contributions will be credited to the individual account of each such employee. 
(2)  - City contributions. 
The city shall quarterly make contributions as determined by the actuary as necessary to keep the system actuarially sound. The board relying on the advice of the actuary, may from time to time increase or decrease the amount of the city contributions, provided, however, the benefits to be paid or made available under the system are not affected at any time. All city contributions shall be paid to the fund and shall be irrevocable except as herein provided and shall be used only for the benefit of the employees and their beneficiaries. 
Investment of all employee contributions and all city contributions made toward the cost of the system will be accomplished through the fund. Payments of all benefits of all employees and beneficiaries shall be accomplished through the system. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE VII. - RETIREMENT BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
(1)  - Appointment and term of office. 
The Board shall consist of five (5) members chosen as follows: 
(a)  Two (2) Commissioners appointed by the Mayor; 
(b)  One (1) active or retired representative from either the former City of Macon Police Department or the Bibb County Sheriff's Department who participates in the Plan, chosen by a majority vote of the Plan participants from either the former City of Macon Police Department or the Bibb County Sheriff's Department both active and retired; 
(c)  One (1) active or retired representative from the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department who participates in the Plan, chosen by a majority vote of the Plan participants from the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department both active and retired; and 
(d)  A private resident of Macon-Bibb County (who is knowledgeable in investment finance), to be selected by the above-mentioned four. 
The terms of office of the Board members shall each be for a term of two (2) years and until a successor has been selected. The Macon-Bibb County attorney shall serve as legal counsel for and advisor to the Board. The Macon-Bibb County Human Resources Director shall be responsible for conducting the votes of the Plan participants in selecting the law enforcement and firefighter representatives in a manner approved by the Board of Trustees. If the private resident position of the remains vacant for more than (60) days, then, the Mayor shall be authorized to appoint an interim private resident member, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
The individual members of the Board serving on June 1, 2015, shall continue to serve for their respective terms and until a successor has been selected, unless said member ceases to meet the eligibility requirements set out above, in which case the member shall serve until a successor has been selected. 
(2)  - Organization of the board. 
The board shall elect a chairman and a secretary from among its members. The board may appoint such agents, who need not be members of such board, as it may deem necessary for the effective performance of its duties and it may delegate to such agents such powers and duties whether ministerial or discretionary as the board may deem expedient or appropriate. The compensation of such agent shall be fixed by the board within limits set by the city commissioners. The board shall act by majority vote of its active members. The board members shall serve without compensation. 
(3)  - Selection of agents. 
(a)  Pursuant to section (2) above, which authorizes the city to set limits on the compensation of agents, the board shall be required to enter into a written agreement with any agents selected to perform duties on the board's behalf. The board is hereby authorized to enter into and to sign a written agreement with an agent, without the approval of the city, provided that the agent certifies to the board in the written agreement that the agent does not reasonably expect the cost of its services to exceed Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00). 
(b)  An agreement with an agent whose services are reasonably expected to exceed Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00) or the continued engagement of any agent whose cost of services for the previous twelve months have exceeded Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00) without the approval of the city shall require the consent of the city by adoption of a resolution of mayor and council. As a condition of seeking approval from the city, the board shall demonstrate to mayor and council that it has made a competitive selection based upon relevant criteria established and published as part of the selection process. 
(c)  Any written agreement entered into by the board on or after November 1, 2012 which does not comply with the requirements of this section as set forth above shall be null and void. 
(4)  - Powers of the board. 
The board shall have complete control of the administration of the system with all powers necessary to enable it to properly carry out its duties in that respect. Not in limitation, but in amplification of the foregoing, such board shall have the power to construe the said system and to determine all questions which shall arise thereunder and shall also have all the powers herein conferred upon it. It shall decide all questions relating to eligibility of employees to participate in the benefits of the system and shall determine the benefits of this system to which any employee or his or her beneficiary may be entitled. All disbursements shall be made upon, and in accordance with, written instructions of the board, signed by the secretary. The decision of the board upon all matters within the scope of its authority shall be binding upon all parties of this instrument, employees and their beneficiaries. 
The board shall establish rules and procedures to be followed by employees and beneficiaries in filing applications for benefits and in furnishing and verifying proof necessary to determine age and any other matters required to administer the system. 
The board shall receive all applications for benefits. Upon receipt by the board of such an application, it shall determine all facts which are necessary to establish the right of the applicant to benefits under the provisions of the system and the amount thereof as herein provided. Upon request, the board will afford any applicant the right of hearing with respect to any findings of fact or determination. 
The board shall prepare and distribute to the employees, at the expense of the city, and in such manner as it shall be deemed appropriate, information concerning the system. 
To enable the board to perform its functions, the city shall supply full and timely information to the board of all matters relating to the compensation of the employees, their length of service, their retirement or other causes for termination of employment, and such other pertinent facts as the board may require. 
The board shall designate an actuary who shall be the technical advisor of the board regarding the operation of the system and shall perform such other duties as are required in connection therewith. 
The board shall be entitled to rely upon all tables, valuations, certificates, and reports furnished by the actuary and upon all opinions given by the city attorney, and the board shall be fully protected in respect to any action taken or suffered by them in good faith in reliance upon the advice or opinion of any such actuary or counsel, and all action so taken or suffered shall be conclusive upon each of them and upon all employees or other persons interested in the system. 
(5)  - Records of board. 
All acts and, determinations of the board shall be duly recorded by the secretary thereof, or under his or her supervision, and all such records, together with such other documents as may be necessary for the administration of the system shall be preserved in the custody of such secretary. 
(6)  - Exemption from liability of board. 
The members of the board, and each of them, shall be free from all liability, joint or several, for their acts, omissions and conduct, and for the acts, omissions and conduct of their duly constituted agents, in the administration of the system and the city shall indemnify and save them, and each of them, harmless from the effects and consequences of their acts, omissions and conduct in their official capacity, except to the extent that such effects and consequences shall result from their own willful misconduct. 
(7)  - Annual audit required. 
An annual audit prepared by a certified public accountant chosen by the board shall be made at the close of each fiscal year (June 30) of all the transactions of the system. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRUST AND TRUSTEE 
The board at its own discretion shall appoint the trustee. The trust agreement shall be in such form and containing such provisions as the board deems appropriate, including, but not by way of limitation, the position with respect to the liability of the trustees, the authority of the board to settle the accounts of the trustee on behalf of all persons having interest in the trust and from time to time shall appoint a new trustee in place of any then acting trustee. With respect to any payment to or for the benefit of any employee or beneficiary under the system the trustee shall follow the directions of the board. 
When entered into, the trust agreement shall be deemed to form a part of the system and any and all rights to benefits which may accrue to any person under the system shall be subject to all the terms and provisions of the trust agreement. A trust fund shall be established under the terms of said trust agreement and all employee contributions and city contributions shall be paid into the system and the trustee shall be authorized, subject to the direction of the board, to administer such fund, investing and reinvesting the fund in any investments which are legal investments for insurance companies under the laws of this state, as the same may now or hereafter provide. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS 
(1)  - Headings. 
The headings and subheadings in this system have been inserted for convenience of reference only and are to be ignored in any construction of the provisions hereof. 
(2)  - Construction. 
In the construction of this system the masculine shall include the feminine and the singular the plural in all cases where such meanings would be appropriate. 
The system shall be construed in accordance with the law of the State of Georgia. 
(3)  - Spendthrift clause. 
To the extent permitted by law, none of the benefits, payments, proceeds or distributions under this system shall be subject to the claims of any creditor of the employee or to the claim of any creditor of any beneficiary hereunder or to any legal process by any creditor of such employee or any such beneficiary whomsoever, save by and at the instance of the City of Macon or the Macon Police Credit Union or the Macon Firemen's Credit Union, corporations of Bibb County, Georgia, and then only for money lawfully owing to said city or said credit unions by any particular member, and then only to the extent of such member's benefit payments and contributions to the system; and neither such employee or any such beneficiary shall have any right to alienate, commute, anticipate or assign any of the benefits, payments, proceeds or distributions under this system, except to the City of Macon or the Macon Police Credit Union or the Macon Firemen's Credit Union and if any employee shall attempt to dispose of the benefits provided for him other than to the City of Macon, Macon Police Credit Union or Macon Firemen's Credit Union or to dispose of the right to receive such benefits other than to the City of Macon, Macon Police Credit Union, or Macon Firemen's Credit Union or in the event there should be an effort to seize such benefits, or the right to receive such benefits by attachment, execution or other legal or equitable process by any except the City of Macon, Macon Police Credit Union, or Macon Firemen's Credit Union, such right may pass and be transferred at the discretion of the board, to such one or more as may be appointed by the board from among the beneficiaries, if any, theretofore designated by the employee, or from the spouse, children or other dependents of the employee, in such shares as the board may appoint. Any appointment so made by the board may be revoked by it at any time and further appointment made by it which may include the employee. 
(4)  - Legally incompetent. 
If any employee or beneficiary is a minor, or is in the judgment of the board otherwise legally incapable of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt for any payment due him hereunder, the board may, unless and until claim shall have been made by a duly appointed guardian or committee of such person, direct that such payment or any part thereof be made to such person's spouse, child, parent, brother or sister or other person deemed by the board to have incurred expense for or assumed responsibility for the expenses of such person. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of any liability under this system for such payment. 
(5)  - Benefits supported only by trust fund. 
Any person having any claim under the system will look solely to the assets of the system for satisfaction. In no event will the city or any of its officials, members of its commission or agents, be liable in their individual capacities to any person whomsoever under the provisions of the system. Upon complete or partial termination of the system, the rights of all affected employees to benefits accrued as of the date of such termination shall become nonforfeitable to the extent the system is then funded. 
(6)  - Misconduct. 
If the board finds that any retired or terminated employee engaged in misconduct involving dishonesty or moral turpitude while employed with the city, the board shall reduce or suspend the benefits of the employee, which reduction or suspension shall continue until removed by notice from the board. 
(7)  - Discrimination. 
The city, through the board, shall administer the system in a uniform and consistent manner with respect to all employees and shall not permit discrimination of any kind. 
(8)  - Limitation of liability; legal action. 
It is expressly understood and agreed by each employee who becomes a member hereunder, that except for its or their willful neglect or fraud, neither the city nor the board shall be in any way subject to any suit or litigation, or to any legal liability, for any cause or reason or thing whatsoever, in connection with this system or its operation, and each such employee hereby releases the city and all its officers and obligation. 
To any action or proceeding involving the assets held with respect to the system or the administration thereof, the city, the board and the trustee shall be the only necessary parties and no employees or former employees of the city or their beneficiaries or any other person having or claiming to have an interest in the system shall be entitled to any notice or process. Any final judgment which is not appealed or appealable that may be entered in any such action or proceeding shall be binding and conclusive on the parties hereto, the board and all persons having or claiming to have any interest in the system. 
(9)  - Claims. 
Any payment to an employee or beneficiary, or to their legal representative, in accordance with the provisions of this system, shall to the extent thereof be in full satisfaction of all claims hereunder against the trustee, board and the city, any of whom may require such employee, beneficiary or legal representative, as a condition precedent to such payment, to execute a receipt and release therefor in such form as shall be determined by the trustee, the board or the city, as the case may be. 
(10)  - USERRA. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits, and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with Code section 414(u). In the case of a death or disability occurring on or after January 1, 2007, if an employee dies while performing qualified military service (as defined in section 414(u) of the Code), the survivors of the employee are entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) provided under the system as if the employee had resumed and then terminated employment on account of death. For years beginning after December 31, 2008, (a) an individual receiving a differential wage payment, as defined by section 3401(h)(2) of the Code, shall be treated as an employee of the city, (b) the differential wage payment shall be treated as basic compensation, and (c) the system shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of any provision described in section 414(u)(1)(C) of the Code by reason of any contribution or benefit which is based on the differential wage payment. 
(11)  - Exclusive Benefit. 
The Plan and trust will be maintained and administered for the exclusive benefit of participants and their beneficiaries. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION RULES 
(1)  - Required Minimum Distribution Rules. 
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the board shall direct that payment of an employee's pension commence by the first day of April in the calendar year following the later of (a) the calendar year in which the employee attains age seventy and one-half (70½), or (b) the calendar year in which the employee retires. The foregoing requirement shall be administered by the board in accordance with a reasonable and good faith interpretation of Section 401(a)(9) of the Code pursuant to Treas. Reg. Section 1.401(a)(9)-1, A-2(d). 
(2)  - Limitation on Benefits. 
The annual benefit payable under this system to an employee at any time shall not exceed the maximum permissible amount. "Maximum permissible amount" shall mean $160,000.00, as adjusted by the Secretary of the Treasury for each calendar year under section 415(d) of the Code, with the new limitation to apply to limitation years ending within the calendar year of the date of the adjustment. The limitations, adjustments, and other requirements set forth in this Article X shall comply with the provisions of section 415 of the Code (specifically including any special rules under sections 415(b)(2)(G) and 415(b)(11) of the Code) and the final regulations promulgated thereunder, the terms of which are specifically incorporated herein by reference for Limitation Years beginning on or after July 1, 2007, except where an earlier effective date is otherwise provided in the final regulations or in this Article X. The application of the provisions of this Article X shall not cause the maximum permissible amount for any employee to be less than the employee's accrued benefit under all the defined benefit plans of the employer or a predecessor employer as of the end of the last limitation year beginning before July 1, 2007, under provisions of the plans that were both adopted and in effect before April 5, 2007 (provided such provisions were both adopted and in effect before April 5, 2007, and satisfied the applicable requirements of statutory provisions, regulations, and other published guidance relating to section 415 of the Code in effect as of the end of the last limitation year beginning before July 1, 2007). 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
ARTICLE XI. - EARLY RETIREMENT INCENTIVE PROGRAM 
An enhanced early retirement benefit shall be made available to certain employees participating in this Plan on a one-time basis, in accordance with and subject to the following requirements, and shall be referred to herein as the Early Retirement Incentive Program or "ERIP" 
(1)  - Eligibility for Enhanced Early Retirement Benefit under ERIP. 
An employee participating in this Plan is eligible to elect to participate in the ERIP and receive a normal pension, if, assuming the employee worked through December 31, 2015, he or she attained age forty-eight (48) and earned at least twenty-three (23) years of service on or before December 31, 2015. An employee is eligible to elect to participate in the ERIP and receive an early pension if, assuming the Participant worked through December 31, 2015, he or she earned at least twenty-three (23) years of service. Terminated employees and elected employees are not eligible to elect to participate in the ERIP. 
(2)  - Description of Enhanced Benefits. 
Subject to the applicable limitations of Code Section 415, the enhanced early retirement incentive benefit payable to an employee who elects to participate in the ERIP shall be computed by substituting a multiplier of two and one-half percent (2.5%) for benefits determined under Article IV, and assuming the employee worked for the employer until December 31, 2015. Therefore, the pension benefit shall be based upon the employee's service and his average compensation as of December 31, 2015, times 2.5%; provided however, the annual benefit payable shall not exceed ninety percent (90%) of average compensation and the early pension shall be subject to the reductions as provided in Article IV section (3) of the Plan. 
(3)  - Additional Benefits. 
A supplemental benefit will be paid from the Plan to an employee who elects to participate in the ERIP equal to $200 per month for the life of the employee. 
(4)  - Window Period for Election. 
Any employee, who satisfies the eligibility requirements of the ERIP in Section (a) above, may elect to terminate employment, retire and receive the enhanced early retirement benefit described in this Section by submitting the required forms to the designated individual no later than 5:00 p.m. on July 31, 2015. An employee may not make an election to retire under the ERIP after he or she has terminated employment with the Employer. 
(5)  - 7-Day Revocation Period. 
Any employee electing to retire early under the ERIP may revoke his or her election by providing written notice of the revocation to the designated individual within seven (7) days after he or she submitted the election form (the revocation period). If the employee does not revoke his or her election within the 7-day revocation period, the election to terminate employment, retire and receive an enhanced retirement benefit pursuant to the ERIP shall become irrevocable when the revocation period ends. 
(6)  - Termination of Employment; Retirement Date. 
Employees who irrevocably elect to participate in the ERIP shall be required to retire no later than September 30, 2015. Benefits for an employee who elects to participate in the ERIP shall commence on the first day of the month following his or her termination of employment and shall be paid on the first day of each succeeding month thereafter for as long as the employee remains eligible to receive such benefits. If an employee dies before commencement of benefits under this ERIP, the employee's election to participate in the ERIP shall be null and void, notwithstanding any provisions herein to the contrary. 
(7)  - Voluntary Election. 
The election to retire and receive enhanced early retirement benefits pursuant to the ERIP shall be completely voluntary. 
The effective date of this article XI is May 31, 2015. The rights and obligations under the Plan with respect to employees whose employment with the Employer is terminated for any reason whatsoever prior to the effective date of this Plan Amendment shall be governed by the Plan as it existed and was in effect at the time of such termination. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0064, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
PART II - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the County, as a part of Supp. No. 2, Part II was amended in its entirety to read as set out herein. 

Part I - Related Laws [of Bibb County] 
Part II - Related Laws [of Macon County] 
Part III - [Comparative Tables] 
PART I - RELATED LAWS [OF BIBB COUNTY][2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Part I is a compilation of local constitutional amendments, local acts and amendments made thereto by the Bibb County Board of Commissioners, all of which pertain to Bibb County. Unless they contain special information, legal status provisions such as short title, repealer, effective date and referendum provisions have been deleted. History notes show the source of each section in part I. Enacting clauses are deleted from individual sections, and individual sections have been otherwise altered so that they stand alone without enacting clauses. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform; and the same system of capitalization, citations to state statutes, expression of numbers in text and designation of subsections as appears in part II has been used. References to acts or portions of acts contained in this part are altered so as to reference their location in this compilation. Obvious spelling errors have been corrected without notation. In addition, section catchlines have been added or altered as necessary. 
Pursuant to Ga. Const. (1976) art. VI, § VI, ¶ XIV, the terms "ordinary" and "court of ordinary" have been changed without notation to "judge of the probate court" (or "probate judge") and "probate court" respectively. Pursuant to 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 438), page 3302, the terms "City Court of Macon" or "city court" have been changed without notation to "State Court of Bibb County" and "state court" respectively. 
Pursuant to Ga. Const. (1983) art. VI, § X, ¶ I, the terms "justice of the peace" and "justice court" have been changed to "magistrate" or "magistrate court," as appropriate without notation. 
Any other additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - County boundaries. 
(a)  All that tract of country hereinafter pointed out, viz. Beginning at Waller's or Torrentine's Ferry on the Ocmulgee River, running a direct line to the corner of the 12th and 13th districts of Monroe county on the line dividing Monroe and Houston Counties, thence due south to Ichucconna Creek, thence down said creek to where it enters into the Ocmulgee River; then beginning at Waller's or Torrentine's Ferry, running down the Ocmulgee River to the mouth of a small branch just below William W. Brown's shoals, thence a direct line to the corner of the reserve near Mrs. Lavinia Hawkins' old mill, thence down the reserve line to the corner, thence to the corners of lots Nos. 96 and 86 in the Seventh district of Baldwin originally, now Twiggs County, thence a direct line to Stone creek, thence down said creek until it strikes the dividing line of lots Nos. 108 and 107, thence a direct line to the Ocmulgee River, thence down said river to the mouth of Ichoccunna Creek, forming another county to be called Bibb. 
(1822 Ga. Laws, page 21, § 2) 
(b)  Lots No. 90 and 91, in the Seventh District of originally Baldwin County, now Twiggs, be added to, and become a part of the County of Bibb, any law to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(1833 Ga. Laws, page 51) 
(c)  From the said fraction number 101, in the said Seventh District of originally Baldwin, now Jones County, be added to and become a part of the County of Bibb. 
(1834 (Nov.-Dec. Sess.) Ga. Laws, page 31) 
(d)  The residence of Isaac Watts, which now lies in the County of Twiggs, distinguished as number 61, and seventh district, of originally Baldwin, now Twiggs County, be, and the same is hereby added to the County of Bibb; and that the said Isaac Watts be, and he is hereby considered a citizen of the County of Bibb, and entitled to all the privileges and immunities of the same. 
(1842 Ga. Laws, page 61, § 1) 
(e)  All that part of the County of Twiggs known as lot number 89 in the seventh district of originally Baldwin, now Twiggs County, and lot number 70 in said seventh district, be and the same is hereby added to the County of Bibb; and that fractional lots numbers 99 and 100 in the seventh district of originally Baldwin, now Jones County, shall be added to the County of Bibb; and that lot number 134 in the eighth district of originally Baldwin, now Bibb County, and fractional lot number two in the East Macon Reserve, now owned by James M. Gray, of said County of Jones, laying within the County of Bibb, shall be added to the County of Jones. 
(1849-1850 Ga. Laws, page 129, § 1) 
(f)  Lot of land number 62 in the seventh district of originally Baldwin, now Twiggs County, the same being a part of the plantation of Elisha Davis, of Bibb County, be and the same is hereby added to the County of Bibb. 
(1851-1852 Ga. Laws (Act No. 44), page 75, § I) 
(g)  Lots of land numbers 85 and 86, in the seventh district of originally Baldwin, now Jones County, the same being a part of the plantation and mill of Elisha Davis, of Bibb County, be and the same is hereby added to the County of Bibb. 
(1853-1854 Ga. Laws (Act No. 249), page 32, § I) 
(h)  The line between the counties of Bibb and Twiggs be so changed as to include the following lots of land, now in the County of Twiggs, into the County of Bibb, to-wit: Numbers 134, 135, 143, 144, 145, 146, 149, 150, 151, 152 and 161. 
(1875 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCXLVI), page 269, § I) 
(i)  The line between the Counties of Jones and Bibb be so changed as to include lots of land number 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 98, 99, 100, 101, and 102, now in the County of Jones, into the County of Bibb. 
(1875 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCLVII), page 273, § I) 
(j)  The line between the Counties of Bibb and Twiggs be so changed as to include the following lots of land now in the County of Twiggs into the County of Bibb, to-wit: Lots Nos. 132, 133, 122, 123, 120, 121, 110, 111, and parts of lots Nos. 108, 109 and 92, west of Stono Creek, and that said lines shall be so changed as to include the lands of Jasper Bullock, now in the County of Twiggs, in the County of Bibb. 
(1876 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCCXXI), page 302, § I) 
(k)  The line between the counties of Bibb and Monroe, be altered and changed so that the residence of Dr. Lee Holt, and so much of lot No. 285 as belongs to said Dr. Holt, now lying and being in Monroe County, the same being about 50 or 75 acres, be taken from Monroe County, and added to, and made a part of, Bibb County. 
(1877 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCLXX), page 272, § I) 
(l)  The line between the Counties of Bibb and Twiggs, be so changed as to include lots Nos. 63 and 64, of the seventh district of Twiggs County, into the County of Bibb. 
(1877 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCLXXI), page 273, § I) 
Sec. 1-2. - Constitutional amendment ratifying acts affecting Bibb County. 
All laws applicable to Bibb County, its courts, agencies, tribunals, and officers, and officers and agents of either and all, which have heretofore and since the Federal census of 1940 been adopted by the General Assembly of Georgia, and which have not been directly declared invalid by an appellate court of this state, and whether such laws are applicable by reason of specific designation or by inclusion in population classification, or ratified, approved and confirmed as of the date of their respective passage, to remain in full force and valid effect until affected by legislation subsequent to the adoption of this amendment. 
(1950 Ga. Laws (Act No. 856), page 434, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. I, § I, ¶ I was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-115, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws, page 5108. 
CHAPTER 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Created; districts; members. 
(a)  (1) There is created the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County to be elected as provided in this section. For the purposes of electing members of the board, Bibb County is divided into four commissioner districts as follows: 
Commissioner District No. 1 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0001 EM01 
VTD: 0002 EM02 
VTD: 0003 EM03 
VTD: 0004 EM04 
VTD: 0005 EM05 
VTD: 0006 EM06 
VTD: 0007 EM07 
VTD: 0008 EM08 
VTD: 0010 GODFREY 01 
VTD: 0011 GODFREY 02 
VTD: 0013 GODFREY 04 (Part) 
Tract: 0128. 
Block(s): 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415 
Tract: 0130. 
Block(s): 271, 272, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297 
VTD: 0034 VINEVILLE 01 
Commissioner District No. 2 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0012 GODFREY 03 
VTD: 0016 GODFREY 07 
VTD: 0019 HAZARD 05 
VTD: 0022 MACON 03 
VTD: 0023 HAZARD 01 
VTD: 0035 VINEVILLE 02 
VTD: 0036 VINEVILLE 03 
VTD: 0037 VINEVILLE 04 
VTD: 0038 VINEVILLE 05 
VTD: 0040 VINEVILLE 07 
VTD: 0043 MACON 02 
VTD: 0044 MACON 01 
Commissioner District No. 3 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0009 EM09 
VTD: 0024 HO 01 
VTD: 0025 HO 02 
VTD: 0026 HO 03 
VTD: 0027 HO 04 
VTD: 0028 HO 05 
VTD: 0029 HO 06 
VTD: 0030 HO 07 
VTD: 0031 HO 08 
VTD: 0039 VINEVILLE 06 
VTD: 0041 VINEVILLE 08 
VTD: 0042 VINEVILLE 09 
VTD: 0047 HAZARD 02 
Commissioner District No. 4 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0013 GODFREY 04 (Part) 
Tract: 0128. 
Block(s): 101, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 217, 219, 222 
VTD: 0014 GODFREY 05 
VTD: 0015 GODFREY 06 
VTD: 0017 GODFREY 08 
VTD: 0018 GODFREY 09 
VTD: 0020 HAZARD 06 
VTD: 0021 HAZARD 03 
VTD: 0032 RUTLAND 01 
VTD: 0033 RUTLAND 02 
VTD: 0045 WA 01 
VTD: 0046 WA 02 
VTD: 0048 HAZARD 04 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection: 
a.  The terms "tract," "block," and "VTD" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; 
b.  The term "Precinct" is synonymous with the term "voting precinct" and means a geographical area designated by O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, art. 7 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-260 et seq.) or O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.), within which all electors vote at one polling place; 
c.  Whenever the description of any commissioner district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; 
d.  Precinct names and designations following VTD designations are included for convenience only; and in the event the description of any commissioner district contains a conflict between the geographical boundaries of any VTD and the boundaries of the following named precinct, the geographical boundary of the VTD as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia shall control; 
e.  Any part of the county which is not included in any commissioner district described in this subsection shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; and 
f.  Any part of the county which is described in this subsection as being included in a particular commissioner district shall nevertheless not be included within such commissioner district if such part is not contiguous to such commissioner district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that commissioner district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia. 
(b)  There shall be elected to the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County one member who shall be elected from Bibb County at large, who shall be the chairman of the board, and one member from each of the commissioner districts. Each member from a district and each person elected to fill a vacancy from a district shall be elected by the qualified voters of the commissioner district which he represents. The member at large and any person elected to fill a vacancy in such position shall be elected by the qualified voters of the entire county. Candidates from districts shall offer for election to the board from the commissioner district in which their legal residence lies. 
(c)  The initial members of the board of commissioners elected under the provisions of this section shall be elected at the general election to be held in 1980 and shall take office on January 1, 1981, for a term of office of four years each and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. Following the terms of the initial members, the terms of office of members of the board of commissioners shall be for four years and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. Members shall take office on January 1 following their election. Successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of the terms of office of the members. 
(d)  At their first meeting after taking office, the members shall elect such officers, other than a chairman, as they may deem necessary. The officers so elected shall serve for a period of four years and until their respective successors are duly elected. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, § I; 1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 502), page 3752, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 213), page 3737, § 1; 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 902), page 3728, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 656), page 4907, § 1) 
Sec. 2-27. - Filling of vacancies. 
(a)  A vacancy in the office of a member of the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County shall be filled as provided in this section. 
(b)  In the event the office of chairperson of the board of commissioners or of any member thereof shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the remaining members of the board shall, by resolution, notify the Superintendent of Elections in the Macon-Bibb County Board of Elections to call an election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of that office as provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  If, however, the vacancy in any seat on the board of commissioners occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the normal term of that office, the remaining members of the board may, within 20 days of the occurrence of the vacancy, appoint a successor for the remainder of such term. 
(1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 365), page 4268, § 2) 
Sec. 2-28. - Oath of commissioners. 
Each member of said board before entering upon his duties as commissioner shall be sworn by the judge of the superior court of said county faithfully and truly to discharge the duties of commissioner as aforesaid, which oath shall be written, subscribed and attested in a book of minutes, to be kept as hereinafter provided. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, § V) 
Sec. 2-29. - Bond. 
Each member of said board of county commissioners shall, after his election, and before entering upon the duties of said office, enter in a bond for the full sum of $5,000.00, for the faithful performance of the duties of his office. Said bonds shall be made payable to the Judge of the Superior Court of the Macon Circuit, for the use of the County of Bibb, and shall be approved by him. 
(1876 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCXCI), page 270, § I) 
Sec. 2-30. - Meetings. 
The Board of Commissioners of Bibb County shall meet at the courthouse in said county at least once in each month, and it shall be empowered by ordinance to determine the time and frequency of regular and special sessions and how special sessions may be called. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, § VI; Ord. No. X-74-37, § 1, 7-2-1974) 
Editor's note— The following ordinances can be found in the Georgia Laws as indicated below: 

 
Sec. 2-31. - Quorum; compensation of commissioners. 
Three of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business and it shall require the concurrence of three commissioners to pass any order or decree. The commissioners shall receive such compensation for their services as such as they shall provide by ordinance or resolution. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. XCIX), page 219, § VII; 1889 Ga. Laws (Act No. 336), page 1124, § I; 1896 Ga. Laws (Act No. 85), page 271, § I; 1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 352), page 544, § 1; 1937 Ga. Laws (Act No. 194), page 1252, § 1; 1953 Ga. Laws (Jan.-Feb. Sess.) (Act No. 96), page 2230, § 1; 1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 698), page 2430, § 1; 1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 250), page 2623, § 1) 
Secs. 2-32—2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES 

Sec. 2-46. - Board a body corporate may sue, etc.; property of members. 
Said county board of commissioners shall be a body corporate, and may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all matters within their jurisdiction, as herein defined; but no judgment, order or decree of any court shall have effect against the individual property of any member of said board, but shall constitute a charge against said county. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, § XIII) 
Sec. 2-47. - Record of proceedings. 
Said board of commissioners shall keep a written record of all their proceedings in a well-bound book, and shall submit the same for the inspection of each grand jury at its regular meeting. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, § XII) 
Sec. 2-48. - Statements of receipts and expenditures. 
It shall be the duty of said commissioners to publish semiannually, in the first week of January and July in each year, in one or more of the newspapers published in the City of Macon, an itemized statement of the receipts and expenditures of the funds of said county. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, § X) 
Sec. 2-49. - Power as to roads. 
Said county board of commissioners is further authorized and empowered to exercise all of the functions now or heretofore exercised by the road commissioners of said county, commonly known as the road board, including the right to repair, improve, and develop the system of public roads in Bibb County, and all other public works in said county with convicts or with free labor. 
(1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 98), page 405, § 1(3)) 
Editor's note— The 1933 act designated the above section as an amendment to 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, but did not designate same as a specific section. 
Sec. 2-50. - Conferred. 
All the powers and duties of the Judge of the Probate Court of Bibb County, so far as the same relates to bridges, fences, public buildings, and other property, poor house and farm, jail fees, and the management of the jail, assessing and collecting tax, disbursing money for county purposes, and all laws in reference thereto, are hereby conferred upon said county board of commissioners. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, § IV) 
Sec. 2-51. - Exclusive jurisdiction. 
Said board shall have exclusive jurisdiction when sitting for county purposes, over the following subject matters, to-wit: 
(1)  Governing and controlling all property in the county as they may deem expedient according to law. 
(2)  In levying a general tax for general and a special tax for particular county purposes, according to the laws of Georgia. 
(3)  In establishing, altering and abolishing all roads, bridges and ferries in conformity to law. 
(4)  In establishing and changing election precincts and militia districts. 
(5)  In examining, settling and allowing all claims against the county. 
(6)  In examining and auditing the accounts of all officers now or heretofore having the care, management, keeping, collecting and disbursement of money belonging to the county or appropriated for its use and benefit, and bringing them to a settlement. 
(7)  In making such rules and regulations for the support of the poor of the county, and for the promotion of the health of the citizens of the county as are authorized by law or are not inconsistent therewith. 
(8)  In regulating peddling, and fixing the cost of license therefor. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, § VIII) 
Sec. 2-52. - Local constitutional amendment authorizing delegation of legislative power to board of commissioners. 
The general assembly shall have power to delegate to the County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb legislative powers over matters primarily of local concern and to reasonably vary or to permit the County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb to reasonably vary the application of such powers in and for different areas of Bibb County lying outside the corporate limits of Macon according to the need of such area and the welfare of its inhabitants; provided that the powers delegated shall be restricted to traffic problems and to the exercise of police powers affecting the security of Bibb County and of its inhabitants. 
(1953 (Nov.-Dec. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 205), page 526, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. art. VI, § XVII, ¶ I was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-117, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws, page 5117. 
Sec. 2-53. - Police powers. 
(a)  The County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb are hereby delegated and authorized to exercise legislative powers over matters primarily of local concern, provided that the powers hereby delegated and to be exercised shall be restricted to traffic problems and to police powers affecting the security of Bibb County and of its inhabitants, and limited to the reasonable regulation, control and protection of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and of matters affecting health, sanitation, drainage, safety, morality and the protection of person and property. 
(b)  The County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb are authorized, in the exercise of the delegated powers, to reasonably vary the application of such powers in and for different areas of Bibb County lying outside the corporate limits of the City of Macon according to the need of any such areas and the welfare of its inhabitants. 
(c)  In the exercise of any and all of the legislative powers herein delegated, the County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb may provide that violators shall be tried in the State Court of Bibb County and, upon conviction, may be punished as provided by the laws of Georgia pertaining to that court, except that penalties and punishment shall not exceed 60 days in the Bibb County jail and a fine of $300.00, either or both, each day's violation constituting a separate offense. 
(d)  This section is pursuant to and in conformity with an amendment to the Constitution of the State of Georgia and as proposed by a resolution of the General Assembly of Georgia (section 2-53 of this compilation), is to be construed in connection therewith, but is not to be construed as exhaustive or restrictive of legislative powers therein authorized or heretofore, contemporaneously herewith, or hereafter conferred, pursuant to said amendment or other constitutional or statutory authority. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 321), page 3136, §§ 1—4) 
Editor's note— The above act is treated as superseding 1943 Ga. Laws (Act No. 234), page 837. 
Sec. 2-54. - Rental, lease of property. 
(a)  The governing authority of Bibb County is authorized and empowered to rent and lease, as lessor, such portions of the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area and for such uses as it shall, in its discretion, determine to be reasonable and necessary or useful in the operation of the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area and in providing facilities for the benefit of persons utilizing the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area. 
(b)  The governing authority of Bibb County is further authorized and empowered to rent or lease, as lessor, the building commonly known as the Grand Opera House to such persons or organizations as it shall, in its discretion, determine to facilitate the operation of the Grand Opera House and its utilization by the public. 
(c)  In making such leases, as lessor, the governing authority of Bibb County is authorized to prescribe such terms and conditions, including the payment of rent, as it shall determine to be in the public interest, and may execute such leases for terms of up to 20 years and to provide in any lease, that the same may be renewed for an additional period of time up to 20 years. 
(d)  All leases respecting the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area and the Grand Opera House, which have heretofore been executed by Bibb County, are hereby ratified, confirmed, and approved as of their respective dates. 
(e)  After February 1, 1987, before any lease of such property is authorized or executed, a notice of intention to execute a lease thereof containing a description of the property to be leased, the name of the proposed lessee, and the term for which the property is to be leased shall be advertised in the official organ of Bibb County on two occasions at least five days apart, with the first notice to be run not more than 30 days nor less than five days before the meeting at which the lease is to be authorized. Such notice shall not be run as a legal advertisement but shall be in a display advertisement of not less than four column inches. 
(1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 243), page 4287, § 1) 
Editor's note— The 1987 act added the above section as section 8C of 1873 Georgia Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219. 
Sec. 2-55. - Hydroelectric power in Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area. 
(a)  The governing authority of Bibb County is authorized and empowered to rent, lease, sell the fee simple title, or otherwise dispose of so much of the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area as it shall in its discretion determine to be reasonably necessary to permit the construction, maintenance, repair, and operation of hydroelectric power generation and related facilities within the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area and to do so upon such terms as its governing authority may in its discretion determine to be proper. In furtherance of the powers granted in this section, said county may grant easements and other rights in property by contract with any person, firm, or corporation for any period of time for such purposes. 
(b)  The governing authority of Bibb County is further authorized and empowered to develop for its own account hydroelectric generation and related facilities in the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area and to provide for such development, maintenance, operation, and repair thereof in concert with any other person, firm, or corporation and to do such things as the governing authority shall in its discretion determine to be necessary or convenient to the accomplishment of the purposes hereof. 
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 30), page 3621, § 1) 
Editor's note— The 1983 act added the above section as § 8A of 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. XCIX), page 219. 
Sec. 2-56. - Redevelopment powers. 
The county shall have and be authorized to exercise all redevelopment and other powers authorized or granted counties pursuant to the Redevelopment Powers Law, as now or hereafter amended, provided for by O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 44 (O.C.G.A. 36-44-1 et seq.). These powers shall include, without being limited to, all redevelopment powers, the power to issue tax allocation bonds and incur other obligations without such bonds or obligations constituting debt within the meaning of Article IX, Section V of the Constitution, and the power to enter into contracts with private persons, firms, corporations, and business entities for the period specified in the Redevelopment Powers Law. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1170), page 4736, § 1) 
Editor's note— The 1986 act added the above section as § 8B of 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219. 
Sec. 2-57. - Control of floodwaters of Ocmulgee River. 
Said County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb is authorized and empowered in and on behalf of said county and either alone or in conjunction with the City of Macon, State of Georgia, United States of America or any agency of any of them and either any or all of them, to take such measures which the commissioners may deem appropriate for control of the floodwaters of the Ocmulgee River in and near Bibb County, including, but not limited to, the right to acquire land by purchase, condemnation, through condemnation by the United States of America, or otherwise, for the construction, maintenance, repair, control, extension and improvement of levees and drainage structures and control; to expend funds and to levy taxes for such purposes and for purposes consistent therewith. 
(1950 Ga. Laws (Act No. 578), page 2119, § 1) 
Sec. 2-58. - Local constitutional amendment regarding public service districts; tax; assessments. 
The governing authorities of the County of Bibb shall have authority in their discretion, and without further authority than the exercise of such discretion, to establish and constitute, from time to time to reestablish and reconstitute or discontinue, and to administer within the bounds of the county but without the present territorial limits of the City of Macon, Georgia, districts for special sanitation; garbage removal and disposal; fire prevention; police protection; drainage; road building, paving, and improvement; and any and all other public services and facilities usual and customarily afforded by municipalities of this state; and to carry out the purposes of such establishment and administration, they shall have authority to levy taxes in varying amounts from that applicable to the county as a whole or to any other district, to issue bonds of any such district upon a vote of the qualified voters of such district, and under the rules of law governing the issue of county bonds, to levy assessments against and impose service charges upon the property and/or person served by these establishments provided pursuant hereto, to issue executions against the property and/or persons so served, and to collect such assessments, service charges, and executions in the manner as provided by law with respect to ad valorem taxes and/or license taxes. 
(1943 Ga. Laws (Act No. 37), page 8, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1877) art. XI, § I was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-114, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws, page 5103. 
Sec. 2-59. - Local constitutional amendment granting authority to adopt zoning and planning laws, rules and regulations. 
The City of Macon and Bibb County may, through their respective governing authorities, separately or jointly, promulgate zoning and planning laws, rules and regulations, and administer the same, and/or appoint agencies or agency for adopting zoning and planning laws, rules, and regulations, and for administering the same, the governing authorities or their designated agencies being authorized to condition the application of any zoning and planning and the administration of the same according to any presently existing zoning or planning law, any that may hereafter be enacted or according to any that may be resolved or ordained by either or both or by their designated agency or agencies. 
(1947 Ga. Laws (Act No. 334), page 1240, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. XI, § I, ¶ VI was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1314), page 5308. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. 
Secs. 2-60—2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CLERK 

Sec. 2-81. - Board authorized to elect a clerk. 
Said board are hereby empowered to elect a clerk under rules prescribed by them. 
(1876 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCXCI), page 270, § II) 
Sec. 2-82. - Clerk's office; where kept. 
The office of said clerk shall be in the courthouse of said County of Bibb. 
(1874 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCLXX), page 333, § II) 
Sec. 2-83. - Duties. 
The duties of said clerk shall be prescribed by the board, and shall extend no farther than shall be authorized under the rules and regulations that may be passed by said board, under the authority now granted them by law. 
(1874 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCLXX), page 333, § III) 
Sec. 2-84. - Care of paupers duty; monthly report. 
It shall be the duty of said clerk, under instructions from the board, to see that the paupers of the county are properly cared for, and to make a report, in writing, at every monthly meeting of the board, as to the condition of all business entrusted to his care by said board—which business shall be the collection of any license tax, and collection of any rents due the county; a general superintendence of the county buildings, and any matters pertaining to the welfare of the county that may be given him in charge by said board. 
(1874 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCLXX), page 333, § IV) 
Sec. 2-85. - Compensation. 
The compensation of said clerk shall be such reasonable amount for his services as said board, or a majority of them, shall determine. 
(1874 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCLXX), page 333, § V) 
Editor's note— An amendment to the above section made by 1876 Ga. Laws (Act No. CCXCI), page 270, § III has been deleted as repealed by 1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 98), page 405, § 1(1). See § 2-126 of this compilation. 
Secs. 2-86—2-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-126. - Power to fix salaries. 
Said County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb is authorized and empowered to fix the salaries and compensation of all officers, employees, or other persons whose salaries or compensation is paid out of the treasury of Bibb County, except where express provision is made for the fixing of such salaries by cooperation of said board and the grand jury of said county. 
(1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 98), page 405, § 1(1)) 
Editor's note— The 1933 act designated the above section as an amendment to 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, but did not designate same as a specific section. 
Sec. 2-127. - Number of officers. 
Said board is further authorized and empowered to determine the number of officers, deputies, or employees employed in any department or office in Bibb County where the salaries or compensation is paid out of the treasury of Bibb County, except as to those officers where the grand jury cooperates with said board in fixing such number. 
(1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 98), page 405, § 1(2)) 
Editor's note— The 1933 act designated the above section as an amendment to 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, but did not designate same as a specific section. 
Sec. 2-128. - Approval of bonds. 
All the powers heretofore conferred upon the judge of the probate court of said [Bibb] County, in relation to the examination and approval of the bonds of the county officers, and their qualifications as officers, be and the same are hereby conferred upon said county board of commissioners, to whom, from and after the passage of this article, all such bonds shall be sent, and before whom all the county officers of said County of Bibb shall qualify. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, § XV) 
Sec. 2-129. - Power to employ executive officer. 
Said county board of commissioners is further authorized and empowered to employ and, at their discretion, at any time to remove a competent and experienced business executive, other than a member of said board, and delegate to him such administrative and managerial powers and duties as said board may deem proper; and such person, upon being so employed, shall have full power and authority to consolidate, correlate, and prescribe the duties of all employees of the county, and carry into effect all of the duties and powers vested in him by said board. 
(1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 98), page 405, § 1(4)) 
Editor's note— The 1933 act designated the above section as an amendment to 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, but did not designate same as a specific section. 
Sec. 2-130. - Treasurer. 
(a)  The office of Treasurer of Bibb County is abolished effective upon the expiration of the term of office of the incumbent in office on March 1, 1986, or upon retirement of the incumbent in office on March 1, 1986, whichever date first occurs. 
(b)  The governing authority of Bibb County is authorized to designate an employee of the county or some other person to perform the duties of treasurer when such office is abolished pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. Such employee or other person shall receive all funds heretofore received by the treasurer and disburse the same as provided by law for the disbursement of funds by county treasurers. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1311), page 5294, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2-131. - Auditor. 
The Board of Commissioners of Bibb County shall appoint a person to be known as the county auditor, and who shall perform such duties and receive such compensation and serve for such periods of time as may be prescribed by said board. 
(Ord. of 7-2-1974, § 2) 
Editor's note— The following ordinances can be found in the Georgia Laws as indicated below: 

 
Sec. 2-132. - Salary of comptroller. 
Said board is further authorized and empowered to fix the salary of such comptroller and change the same from time to time when and as said county board of commissioners may determine. 
(1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 98), page 405, § 1(5)) 
Editor's note— The 1933 act designated the above section as an amendment to 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, but did not designate same as a specific section. 
Sec. 2-133. - Convict warden, guards, salaries. 
Said county board of commissioners is further authorized and empowered to name the warden, deputy warden, guard, physician, or any other officer or employee having charge, control, or direction of convicts in said county, where the salary of such officer or employee is payable out of the treasury of said county; and, further, to fix the salaries of such officers and employees and in their discretion remove or discharge any such officer or employee at any time. 
(1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 98), page 405, § 1(6)) 
Editor's note— The 1933 act designated the above section as an amendment to 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, but did not designate same as a specific section. 
Sec. 2-134. - Unlawful expenditures; graft; prohibited relationship of appointee; punishment. 
It shall be unlawful for any member of said board, or of any committee thereof, or any officer, agent, or employee of Bibb County, to expend more money for the use of any department of said county, or for any function thereof, than has been duly appropriated therefor, except in case of providential necessity. No member of said board, or officer or employee of Bibb County, shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract of the County of Bibb, or receive, directly or indirectly, any emolument or profit on account of any purchase or sale in which Bibb County may be interested. No person shall be hereafter elected, appointed, or employed by said board of commissioners, or any member thereof, to any office, agency, or employment, who is related within the third degree by consanguinity or affinity to any member of said board; nor shall any other board, committee, or head of any department of said county, hereafter appoint or employ any person who is so related to any member of such board, committee, or head of such department, to render service under the direction and control of such board, committee or head of department; nor shall any person be hereafter appointed or employed in any capacity on behalf of Bibb County who is so related to the person appointing or employing him. Any person knowingly violating any provision of this section, or participating in the violation of the same, or aiding or abetting the violation of the same, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3. 
(1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 98), page 405, § 2) 
Secs. 2-135—2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 

Sec. 2-151. - Local constitutional amendment regarding debt certificates. 
Bibb County, by a majority vote of the board of county commissioners of said county, may issue notes or debt certificates from time to time in aggregate amounts not exceeding $150,000.00, for the specific purposes hereinafter expressed. The said notes or debt certificates shall be executed by the chairman of the board of county commissioners, the treasurer of Bibb County, and attested by the clerk of the board of county commissioners. Such notes or debt certificates may be issued in such denomination, bearing such interest, and falling due at such times as a board of county commissioners by a majority vote thereof may from time to time fix and determine, but shall not mature later than five years from the date of their respective issues. The specific purpose of loans authorized hereunder shall be for the appropriating of money, or for leasing, lending, selling or donating property, or lending credit to the State of Georgia, or the United States of America, for purposes of local, state, or national defense. Any funds borrowed by virtue of this authority may be directly so used, or given in payment for the lease or purchase of property so to be used. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 302), page 21, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1877) art. VII, § VII, ¶ I was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-113, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws page 5098. 
Sec. 2-152. - Temporary loans. 
Bibb County, in addition to the debts hereinabove allowed, may make temporary loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year, to be paid out of the revenues received by the county in that year, said loans to be evidenced by promissory notes signed by the chairman of the County Commissioners of Bibb County, the Treasurer of Bibb County, and attested by the clerk of the county commissioners, and previously authorized by resolution approved by majority vote of the Board of County Commissioners in Bibb County, at a regular meeting or special meeting called for that particular purpose, and entered on the minutes of the board of county commissioners. The aggregate amount of said loans outstanding at any one time shall not exceed 50 percent of the total gross receipts of Bibb County from ad valorem taxes in the preceding year, and no new loans shall be made in any year until all loans made in previous years by virtue of this authority have been paid in full, provided, the failure to pay said loans out of the revenues received by the county in the year the loan is made shall not affect the obligation of the county to pay the same. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 302), page 21, § 1) 
Secs. 2-153—2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-176—2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS 

Sec. 2-201. - Created. 
There is hereby created a governmental agency which shall be known as the Macon-Bibb County Board of Elections which shall have jurisdiction over the registration of voters and the conduct of primaries and elections for the County of Bibb and the City of Macon in accordance with this division. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 1) 
Sec. 2-202. - Members. 
Such board shall be composed of five members, each of whom shall be an elector and a resident of the county and who shall be appointed in the following manner: 
(1)  Two members shall be chosen by the county executive committee of the political party which at the last preceding regular general election held for the election of all members of the General Assembly elected the largest number of members of the General Assembly. Such members so chosen shall be certified by the chairman of the county executive committee of such political party to the governing authority of Bibb County, and such appointment shall be entered upon the minutes of the governing authority. One member chosen by the said county executive committee shall be a resident of the City of Macon, Georgia, at the time of his selection and at the time of his appointment by the governing authority of Bibb County. 
(2)  Two members shall be appointed in like fashion by the county executive committee of the political party which, at such election, elected the next largest number of members of the General Assembly. Such appointees shall be certified by the chairman of the county executive committee of that political party to the governing authority of said county and such certification shall be entered upon the minutes of the governing authority. One member chosen by the said county executive committee shall be a resident of the City of Macon, Georgia, at the time of his selection and at the time of his appointment by the governing authority of Bibb County. 
(3)  The fifth member of the board shall be appointed jointly by the governing authority of the City of Macon and Bibb County from a list of one or more nominees submitted by a majority of the other four members of the board. The fifth member so selected shall be deemed to be a member at large. In the event a majority of the four members of the board is unable to nominate one or more persons to the governing authority of the City of Macon and Bibb County within the time hereinafter specified for appointments, then, and in such event, the governing authority of said city and county shall be authorized to make the appointment. Any appointment made under the provisions of this paragraph shall also be entered upon the minutes of the governing authorities. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 2) 
Sec. 2-203. - Qualifications. 
No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of any such board of elections during the term of such elective office and the position of any member of the board shall be deemed vacant upon such member qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 3) 
Sec. 2-204. - First appointments. 
Initial appointments hereunder shall be made by the respective appointing authorities no later than 60 days after this division shall become effective. In the event of a vacancy on the board with respect to a member appointed by one of the political parties as hereinabove provided, such political party shall appoint a successor within 60 days after the date such vacancy is created, such successor to be appointed in like manner as the person whose position is vacant for his unexpired term. In the event such political party fails to make an initial appointment hereunder within 60 days after this act shall become effective or within 60 days after a vacancy occurs then and in such event, the position shall be filled by the governing body of Bibb County. In the event of a vacancy on the board with respect to the member at large, the remaining members of the board shall submit the names of one or more nominees to fill the unexpired term, such nomination to be made within 60 days after the vacancy occurs. The governing authority of the City of Macon and Bibb County shall select and appoint the successor member at large from the nominee or nominees whose names are submitted by a majority of the remaining members of the board. In the event of the failure of the board to submit the names of such nominee or nominees within 60 days after the vacancy occurs, then and in such event, the governing authorities of the city and county may fill the vacancy on their own motion. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 4) 
Sec. 2-205. - Terms, vacancies. 
Initial appointees hereunder shall take office upon appointment and shall serve until March 31, 1971, and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The successors of the initial appointees shall serve for two year terms beginning on April 1 in odd-numbered years and shall continue in office for such terms and until their successors are chosen and qualified. Each member shall be eligible to succeed himself, shall have the right to resign at any time by giving notice to the body which appointed him, and to the governing authorities of the City of Macon and Bibb County, if the city and county were not the appointing authorities. Each member shall be subject to removal from the board at any time in the same manner and by the same authority provided for removal of registrars under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-2-212. Upon removal of a member as provided by law, a vacancy shall be deemed to exist and shall be filled for the unexpired term as hereinabove provided. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 5) 
Sec. 2-206. - Oath. 
Before entering upon his duties, each member of the board shall take substantially the same oath of office as is presently required by law for registrars and shall have the same privilege from arrest as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-214. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 6) 
Sec. 2-207. - Compensation. 
Compensation for members of the board of elections, elections supervisor, clerical assistants, and other employees of the board shall be such as may be fixed from time to time by the governing authority of Bibb County. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 12) 
Sec. 2-208. - Duties regarding poll workers. 
The board [of elections] shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, training and removal of poll workers, and such workers shall be appointed insofar as practicable from the lists provided the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 7) 
Sec. 2-209. - General duties. 
The board of elections shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  It shall succeed to and exercise all of the duties granted to and incumbent upon the probate judge of Bibb County under the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.) of "The Georgia Election Code" of whatever kind and character and any other provision of law with respect thereto. 
(2)  It shall succeed to and exercise all of the duties and powers granted to and incumbent on the chief registrar and the county registrars of Bibb County under the provisions of the foregoing act, and any other provision of law with respect to their duties and powers. 
(3)  It shall succeed to and have all of the powers and duties granted to and incumbent upon the ordinary under the provisions of law with respect to primaries. 
(4)  It shall succeed and have all of the powers and duties granted to and incumbent on the mayor of the City of Macon, the mayor and council of the City of Macon, the city registrar, and all other officers, employees and agencies with respect to the registration of voters and the conduct of all city primaries and elections under the provisions of the charter of the City of Macon, as amended, as well as those powers, duties and functions, relating to the registration of voters and the conduct of primaries and elections now vested in municipal officers and agencies under the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.). 
(5)  The board shall be authorized and empowered to organize itself, elect its officers, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 8) 
Sec. 2-210. - Rules. 
To accomplish the foregoing, the board of elections shall formulate, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations consistent with law and the rules and regulations of the state executive committee of each political party governing the conduct of primaries to the end that, insofar as practicable, all primaries shall be uniformly conducted by the county executive committee for each political party and poll workers shall be properly trained and voters adequately informed and instructed. Nothing in this division shall be construed to require joint primaries or to require the governing authority of Bibb County or any other public agency to bear any expense conducting primaries not otherwise required or permitted by law. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 9) 
Sec. 2-211. - Transfer of powers. 
The board shall organize, and the judge of the probate court and the chief registrar and county registrars together with appropriate officials of the City of Macon shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by virtue of the provisions of this act and they shall deliver to the board upon request of its chairman custody of all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records and facilities of every kind pertaining to such powers and duties. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 10) 
Sec. 2-212. - Elections supervisor. 
The governing authority of Bibb County, upon the recommendation of the board of elections, shall appoint a person whose title shall be "elections supervisor," who shall be the chief administrative officer of the board and who shall have such duties and functions as may be prescribed by the board. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 11) 
Sec. 2-213. - Offices; clerical assistants, employees. 
The governing authority of the county shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices and with such clerical assistants and other employees as the governing authority shall deem appropriate. The elections supervisor, and other employees functioning under his supervision shall be deemed to be employees of Bibb County. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 13) 
Sec. 2-214. - Budget. 
Annually, or at other convenient intervals as may be determined by the board of elections, the board of elections shall determine the actual cost of its operations, including the payment of employees, the purchase of supplies, the holding of primaries and elections, the reasonable value of goods, services, or office space furnished in kind, and shall certify the total cost as so determined to the governing authority of the City of Macon and the County of Bibb. Such certification shall include such reasonable itemizations as will enable the respective governing authorities to review and examine the certification of costs. Upon receipt of such certification so made by the board of elections, the City of Macon shall pay to Bibb County 50 percent thereof as reimbursement to the county for the city's share of the operations of the board of elections. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 14) 
Sec. 2-215. - Costs of elections. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of section 2-214, the City of Macon shall pay all actual costs of holding any given primary or election conducted solely for the City of Macon and, likewise, the County of Bibb shall pay all actual costs of holding any given primary or election conducted solely for Bibb County. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the governing authority of the City of Macon or the governing authority of Bibb County or any other public agency to bear any expense of conducting primaries not otherwise required or permitted by law. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 15) 
Secs. 2-216—2-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MIDDLE GEORGIA COLISEUM AUTHORITY 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-251. - Declaration. 
It is hereby declared that there exists in Middle Georgia a need for an authority to function without profit in developing and promoting for the public good in this state the cultural growth, public welfare, education, and recreation of the people of this state. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 1) 
Sec. 2-252. - Created. 
There is hereby created a public body corporate and politic to be known as the Middle Georgia Coliseum Authority, which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality and a subordinate public corporation of the State of Georgia. Any funds realized by said authority shall be expended for the development and promotion in this state of the cultural growth, public welfare, education, and recreation of the people of this state including the erection and construction of a building or buildings which shall and hereby are declared to be public buildings to be used for amusement purposes or educational purposes or a combination of the two, and for fairs, expositions, or exhibitions in connection therewith, and the purchase of lands, easements, rights in lands, and franchises for the construction of such facility or facilities and for use in connection therewith. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 2) 
Sec. 2-253. - Members; vacancies; duties; chairman; quorum; compensation of employees. 
(a)  The authority shall consist of the following five members whose terms of office as members of the authority shall expire on the dates shown following their names: 
Milton C. Powell, June 1, 1964; 
Thad B. Murphey, June 1, 1965; 
Thomas B. Harrell, June 1, 1966; 
Edgar H. Wilson, June 1, 1967; 
Charles F. Adams, June 1, 1968. 
(b)  Vacancies on the authority by reason of expiration of term or otherwise shall be filled by the authority itself, and the authority may act to fill vacancies caused by the expiration of term before the vacancy occurs. Following the initial appointments to the authority hereby made, all appointments to the authority shall be for terms of five years, except that the appointment of any person selected to fill an unexpired term shall be only for the remainder of such term. 
(c)  The members of the authority shall organize and enter upon the performance of their duties immediately after the effective date of this division. 
(d)  The authority shall elect one of its members as chairman and another as vice-chairman, and shall elect a secretary-treasurer, who may but need not necessarily be a member of the authority. 
(e)  Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, and no vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority at every meeting, and in every instance a majority vote shall authorize any legal act of the authority, including all things necessary to authorize and issue revenue bonds. 
(f)  If at any time, by reason of common disaster, or by reason of the failure of the members of the authority hereby appointed to accept their appointment, or for any other reason, there shall not be sufficient members of the authority willing and able to meet and constitute a quorum, any resident of the State of Georgia may file in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Bibb County, Georgia, a petition directed to the Superior Court of Bibb County against the authority setting forth that there are not sufficient members of the authority willing and able to meet and constitute a quorum, and setting forth the reason or reasons therefor and showing the necessity of having a sufficient number of members of the authority appointed in order that a quorum may be available, and shall obtain from the judge of the said court an order requiring the authority to show cause at such time and place either in term or chambers within 20 days of the filing of the petition, as the judge may direct, why the said judge should not appoint sufficient members to the authority to enable the authority to obtain a quorum. In the event there is no officer or agent of the authority upon whom service may be made, and the court shall so find, the cause shall proceed to be heard ex parte. At the time designated for the hearing of said cause the judge of said court shall proceed to hear and determine all questions of law and of fact in said cause and shall render judgment thereon, and, in the event said judgment shall find that a necessity exists for the making of such appointment or appointments, such judge shall then make such appointment or appointments either for the remainder of an unexpired term or terms or for such new term or terms as may not have been filled, and shall include such appointment or appointments in said judgment, and, if the petitioning party or parties shall be dissatisfied with said judgment the petitioning party or parties may except thereto within 20 days from the date of the judgment, and said judgment shall be reviewable as are other final judgments of the court. 
(g)  The members of the authority shall not be entitled to compensation for their services, but shall be entitled to and shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses properly incurred in the performance of their duties. Each member of the authority shall hold office until his successor shall have been appointed and qualified. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government and may retain, employ, and engage professional and technical supervisors, assistants, and experts and other agents and employees, temporary or permanent, as it may require. The members of the authority shall be accountable in all respects as trustees, and the authority shall keep suitable books and records of all its obligations, contracts, transactions, and undertakings, and of all income and receipts of every nature and all expenditures of every kind. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 3) 
Sec. 2-254. - Property. 
It is hereby found, determined, and declared that the creation of the [coliseum] authority and the carrying out of its corporate purposes is in all respects for the benefit of the people of this state, and that the authority is an institution of purely public charity, and all property of said authority is hereby declared and shall in all respects be considered to be public property and title to such property shall be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public, and the use of such property pursuant to the terms of this division shall be and is hereby declared to be for public and governmental purposes, that is, for the promotion of the public general welfare in matters of cultural development, education, pleasure, and recreation of the public at large, in an effort to better the general condition of society, or that considerable part of society residing in Middle Georgia, which promotion is hereby declared to be a public beneficence for the good of humanity and for the general improvement and happiness of society, and all the property, income, obligations, and interest on the obligations of the authority and the transfer thereof shall be and hereby are declared to be nontaxable for any and all purposes. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 4) 
Sec. 2-255. - Powers. 
The [coliseum] authority shall have powers: 
(1)  To adopt and alter a corporate seal. 
(2)  To acquire by gift or by purchase on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper or by exercise of the right of eminent domain in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, lands, easements, or rights in lands, or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes and to use, rent, or lease the same or make contracts with respect to the use thereof, or to dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority and the purposes thereof. Title to such property, however, shall be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public. 
(3)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, loans, appropriations, and donations of money or materials or property of any kind, including loans and grants from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality thereof shall impose, and to administer trusts, and to sell, lease, transfer, convey, appropriate, pledge, mortgage, or encumber all of its property and assets. 
(4)  To borrow money and issue notes or revenue bonds payable from the earnings of the projects of the authority, execute trust agreements or indentures and sell, convey, mortgage, pledge, encumber, and assign any and all of its funds, assets, property, and income as security for such notes or revenue bonds, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof, and provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default either in payment of principal of or interest on such obligations or under any term of or condition pursuant to which such obligations were issued. 
(5)  To contract with the State of Georgia and agencies thereof, cities, counties, and other political subdivisions thereof, and with private persons and corporations in such manner as the legitimate and necessary purposes of this division shall authorize or require including contracts for construction and leasing of its projects. 
(6)  To construct, reconstruct, acquire, own, alter, repair, maintain, add to, extend, improve, operate, and manage projects including the erection of a building or buildings which shall and hereby are declared to be public buildings to be used for amusement purposes or educational purposes or a combination of the two, and for fairs, expositions, or exhibitions in connection therewith, and the purchase of lands, easements, rights in lands, and franchises for the construction of such facility or facilities and for use in connection therewith, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of the sale of revenue bonds of the authority, and the title to such property to be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public. 
(7)  To issue from time to time revenue bonds not to exceed an aggregate principal amount of $28 million during the life of the authority to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, addition to, or extension of such projects. All revenue bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be fully negotiable instruments and shall have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments law of Georgia. 
(8)  To issue revenue bonds to call, refund, or refinance in whole or in part all outstanding revenue bonds secured by the anticipated revenue of such project and to include in the cost of the issuance of such bonds any call premium that may be required for the redemption and refunding of such outstanding bonds. 
(9)  To do any and all things necessary or proper for the accomplishment of the objectives of this division and any amendments hereof and to exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this State. 
(10)  To invest any accumulation of its funds and any sinking funds or reserves in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested and to purchase its own bonds at a price of not more than the principal thereof and accrued interest. All bonds so purchased shall be cancelled. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 5; 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 114), page 2807, § 1; 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 97), page 4006, § 1) 
Sec. 2-256. - Property. 
Any political subdivision of this state, by proper resolution of its governing body, shall be authorized to convey to said [coliseum] authority public property owned by such political subdivision in consideration of the use of the authority's organization and method of financing and funding and in consideration of the undertaking of the authority to issue its revenue bonds for the purpose of providing funds which shall be used by the authority for constructing, reconstructing, altering, repairing, adding to, extending, or improving on such property such projects and facilities as said authority is authorized and empowered to undertake by virtue of the provisions of this division; provided, however, that said authority shall not have the power to alienate or encumber its title to any such property so conveyed, except that the authority shall have the power to reconvey such property to such political subdivision upon retirement of the bonds issued for the purpose of financing the improvements to be constructed or made on such property. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 114), page 2807, § 2) 
Editor's note— The 1975 act added the above section as § 5A of 1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), p. 2250. 
Sec. 2-257. - Bonds. 
In addition to the foregoing powers and subject to any limitations herein contained the [coliseum] authority shall have all the powers of municipalities under the provisions of the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.), including, but not limited to, the authority to expend from any funds available or to obligate itself to expend such sums as may be necessary for the survey, study, financing, construction, and completion of any such project. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 6) 
Sec. 2-258. - Conveyance of projects to City of Macon; termination of authority. 
When each and all of the bonds, interest coupons, and obligations of every nature whatsoever, for the payment of which the revenues of any given project or projects have been placed in whole or in part, have been paid in full or an amount sufficient for the payment of all such bonds or obligations and the interest thereon to the maturity thereof shall have been set aside in trust for the benefit of the holders of such bonds or obligations, the [coliseum] authority shall have the power and right to convey to the City of Macon, Georgia, such project or projects and all legal right, title, and interest therein and, upon the completion of such conveyance in such manner that the authority shall no longer hold any right, title, or interest in any such project or projects, the legal existence and functions of the authority shall terminate. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 7) 
Sec. 2-259. - Contracts. 
Said [coliseum] authority may contract with any city, town, municipality, or county of this state for the payment of such rents, fees, and charges for the use by such subdivisions or the residents thereof of the project or projects and facilities of the authority, and any such city, town, municipality or county shall have and hereby is given the right and power to make such contract and the rentals contracted to be paid by the lessees or tenants to the authority under such contract or contracts entered into pursuant to the provisions of this division shall constitute general obligations of the city, town, municipality, or county for the payment of which the full faith and credit of such city, town, municipality, or county shall be and the same hereby is pledged to provide the funds required to fulfill all obligations arising under any such contract; and any such city, town, municipality, or county which shall have entered into such a contract pursuant to the provisions of this division shall annually in each and every fiscal year during the term of such contract include in a general revenue or appropriation measure, within any millage limitations of its power of taxation and whether or not any other items are included, sums sufficient to satisfy the payments required to be made in each year by such contract until all payments required under such contract have been paid in full, and such contract payments shall constitute a first charge on all the revenues of such city, town, municipality, or county from whatever source derived, and such revenues shall be and hereby are unconditionally obligated to the payment of such sums. In the event for any reason any such provision or appropriation is not made, then the fiscal officers of such city, town, municipality, or county are hereby authorized and directed to set up as an appropriation on their accounts in each fiscal year the amounts required to pay the obligations called for under any such contract. The amount of the appropriation in each fiscal year to meet the obligations of such contract as authorized and required hereby shall be due and payable and shall be expended for the purpose of paying and meeting the obligations provided under the terms and conditions of such contract, and such appropriation shall have the same legal status as if the contracting city, town, municipality, or county had included the amount of the appropriation in its general revenue or appropriation measure, and such fiscal officers shall make such payment to the authority if for any reason such appropriation is not otherwise made; and any such city, town, municipality, or county may obligate itself and its successors to use only such structure, building, or facilities constituting such project and none other. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 10) 
Sec. 2-260. - Trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this division, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds or as revenues, rents, fees, charges, or other earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this division, and the bond holders paying or entitled to receive the benefits of such funds shall have a lien on all such funds until applied as provided for in any such resolution, trust agreement, or indenture of the [coliseum] authority. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 19) 
Secs. 2-261—2-270. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Revenue Bonds 

Sec. 2-271. - Issuance authorized. 
The [coliseum] authority shall have the power and is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any one or combination of its projects not to exceed an aggregate principal amount of $28 million during the life of the authority. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from and may be secured by a pledge of rents, fees, charges, and other revenues of all or any part of the project or projects financed in whole or in part with the proceeds of such bonds or with the proceeds of bonds called and refunded or to be called and refunded by such issue. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest, shall mature, and shall be payable as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority within the terms of the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.), and the bonds may be made redeemable before maturity at the option of the authority at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in its resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. The authority granted for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds by this section is cumulative only and shall not be construed to abridge the rights of the authority as otherwise provided in this act, and specifically shall not abridge the power of said authority to borrow money and issue notes as distinguished from revenue bonds as provided in section 2-255(4) and as otherwise provided by law. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 11; 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 114), page 2807, § 3; 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 97), page 4006, § 2) 
Sec. 2-272. - Payment. 
Revenue bonds issued under provisions of this division shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or a pledge of the faith and credit of the State of Georgia or of any city, county, or other political subdivision of the same, but such bonds shall be payable from the rentals, revenues, and funds of the authority as provided in the resolutions or trust agreements or indentures authorizing or securing the issuance and payment of such bonds and the issuance of such bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the state or any city, county, or political subdivision thereof to levy or pledge any form of taxation whatever for the payment thereof. No holder of any such bond or receiver or trustee in connection therewith shall have the right to enforce the payment thereof against any property of the state or of any city or county thereof nor shall any such bond constitute a charge, lien, or encumbrance, legal or equitable, upon any such property. All such bonds shall contain on their face a recital setting forth substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 8) 
Sec. 2-273. - Made securities. 
The bonds herein authorized are hereby made securities in which all public officers and bodies of this state and all municipalities and all municipal subdivisions, all insurance companies and associations, and other persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks, and savings associations, including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations, investment companies, and other persons carrying on a banking business, and all other persons whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state may properly and legally invest funds including capital in their control or belonging to them. The bonds are also hereby made securities which may be deposited with and shall be received by all public officers and bodies of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions for any purpose for which the deposit of the bonds or other obligations of this state is now or may hereafter be authorized. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 9) 
Sec. 2-274. - Rents, fees, charges. 
(a)  For the purpose of earning sufficient revenue to make possible the financing of the construction of the project or projects of the [coliseum] authority with revenue bonds, the authority is authorized and empowered to collect rents, fees, and charges on each project which it shall cause to be constructed. Such rentals, fees, or charges to be paid for the use of such project or projects shall be so fixed and adjusted as to provide a fund sufficient with other revenue, if any, of such project or projects or of said authority: 
(1)  To pay the cost of operating, maintaining, and repairing the project or projects, including reserves for insurance and extraordinary repairs and other reserves required by the resolution or trust agreement or indenture pertaining to such bonds and the issuance thereof unless such cost shall be otherwise provided for; 
(2)  To pay the principal of and interest on said revenue bonds as the same shall become due, including premium, if any, the proceeds of which shall have been or will be used to pay the cost of such project or projects; 
(3)  To comply with any sinking fund requirement contained in the resolution or trust agreement or indenture pertaining to the issuance of and security for such bonds; 
(4)  To perform fully all provisions of such resolution and trust agreement or indenture relating to the issuance of or security for such bonds to the payment of which such rental is pledged; 
(5)  To accumulate any excess income which may be required by the purchasers of such bonds or may be dictated by the requirements of such resolution or trust agreement or indenture or of achieving ready marketability of and low interest rates on such bonds; 
(6)  To pay any expenses in connection with such bond issue or such project or projects including but not limited to trustees', counsel, and fiscal fees. 
(b)  Such rental shall be payable at such intervals as may be agreed upon and set forth in the rental contract or lease providing therefor and any such contract or lease may provide for the commencement of rental payments to the authority prior to the completion of the undertaking by the authority of any such project, and it may provide for the payment of rental during such times as such project or projects may be partially or wholly untenantable. 
(c)  Such rental contract or lease may obligate the tenants or lessees to operate, maintain, and keep in good repair, including complete reconstruction, if necessary, the rented or leased premises and projects regardless of the cause of the necessity of such maintenance, repair, or reconstruction. If such projects be included in any rental contract or lease then the operation, maintenance, repair, and reconstruction, if necessary, may be performed by the cities, towns, municipalities, or counties which may be the tenants or lessees under such rental contract or lease. 
(d)  Such rental contract or lease may obligate the tenants or lessees to indemnify and save harmless the authority from any and all damage to persons and property occurring on or by reason of the leased property or improvements thereon and to undertake, at the expense of the tenants or lessees, the defense of any action brought against the authority by reason of injury or damages to persons or property occurring on or by reason of the leased premises. 
(e)  In the event of any failure or refusal on the part of the tenants or lessees to perform punctually any covenant or obligation contained in any such rental contract or lease, the authority may enforce performance by any legal or equitable process against the tenants or lessees, and consent is hereby given for the institution of any such action. 
(f)  The authority shall be permitted to assign any rental to it pursuant to such rental contract or lease to a trustee or paying agent as may be required by the terms of the resolution or trust agreement or indenture relating to the issuance of and security for such bonds. 
(g)  The use and disposition of the authority's revenue shall be subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or of the trust agreement or indenture, if any, securing the same. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 12) 
Sec. 2-275. - Use of revenues, rents, earnings. 
The revenues, rents and earnings derived from any particular project or projects and any and all revenues, rents, and earnings received by the [coliseum] authority regardless of whether or not such revenues, rents, and earnings were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued may be pledged by the authority to payment of principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as may be provided in any resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or in any trust instrument pertaining to such bonds, and such funds so pledged, from whatever source received, may include funds received from one or more or all sources and may be set aside into sinking funds at regular intervals for which provision may be made in any such resolution or trust instrument, or sinking funds may be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall become due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall mature; 
(3)  The necessary charges of any trustee or paying agent for paying such principal and interest; and 
(4)  Any premium upon bonds retired upon call or purchase; 
and the use and disposition of any sinking fund may be subject to such regulation as may be provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument securing the payment of the same. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 13) 
Sec. 2-276. - Form. 
The [coliseum] authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bonds as to principal alone and also as to both principal and interest. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 14) 
Sec. 2-277. - Contracts. 
In the discretion of the [coliseum] authority any issue of revenue bonds may be secured by a trust agreement or indenture made by the authority with a corporate trustee which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the State of Georgia. Such trust agreement or indenture may pledge or assign rents, fees, charges, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust agreement or indenture may contain provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bond holders, including the right of appointment of a receiver upon default of the payment of any principal or interest obligation and the right of any receiver or trustee to enforce collection of any rents, fees, charges, or revenues for the use of the project or projects necessary to pay all costs of operation or reserves provided for, the principal and interest on all bonds in the issue, all costs of collection, and all other costs reasonably necessary to accomplish the collection of such sums in the event of any default of the authority. Such resolution or trust agreement or indenture may include covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition and construction of the project and to the custody, safeguarding, and application of all funds and covenants providing for the operation and maintenance of the project or projects and may contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. Such trust agreement or indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bond holders and of the trustee and may restrict the actual right of the bond holders as is customary in securing bonds and debentures of corporations. Such trust agreement or indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bond holders. All expenses paid in carrying out such trust may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such trust. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 15) 
Sec. 2-278. - Actions. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this act brought in the courts of the State of Georgia, shall be brought in the Superior Court of Bibb County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of the bonds issued under the provisions of this division shall be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such acts. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 16) 
Sec. 2-279. - Bond validation. 
(a)  All bonds of the [coliseum] authority shall be confirmed and validated in the Bibb County Superior Court in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.). The petition for validation shall be brought against said authority and, in the event the payments to be made by any city, town, municipality, or county under a contract entered into between the authority and such political subdivision are pledged as security for the payment of the revenue bonds sought to be validated, such political subdivision or subdivisions shall also be made parties defendant, and the defendants shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be adjudicated to be in all respects valid and binding upon such subdivision or subdivisions. It shall be incumbent upon such subdivision or subdivisions to defend against adjudication of the validity and binding effect of such contract or contracts or be forever bound thereby. Notice of such proceedings shall be included in the notice of the validation hearing required to be issued and published by the clerk of the Superior Court of Bibb County in which court such validation proceeding shall be initiated. Any resident of the State of Georgia may intervene in the validation proceedings at or before the time set for the validation hearing and may assert any ground of objection to the validity and binding effect of such bonds and the security therefor and of such contract or contracts on his own behalf and on behalf of all citizens and residents of the State of Georgia. In the event no bill of exceptions shall be filed within 20 days from the date of the judgment of validation or, if filed and the judgment shall be affirmed by the proper appellate court of this state, the judgment of the Bibb County Superior Court so confirming and validating the validity and binding effect of such contract or contracts and of such bonds and the security therefor shall be forever conclusive upon the issue of the validity and binding effect of such contracts and bonds and the security therefor and upon the issue of the validity and constitutionality of this and any other act pertaining to such contracts and bonds and the security therefor against the authority issuing the same and against the parties to such contracts and against all residents of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Any action or proceeding to contest the validity or binding effect of any such revenue bonds or resolution or trust instrument pertinent thereto or any contracts made for the purpose of providing the payment of such bond as aforesaid must be commenced and filed prior to the conclusion of the validation hearing notice of which shall have been given as provided by law. After the expiration of such period of limitation no right of action or defense founded upon the invalidity of such bonds, resolution, trust instrument, or contracts shall be asserted nor shall the validity and binding effect of such bonds, resolution, trust instrument, or contracts be opened to question or attack in any court upon any ground whatever, except in an action or proceeding commenced and filed prior to the conclusion of such validation hearing. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 17) 
Sec. 2-280. - Intent. 
While any of the bonds issued by the [coliseum] authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds. The provisions of this division shall be for the benefit of the state, the authority, and every holder of the authority's bonds and, upon and after the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this division, shall constitute an irrevocable contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 18) 
Secs. 2-281—2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY INDUSTRIAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-301. - Constitutional authorization. 
The governing authorities of the County of Bibb and of the City of Macon, either and both, are by this self-executing amendment, authorized and permitted, directly, or through the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority, to appropriate properties, moneys and services, any or all, so as to encourage, induce, assist and promote the location and expansion of industrial and commercial facilities throughout the territorial limits of the County of Bibb, but conditioned, however, upon none of said appropriations being used or pledged for entertainment purposes and, further conditioned, that such appropriations not increase ad valorem tax millage limitations now or hereafter otherwise imposed by law; provided, further, that an act of the General Assembly of Georgia entitled "An Act to create a public body corporate and politic, as an instrumentality of the County of Bibb and City of Macon, and to be known as the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority; to provide for its purposes, scope, powers, revenues and limitations, and for the designation of its governing commission; to provide for the tax exemption of its properties, income, obligations and interest thereon; to provide for separability of the several provisions of this act; and for other purposes," which was enacted at the January-February, 1962 session of the General Assembly of Georgia is ratified and confirmed as of the dates of both its passage and approval; and, provided further that, insofar as this amendment relates to the aforesaid act creating the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority, the effectiveness of this amendment shall be retroactive to such dates as may be required to assure said act of full force, effect and validity." 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 168), page 885, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VII, § V, ¶ I was continued in force and effect by county ordinances adopted on March 6, 1984, and February 3, 1986, and a City of Macon ordinance adopted on March 6, 1984. The 1984 county ordinance can be found in 1985 Ga. Laws, page 5160. The 1986 county ordinance can be found in 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4685. The city ordinance can be found in 1985 Ga. Laws, page 5274. 
Sec. 2-302. - Created. 
There is hereby created a public body corporate and politic in the County of Bibb to be known as the "Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority," which shall be an instrumentality of the City of Macon and of the County of Bibb, and which is sometimes hereinafter referred to as "the authority." 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 1) 
Sec. 2-303. - Members. 
The authority shall consist of six members as follows: The mayor of the City of Macon (or the chief executive officer of said city if hereafter otherwise titled), the chairman of the County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb (or the chief executive officer of the governing authority of said county if hereafter otherwise titled), the president of the Macon Area Development Commission, Inc., a member to be appointed by the mayor or aforesaid chief executive officer of the City of Macon and approved by a majority of the members of the City Council of Macon, and a member to be appointed by the chairman or aforesaid chief executive officer of the County of Bibb and approved by a majority of the members of the governing authority of the County of Bibb. Beginning July 1, 1985, the chairman or aforesaid chief executive officer of the governing authority of the County of Bibb shall appoint one additional member with the approval of a majority of the members of the governing authority of the County of Bibb for a term of office of five years. At the expiration of the initial term of office of the additional member appointed to assume office on July 1, 1985, the mayor or aforesaid chief executive officer of the City of Macon with the approval of a majority of the members of the council of the City of Macon shall appoint a successor to said additional member. Thereafter, the appointment of said additional member shall rotate between the governing authority of the City of Macon and the governing authority of the County of Bibb. In the event the Macon Area Development Commission, Inc., should be dissolved or should cease to function effectively (to be determined in the sole discretion of the other three specifically named members) a member to serve in lieu of said president, shall be selected by the other three specifically named members. 
The terms of office of the designated members and their successors in and through official office shall coincide with their respective terms as heads of the organizations described. The terms of the other members (three or four in number as the contingency hereinbefore provided may or may not occur), shall be five years, with vacancies in such offices to be filled for the remaining term of office in the same manner and means as herein provided for the appointment of the member succeeded. 
A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum but only a majority of the members of the authority may act for the authority in any matter. No vacancy or vacancies shall impair the power of the authority to act, provided that four members are in accord with such action. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 2; 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 42), page 3600, § 1) 
Sec. 2-304. - Compensation. 
The members of the authority shall receive no compensation for their services to the authority. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 6) 
Sec. 2-305. - Immunity from taxation. 
The property, income, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, income, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the County of Bibb or of the City of Macon. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 3) 
Sec. 2-306. - Powers. 
The powers of the authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)  Of public authorities provided by the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.) as it has been or may hereafter be amended, and where the same are additional to or complementary of and not inconsistent with the powers herein expressly enumerated; 
(2)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, loans, appropriations and donations and to administer trusts, and to sell, lease, transfer, convey, appropriate, pledge, mortgage or encumber any and all of its properties and assets; 
(3)  To borrow money, to issue notes, bonds and revenue certificates, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor; 
(4)  To contract with the State of Georgia, agencies thereof, political subdivisions of the State of Georgia, and agencies thereof, and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
(5)  To have and exercise any and all of the usual powers of private and public corporation except such as are inconsistent with this division, including the power to adopt and alter a corporate seal and to adopt and amend by-laws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
(6)  To encourage, induce, assist, promote and develop the location and expansion of industrial and commercial facilities throughout the territorial limits of the County of Bibb so as to relieve, insofar as possible, abnormal unemployment within its boundaries, and to otherwise support and expand the economy thereof; 
(7)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(8)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
(9)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish or to complement the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 4) 
Sec. 2-307. - Limitation. 
The authority shall not be authorized to, nor shall any act thereof, create any debt, obligation or liability against the State of Georgia or City of Macon or County of Bibb. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 5) 
Sec. 2-308. - Bonds. 
In order to finance any undertaking within the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds bearing rate or rates of interest and maturing at the years and amounts determined by the authority and the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.) as if said obligations had been originally authorized to be issued thereunder; provided, however, that any property, real or personal, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the authority. The authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this amendment to provide security for any bonds issued as provided herein, and such trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or under any term or condition under which such bonds are issued. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to create a right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of Bibb County or of the City of Macon to pay any such bonds or the interest thereon nor to enforce payment thereof against any property of Bibb County or of the City of Macon. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 7) 
Sec. 2-309. - Additional bonds authorized. 
The authority may authorize additional bonds, and for its purposes, to be placed in escrow and to be negotiated from time to time as proceeds for such purpose may become necessary. Bonds so placed in escrow shall, when sold and delivered, have such standing with the bonds of the same issue as may be provided in the authorizing proceedings. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 8) 
Sec. 2-310. - Entertainment. 
No moneys derived by the authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 9) 
Sec. 2-311. - Rules. 
The governing authorities of the City of Macon and of the County of Bibb are jointly authorized, and from time to time, to prescribe rules, regulations and conditions, not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, for the functioning of the authority. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 10) 
Secs. 2-312—2-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MIDDLE GEORGIA SURFACE AND AIR TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-326. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this division, the term: 
(1)  Airport means: 
a.  Any area of land or water or any structure which is or has been used, or which the commission may plan to use, for the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft, including helicopters; and all buildings, equipment, facilities, or other property and improvements of any kind or nature located within the bounds of any such land or water area or structure; 
b.  Facilities of any type for the accommodation of passengers, maintenance, servicing, and operation of aircraft, business offices and facilities of private businesses and governmental agencies, parking of automobiles, and all other activities which are or have been carried on or which may be necessary or convenient in conjunction with the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft; and 
c.  All buildings, equipment, facilities, and other property and improvements of any kind or nature located outside the bounds of any such land or water area or structure which is or has been used or which the commission plans to use for the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft which are necessary for the safe operation of aircraft, including without limitation, aviation easements and other real or personal property. 
(2)  Commission means the Middle Georgia Surface and Air Transportation Commission created by section 2-328. 
(3)  Cost of the project means the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment; financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction; cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses, costs of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expense; and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this division, the construction of any project, and the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this division for such project. 
(4)  Member county means Baldwin, Bibb, Bleckley, Crawford, Dodge, Houston, Jasper, Jones, Laurens, Monroe, Montgomery, Peach, Pulaski, Telfair, Toombs, Treutlen, Twiggs, Wheeler, Wilcox, and Wilkinson counties unless the governing authority of any such county has adopted a resolution, at any time, declaring that such county shall not be a member county under this division. 
(5)  Member municipality means the Cities of Abbeville, Alamo, Cochran, Dublin, Eastman, Forsyth, Fort Valley, Gray, Hawkinsville, Irwinton, Jeffersonville, Macon, McRae, Milledgeville, Monticello, Mount Vernon, Perry, Roberta, Soperton, and Vidalia unless the governing authority of such municipality has adopted a resolution, at any time, declaring that such municipality shall not be a member municipality under this division. 
(6)  Project means and includes the leasing, acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improving, and operation of public airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft and surface transportation facilities and systems, related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings, and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all of such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance, and operation of such airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft and such surface transportation facilities and systems, deemed by the commission to be necessary, convenient, or desirable for the operation of such airports, landing fields, and surface transportation facilities and systems. 
(7)  Revenue bonds and bonds shall mean revenue bonds and certificates as defined and provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.) known as the "Revenue Bond Law," and such type of obligations may be issued by the commission as authorized under said article. In addition, such terms shall also mean obligations of the commission the issuance of which are specifically provided for in this division. 
(b)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the commission, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the commission therefrom will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 3) 
Sec. 2-327. - Determination of need for the commission. 
(a)  It is determined and declared that the present and projected rapid growth in commercial and private air traffic in the Middle Georgia area, the need for adequate airports to serve safely and efficiently the air transportation needs of the state and the metropolitan areas of Middle Georgia, the need to eliminate airport hazards, the need to raise large amounts of capital for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of present and future airports, and the need to coordinate the operation of various airports within certain metropolitan areas of the state necessitates the creation of an air and surface transportation commission for the present and future operation of air and surface transportation facilities. It is further determined and declared that the establishment of such commission is necessary and essential to ensure the welfare, safety, and convenience of citizens of the entire state and to ensure the proper economic development of the entire state. 
(b)  The purposes and objectives of this division and the commission shall be to meet the needs and requirements recognized in subsection (a) of this section through the establishment, maintenance, and operation of unified and coordinated surface and air transportation systems in the Middle Georgia region; to ensure the orderly and proper use and growth of public airports; to ensure that the maximum public benefit is attained from any public airports in existence and from any future airports; to ensure proper planning and establishment of future airports; to ensure maximum participation in national and international air transportation programs; to promote public transportation and commerce; and to provide the effective and economical use of public airports for the public welfare, safety, and convenience. The primary purpose of this commission is to address the airline passenger service needs of the region and is not to supplant or replace the need for general aviation in the region. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 28) 
Sec. 2-328. - Creation of commission. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the Middle Georgia Surface and Air Transportation Commission, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, bring and defend actions, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts. The commission shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)  The commission shall be composed of 61 members who shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  Two members shall be appointed by the governing authority of each member county. One of such members shall be appointed for an initial term of one year and one for an initial term of three years. Successors to such members shall serve for terms of three years; 
(2)  One member shall be appointed by the governing authority of each member municipality for an initial term of two years. Successors to such members shall serve for terms of three years; and 
(3)  One member shall be elected at large by a majority vote of the remaining members for an initial term of two years. Successors to such member shall serve for a term of three years. 
All initial members of the commission shall be appointed within 30 days of the effective date of this division. All members shall be eligible for reappointment. Thirty members shall constitute a quorum. Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the governing body responsible for originally appointing such member or in the case of the at-large member, by vote of the remaining members. No vacancy on the commission shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the commission. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman of the commission from among the members thereof and shall also elect a secretary-treasurer who need not be a member of the commission. The commission shall also elect an executive committee which shall be composed of the chairman and vice-chairman and three additional members elected by a majority of the members of the commission. The executive committee shall have such powers and authority as shall be provided by the bylaws of the commission. Persons elected to the executive committee shall serve on such committee for a term of one year. The members of the commission shall determine their compensation for serving in such capacities. 
(d)  Any member may be removed from office for good cause affecting his ability to perform his duties as a member, for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for violating the conflict of interest provisions of this division by vote of 30 of the other members, but only after a public hearing at which such member is given the right to present evidence in his own behalf and only upon a finding by 30 of the other members that good cause for removal affecting the member's ability to perform his duties as a member exists, that he was guilty of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office, or that he violated the conflict of interest provisions of this division. Any member who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the commission shall automatically by reason of such fact cease to be a member of the commission. However, such person shall be eligible for reappointment to the commission upon a showing of good cause for failure to attend such meetings. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 2) 
Sec. 2-329. - Powers. 
(a)  The commission is authorized: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the seal at pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, rights, or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or to dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the commission, the commission being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this division except from the funds provided under the authority of this division; and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the commission and to the owners of the property to be condemned; and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this division upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money is deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys and fix their respective compensation; 
(5)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the commission upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; 
(6)  To plan, acquire, establish, develop, construct, enlarge, improve, maintain, equip, and lease all airports which shall come under its control under the provisions of this act or which it may acquire or plan to acquire; to regulate, protect, and police such airports and all related activities and facilities; to enter into any contracts, leases, or other agreements, promulgate any orders, set any tolls, fees, or other charges for the use of its property or services and collect and use same as necessary to operate the airports under its control and to accomplish any purposes of this division; and to make any purchases or sales necessary for such purposes; provided, however, that airports owned or operated by a member county or municipality or any authority of a member county or municipality may not be acquired except with the consent of such owner or operator; 
(7)  To contract with any persons, firms, or public or private corporations to supply goods, commodities, facilities, and services to the public, employees of the commission, and employees of air carriers and other commercial interests located at any airport under its control under such terms and conditions as it may prescribe including, if desirable, exclusive rights, franchises, or concessions; 
(8)  To adopt and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the orderly, safe, efficient, and sanitary operation of airports and related facilities under its control; to provide for its own security force and peace officers with powers of arrest or to arrange for such security force or peace officers in connection with the county in which a facility is located; and to prescribe reasonable penalties for the breach of any rule or regulation. All such rules, regulations, or orders shall become effective upon approval by the commission and after publication of a notice containing a substantive statement of the rules and regulations and the penalties for violation thereof in a newspaper of general circulation of all counties in which such rules and regulations are to be applied. The notice shall state that the breach of any such rule or regulation will subject the violator to a penalty, shall state the penalty, and shall state that the full text of all rules and regulations shall be maintained in the principal office of the commission where same will be open to public inspection and perusal. All rules and regulations shall in fact be so maintained. Said rules and regulations, when promulgated as provided herein shall be judicially recognized by and enforceable in the court having jurisdiction over the offense and located in the county in which the violation occurs; 
(9)  To provide its own fire and emergency medical protection and crash and rescue services or to arrange for such services in connection with any federal, state, municipal, or county agency or any private firm in the business of providing such services; 
(10)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in aid of airports under its control and to accept and use same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by the federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(11)  To enter into agreements with the state, any subdivision thereof, or any county or municipality or the federal government or any agency thereof to use in the performance of its functions the facilities or the services of the state or such subdivision or such county or municipality or the federal government or any agency thereof in order to accomplish the purposes of this division; 
(12)  To enter into contracts, leases, or other agreements with federally certificated air carriers, other commercial air carriers, and other commercial users of its airports for the use of such airports under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate and for such charges, rentals, and fees as it deems appropriate; 
(13)  To enter into such agreement with any municipality or any county presently operating airports of which the commission may subsequently assume control with respect to the manner of transfer of airport employees from any municipality or any county to the commission as the commission deems necessary and appropriate or to contract with such governmental agency for the continued services of such officers and employees on such terms as are deemed to be appropriate; 
(14)  To establish a plan of civil service for officers and employees of the commission or to provide by resolution that such officers and employees of the commission shall be covered under any state, county, or municipal civil service plan which is available to such employees under the laws of the state or any county or municipality; 
(15)  To establish a plan for retirement, disability, hospitalization, and death benefits for officers and employees of the commission or to provide by resolution that such officers and employees shall be covered under any state, county, or municipal plan available to them under the laws of the state or any county or municipality; 
(16)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects as defined in section 2-326(6), the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds and revenue bonds of the commission or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(17)  To accept loans and grants of money, materials, or property of any kind from the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(18)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes, to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(19)  To exercise any power which is usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions and which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; and 
(20)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this division. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division to the contrary, the commission shall not: 
(1)  Own or maintain aircraft or perform maintenance on aircraft owned by others; 
(2)  Engage in flight instruction, flight charter, or other aircraft for hire business; or 
(3)  Perform maintenance on radios, propellers, or other aircraft accessories. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 4) 
Sec. 2-330. - Members of the commission not to be interested in contracts. 
The commission is prohibited from entering into a contract for the purchase of goods, property, or service with any member of the commission or the employer, partner, principal, agent, servant, or employee of a commission member. The commission shall not enter into any contract in which any member of the commission is financially interested, directly or indirectly. Neither the chairman nor any member of the commission nor a partner, employer, principal, agent, servant, or employee of a commission member shall enter into any contract with the commission or sell to the commission any goods, property, or service; provided, however, this section shall not apply to goods or services purchased from any public utility. Any contract made in violation of this section shall be void. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 5) 
Sec. 2-331. - Property of commission deemed to be public property. 
It is declared that all property of the commission held, pursuant to the terms of this division, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, and of any kind or nature, and any income or revenue therefrom, is held for an essential public and governmental purpose, and all such property is deemed to be public property. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 25) 
Sec. 2-332. - Taxation of the commission. 
The property, obligations, and interest on the obligations of the commission shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations, and interest on the obligations of its member counties. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants or lessees of the commission. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 26) 
Sec. 2-333. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this division, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this division. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 27) 
Sec. 2-334. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The commission is authorized to prescribe, fix, and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this division to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of the public airport, landing fields, surface transportation systems, and related buildings and facilities and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 29) 
Sec. 2-335. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the commission to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this division. After the commission has selected a potential site or sites for the regional airport, notice of the site or sites so selected shall be delivered to the board of commissioners of the county wherein the site or sites are located, and the board of commissioners shall have 60 days to notify the commission of its decision to accept the airport or, in the alternative, submit the question of acceptance or rejection of the regional airport to a public referendum which shall be held within 90 days of the call. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 30) 
Sec. 2-336. - Financial statements and audit reports. 
(a)  The commission shall establish a fiscal year for its operation and, as soon after the end of each fiscal year as is feasible, the commission shall cause to be prepared and printed a report and financial statement of the commission's operations for the fiscal year just ended and of its assets and liabilities. A copy of such report shall be sent to the governing commission of each member county, and additional copies shall be made available for distribution to the general public on written requests therefor. 
(b)  The commission shall appoint in due time each year a firm of independent certified public accountants as auditors who shall examine the books, records, and accounts of the commission for the purpose of auditing and reporting upon its financial statement for such year. The report of such auditors shall be appended to such financial statement. 
(c)  Whenever the commission deems it necessary or advisable, it shall be authorized to employ a firm of qualified independent engineers to survey the condition of the commission's facilities and operations from an engineering standpoint and to make a report thereof together with its recommendations for improvement in its physical facilities and operating procedures. A copy of such report shall be sent to the governing commission of each member county and additional copies shall be made available for distribution to the general public on written request therefor. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 31) 
Sec. 2-337. - Competitive bidding on contracts. 
(a)  Except in the purchase of unique articles or articles which for any reason are unobtainable in the open market and except as provided in this division, competitive bids shall be secured before any purchase or sale, by contract or otherwise, is made by the commission or before any contract is awarded for construction, alterations, supplies, equipment, repairs, or maintenance or for rendering any services to the commission other than professional services. The purchase shall be made from or the contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder or the sale shall be made to the highest responsible bidder. If the amount involved is $10,000.00 or more, no purchase of any unique article or other articles unobtainable in the open market shall be made unless a report detailing why such unique article or other articles are unobtainable in the open market is submitted to the chairman of the commission. 
(b)  All purchases, contracts, and sales of $10,000.00 or more shall be awarded after advertising in the official organs of the member counties at least two weeks prior to the bid opening. Bids shall be publicly opened and read aloud at a date, time, and place designated in the invitation to bid. Invitations to bid shall be sent at least one week prior to the bid opening to at least three potential bidders who are qualified technically and financially to submit bids or, in lieu thereof, the commission shall keep on file a memorandum showing that less than three potential bidders so qualified exist in the market area within which it is practicable to obtain bids. 
(c)  Written price quotations from at least three qualified and responsible vendors shall be obtained for all purchases and sales under $2,000.00 but more than $1,000.00 or, in lieu thereof, the commission shall keep on file a memorandum showing that less than three vendors so qualified exist in the market area within which it is practicable to obtain quotations, except as provided in this division. 
(d)  Purchases or sales under $1,000.00 may be negotiated with or without competitive bidding under sound procurement procedures as promulgated and established by the commission. 
(e)  Competitive bidding requirements may be waived if it is determined by the commission that an emergency directly and immediately affecting customer service or public health, safety, or welfare requires immediate delivery of supplies, materials, equipment, or services; provided, however, that a statement explaining the emergency shall be entered in the permanent records of the commission. 
(f)  The commission shall have the right to reject any or all bids or parts of any or all bids whenever in the opinion of the commission such rejection is necessary for the protection of the interests of the commission. In such cases, the commission shall readvertise for new bids on the same or different terms. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 32) 
Sec. 2-338. - Contractors to give bond. 
Contractors who are awarded contracts by the commission shall be required to give bond in an amount equal to the amount of the bid, with good security, for the faithful performance of the contract and to indemnify the commission for any damages occasioned by a failure to perform the same within the prescribed time. Such bond shall be approved by and filed with the commission or shall be approved by and filed with such other person as may be designated by the commission. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 33) 
Sec. 2-339. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this division shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for doing the things authorized thereby, shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as being in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 34) 
Sec. 2-340. - Powers of counties and municipalities. 
This act does not in any way take from member counties or any municipality located therein or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain public airports or landing fields or to issue revenue certificates as is provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 36-86-60 et seq.), known as the "Revenue Bond Law." 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 36) 
Secs. 2-341—2-355. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Revenue Bonds 

Sec. 2-356. - Authorized. 
The commission, or any authority or body which had or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the commission created by this division, is authorized at one time or from time to time to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the commission for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as defined in this division of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this act for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding the interest allowed by O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.), known as the "Revenue Bond Law," shall be payable semiannually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the commission, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the commission, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the commission in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 6) 
Sec. 2-357. - Form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The commission shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the commission may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone or also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 7) 
Sec. 2-358. - Signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the commission and the official seal of the commission shall be fixed thereto and attested by the secretary of the commission, and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the signature or facsimile signature of the chairman of the commission. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of such person and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the commission by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 8) 
Sec. 2-359. - Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under this division shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments law of the state. Such bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 9) 
Sec. 2-360. - Sale; price. 
The commission may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the commission, but no such sale shall be made at a price so low as to require the payment of interest on the money received therefor at a greater rate than the interest allowed by O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.), known as the "Revenue Bond Law," computed with relation to the absolute maturity of the bonds in accordance with standard tables of bond values, excluding, however, from such computation the amount of any premium to be paid on redemption of any bond prior to maturity. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 10) 
Sec. 2-361. - Proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects and, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may be issued in like manner to provide the amount of such deficit, which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund provided for in this division for the payment of principal and interest of such bonds. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 11) 
Sec. 2-362. - Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the commission, under like restrictions, may issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 12) 
Sec. 2-363. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The commission may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 13) 
Sec. 2-364. - Conditions precedent to issuance; object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this division. In the discretion of the commission, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under this division shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the commission by a majority of its members. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 14) 
Sec. 2-365. - Bonds; trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the commission, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the commission and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the commission. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the commission in relation to the acquisition of property; the construction of the project; the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project; and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the commission, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the commission. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the commission may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 15) 
Sec. 2-366. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the commission shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes for which such bonds were issued, subject to such regulations as this division and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 16) 
Sec. 2-367. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the commission to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the commission as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide; and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals, as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund, which sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of: 
(1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  The necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest; and 
(4)  Any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as provided in this division. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust indenture, surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds. Any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 17) 
Sec. 2-368. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under this division or any coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given in this division may be restricted by the resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted under this division or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this division or by such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this division or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the commission or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 18) 
Sec. 2-369. - Refunding bonds. 
The commission is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue refunding bonds of the commission for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under this division and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities, all other details thereof, and the duties of the commission in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provision of this division insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 19) 
Sec. 2-370. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under this division or any suit or action against the commission shall be brought in the Superior Court of Laurens County, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under this division shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 20) 
Sec. 2-371. - Validation. 
Bonds of the commission shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.), known as the "Revenue Bond Law." The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the commission. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds against the commission issuing the same and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality contracting with the commission. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 21) 
Sec. 2-372. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the commission remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of the commission or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the commission to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the commission. The provisions of this division shall be for the benefit of the commission and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this division, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 22) 
Sec. 2-373. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of any member county or municipality or a pledge of the faith and credit of said county or municipality, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this division; and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate any member county or municipality to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment of such bonds; and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 23) 
Sec. 2-374. - Bonds as legal investments for trustees and as lawful deposits of securities with public officers. 
Any bonds issued by the commission under the provisions of this division are made securities in which public officers and bodies of this state; all municipalities; all municipal subdivisions; all insurance companies and associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business; all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks, savings associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking business; all administrators, guardians, executors, trustees, and other fiduciaries; and all other persons who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state may properly and legally invest funds including capital in their control or belonging to them. The bonds are also made securities which may be deposited with and shall be received by all public officers and bodies of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions for any purpose for which the deposit of the bonds or other obligations of this state is now or may hereafter be authorized. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 24) 
Secs. 2-375—2-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY TRANSIT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-401. - Purpose. 
It is hereby found, declared, and determined that the public convenience and necessity require the creation of a public authority to operate a transit system in the City of Macon and the County of Bibb for transportation of passengers both within and without the City of Macon and the County of Bibb. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 1.1) 
Sec. 2-402. - Creation. 
There is hereby created the Macon-Bibb County Transit Authority. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 2.1) 
Sec. 2-403. - Body corporate and politic. 
The [transit] authority is a public corporation of the State of Georgia. The authority is not an arm or agency of the City of Macon nor of Bibb County but is a body corporate and politic created by this division and the powers granted the authority by this division are not restricted by limitations, constitutional or otherwise, upon the powers of the City of Macon nor of Bibb County. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 2.2) 
Sec. 2-404. - Perpetual succession. 
The [transit] authority has perpetual succession. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 2.3) 
Sec. 2-405. - Board; appointment; terms; quorum; members; officers. 
(a)  The governing and administrative body of the [transit] authority shall be a board consisting of four members, one of whom shall be a consumer of transit services, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, and three members, one of whom shall be a consumer of transit services, appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County, for a total of seven members. Members of the board appointed by the city shall be residents of the city for the entire term of their appointment and shall be at least 25 years of age. Members of the board appointed by the county shall be residents of the City of Macon or Bibb County for the entire term of their appointment and shall be at least 25 years of age. The five members of the board who are currently serving in office shall continue to serve until the expiration of their terms of office. The two new members, who shall be the consumer members, shall be appointed to take office on June 1, 1995, for terms of office of five years. All members of the board shall serve for terms of office of five years. Members of the board shall be eligible for reappointment. Vacancies on the board, except by expiration of term, shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term in which the vacancy occurs. 
(b)  A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum and a majority of the board may act for the authority in any manner. 
(c)  No member of the board or employee of the authority shall have directly or indirectly any financial interest, profit, or benefit in any contract, work, or business of the authority nor in the sale, lease, or purchase of any property to or from the authority. 
(d)  Members of the board shall serve without remuneration but shall be entitled: 
(1)  To reimbursement for actual expenses incurred on authority business, provided that such expenses have been authorized in advance of their being incurred; and 
(2)  To participate in and be covered by any contract for group medical or hospitalization insurance plans otherwise provided by the authority for its director, its officers, and its employees pursuant to section 2-408(a)(5). 
(e)  The board shall select one of its members as chairman and another member as vice-chairman and shall also elect a secretary-treasurer, who shall not necessarily be a member of the board. Regular meetings of the board shall be held at least quarterly, the time, place, and notice of such meetings to be fixed by the board. All motions, resolutions, and all other proceedings of the authority and all documents and records in its possession shall be public records and open to public inspection, except such documents and records as shall be kept or prepared by the board for use in negotiations, actions, or proceedings to which the authority is a party. 
(f)  The chairman of the board shall be eligible to vote on all motions coming before the board. The affirmative vote of at least three members of the board shall be necessary for adoption of any resolution or the passing of any motion. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 2.4; 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1124), page 4601, § 1; 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 47), page 3611, § 1) 
Sec. 2-406. - Bonds of secretary-treasurer and director. 
The secretary-treasurer and the director of the [transit] authority shall hold office at the pleasure of the board. Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, the secretary-treasurer and director shall each execute a bond with a corporate surety to be approved by the board. The bond of both officers shall be payable to the authority in whatever penal sum may be directed by the board, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices and the payment of all moneys received by each of them according to law and the orders of the board. The board may at any time require a new bond from either or both officers in such penal sum as may then be determined. The books and records of the authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the authority, by a certified public accountant, selected by the board. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 2.5; 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1085), page 4339, § 1) 
Sec. 2-407. - Funds. 
All funds deposited by the [transit] authority in any bank shall be placed in the name of the authority and shall be withdrawn or paid out only by check or draft on the bank, signed by the secretary-treasurer and countersigned by the chairman or vice-chairman of the board, except under the following circumstances. The board may designate any of its members or the director of the authority to sign any draft or check for the payment of all obligations of no more than $2,500.00, or for the payment of salaries or wages and for FICA, federal income tax, credit union, and insurance payroll deductions, regardless of the amount. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 2.6; 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1085), page 4339, § 2) 
Sec. 2-408. - Powers. 
(a)  The powers of the [transit] authority shall include, but shall not be limited to, those powers generally conferred upon authorities pursuant to law and shall also include those specifically granted by this division which may be exercised only to accomplish the purpose for which the authority is created, namely to own and operate a transit system for the purpose of transporting persons within and without the City of Macon and the County of Bibb and: 
(1)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and donations. 
(2)  To adopt a seal to be impressed upon its instruments and may provide for the impression of such seal by printed or lithographed facsimile thereof. Any executed instrument bearing the seal of the authority shall be prima facie evidence of its execution by the authority and that its execution was duly, regularly, and legally authorized by the authority. 
(3)  To acquire by grant, purchase, gift, device, or lease, and to hold, use, sell, lease, or dispose of real and personal property of every kind and nature whatsoever, licenses, patents, rights, and interests necessary for the full exercise, or convenient or useful for the carrying on of any of its powers pursuant to this division. 
(4)  To acquire, construct, complete, develop, own, operate, and maintain a transit system including power to acquire by purchase, lease, gift, or otherwise all or any part of any patents, licenses, rights, interest, engineering studies, data, or reports owned or held by any person, firm, or corporation and determined by the authority to be necessary, convenient, or useful to the authority in connection with the acquisition, construction, completion, development, operation, or maintenance of such transit system. 
(5)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys; to fix or to provide for their respective compensation; and to provide for pension and retirement plans for these officers, agents, and employees including, but not limited to, the transfer to the authority and maintenance of a pension or retirement plan identical or similar to that heretofore in existence for the officers and employees of the Macon Transit System of the City of Macon; and to provide for or contract for group life, medical, and hospitalization insurance plans for said officers and employees and, except for members of the board of the authority, to pay the costs thereof either in whole or in part. To be a self-insurer as to workers' compensation claims without being required to comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 34-9-121, which relates to self-insurers and the posting of security indemnity or bonds. 
(6)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue notes or bonds therefor and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge, and assign any and all of its funds, property, or income as security therefor and to provide for the payment of the same and the rights of the holders thereof. 
(7)  To sue and to be sued in its corporate name in such actions as are permitted by law. The authority board members shall be immune from suits as to those actions for the recovery of damages; however, such immunity shall be waived as to those actions for the recovery of damages for any claim for which liability insurance protection for such claim has been provided, but only to the extent of the amount of any such liability insurance. 
(8)  To have and to exercise the usual powers of public and private corporations performing similar functions which are not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this state or of the United States of America. 
(9)  To make and execute all instruments and contracts for the acquisition of existing transportation facilities, acquisition of new facilities and properties and such other matters and things as may be needful and necessary to the proper and efficient operation of the business of the authority. 
(10)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest the same in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(11)  To procure and enter into contracts for any type of insurance and indemnity against loss or damage to its property from any cause, including loss of use and occupancy, against death or injury of any person, against employers' liability, against any act of any member, officer, or employee of the board or the authority in the performance of the duties of his office or employment of any other insurable risk. 
(12)  To adopt, alter, or repeal its own bylaws, rules, and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the powers granted to it may be enjoyed as the board may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating the business of the authority. 
(13)  To have the continuing power and authority at any time and from time to time to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds pursuant to and in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law of the State of Georgia for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of acquisition, construction, alteration, and improvement of said transit system and charges incident thereto. The authority shall likewise have the power and authority to issue refunding bonds. For the purpose of evidencing the obligation of the authority to repay any money borrowed by the authority for any of the aforesaid purposes, the authority may, pursuant to resolution adopted by the board, from time to time issue and dispose of its interest-bearing revenue bonds and may also from time to time issue and dispose of its interest-bearing bonds and refund any such bonds at maturity or pursuant to redemption provisions, or at any time before maturity with the consent of the holders thereof. Said authority may issue such types of revenue bonds as may be determined by the board, including bonds on which principal and interest are payable: 
a.  Exclusively from income or revenues of the operations of the authority financed with proceeds of such bonds, or together with any proceeds and grants from any governmental agency, subdivision, instrumentality, corporation, person, or any other source; or 
b.  From income and revenues of any unpledged assets of the authority generally. Any such bonds may be secured by mortgage or deed to secure debt on any real or personal property of the authority, except as may be prohibited by law. 
(b)  Neither the members of the board nor any person executing bonds on behalf of the authority shall be personally liable thereon by reason of the issuance thereof. The bonds shall not be, and shall so state on the face thereof, a debt of the City of Macon, the County of Bibb, or the State of Georgia, and they shall not directly or indirectly or contingently be obligated to levy or pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment thereof. 
(c)  Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the provisions of the State Revenue Bond Law, hereinbefore referred to, and as the same may hereafter be amended, and when validated, the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and against the authority issuing the same. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 3.1; 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1124), page 4601, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 2-409. - When bids required. 
All construction contracts and all contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment, and services, when the expense thereof shall exceed $5,000.00, shall be awarded to the person, firm, or corporation submitting the lowest and best bid, in accordance with the specifications and requirements as established by the board of the transit authority. The transit authority shall annually publish in the legal organ of Bibb County an advertisement setting forth the categories of supplies, equipment, and services required and the procedures for submission of bids therefor. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 4.1; 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1085), page 4339, § 3) 
Sec. 2-410. - Rates. 
The [transit] authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges for the transportation services and facilities furnished, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking of project, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, and improvement of said transit system, and to pledge the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertakings, including the revenues of improvements and betterments thereafter made. The bond redemption and interest payments shall constitute a first direct and exclusive charge and lien on all such rates, fares, tolls, and charges and other revenues and interest thereon and sinking funds created therefrom received from the use and operation of the system; and all such rates, fares, tolls, and charges and other revenues together with interest thereon shall constitute a trust fund for the security and payment of such bonds and, except as to the extent provided in any indenture with respect to the payment therefrom of expenses for other purposes including administration maintenance improvements or extensions of the system, shall not be used or pledged for any other purpose so long as such bonds or any of them are outstanding and unpaid. The authority may provide that the rates, fares, tolls, and charges established are minimum rates, fares, tolls, and charges and subject to increase or decrease in accordance only with the terms of the indenture under which the revenue bonds are issued. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 4.2) 
Sec. 2-411. - Tax exemption. 
The [transit] authority shall be exempt from payment of all taxes and assessments, ad valorem, sales, use, income and otherwise, imposed by the State of Georgia or by any of its subdivisions or taxing districts upon any property, real and personal, acquired or owned by the authority or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, or supervision, and upon its activities in the operation and maintenance of any such properties, and on the income derived by the authority from the operation of said transit system or otherwise. The bonds of the authority, their transfer and the income therefrom, shall always be exempted from taxation by the state or any of its subdivisions or taxing districts. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 5.1) 
Sec. 2-412. - Construction of division. 
This division being necessary for the welfare of the state and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof; and the specific powers, authority, and immunities granted hereby are to be construed in illustration of and not in limitation of, the general powers, authorities, and immunities granted by the authority of this division. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 7.1) 
Secs. 2-413—2-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY URBAN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-451. - Definitions. 
As used in this act, the following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth hereinbelow: 
(1)  Authority means the authority created by this act. 
(2)  City means the City of Macon, Georgia. 
(3)  County means Bibb County, Georgia. 
(4)  Member means a member of the authority established by this subdivision. 
(5)  Advisory committee means the committee established hereinbelow to act as an advisory committee to the authority in matters relating to the revitalization and redevelopment of the Macon downtown area. 
(6)  Project means any undertaking of the authority in connection with the redevelopment or revitalization of urban, central city or downtown areas within Bibb County. 
(7)  Project areas means those urban, central city or downtown areas within Bibb County selected by the authority for redevelopment, revitalization or improvement pursuant to the procedures set forth in this subdivision. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 2) 
Sec. 2-452. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a public body corporate and politic in the County of Bibb to be known as the "Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority." Said authority hereinafter shall be referred to as the "authority" and said authority shall have the powers, rights, duties and obligations set forth herein and as otherwise provided by law. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 1) 
Sec. 2-453. - Composition and organization. 
(a)  The authority shall consist of seven members. The original members of said authority shall be the following residents of the City of Macon or Bibb County, Georgia, whose terms of office as members of the authority shall expire on the date shown following their names: 

 
(b)  Vacancies in the membership of the authority by reason of expiration of term shall be filled in the following manner: The vacancy first occurring shall be filled by appointment of a qualified resident of Bibb County by the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County and the vacancies next occurring shall be filled by appointment of a qualified resident of the City of Macon by the Mayor and Council of the City of Macon and said vacancies as the same shall occur shall thereafter be filled alternately by said board of county commissioners and said mayor and council; provided, however, that a member of the authority shall continue to serve until his successor has been duly appointed and provided further that in the event of vacancy for any other reason than the expiration of term, the remaining members of the authority shall continue to be vested with all of the powers, rights, duties and obligations set forth herein or otherwise provided by law. When two vacancies occur by reason of the expiration of a term at the same time, the city governing authority shall fill one vacancy and the county governing authority shall fill the other such vacancy. Vacancies caused by any reason other than expiration of term shall be filled by appointment of the governing body originally making the appointment where a vacancy exists, provided, however, such vacancies which occur as to the terms of the original members set forth above shall be filled by the remaining members of the authority. 
(c)  Upon appointment of members as provided hereinabove, a member shall serve for a period of four years if appointed at the expiration of a term or in the event of a vacancy in the membership for other causes the appointment of said member shall be for the unexpired term. 
(d)  Each member of the authority shall have attained the age of 25 years and shall have been a resident of the county for at least two years prior to his appointment. No officer or employee of the county or city shall be eligible for appointment to the authority. If at any time during his term a member shall cease to be a resident of the county or city or shall become an officer or employee of the county or city, he shall cease to be a member of the authority. No person may serve more than two consecutive full terms as a member of the authority. No action taken by the authority shall be void by reason of the disqualification of a member until the disqualification shall be brought to the attention of the other members of the authority in writing, and one month has expired since the receipt of said notice and the action sought to be void was taken after said one-month period. 
(e)  The members of the authority shall not be entitled to compensation, pension or other retirement benefits on account of service on the authority but shall be entitled to receive traveling expenses and other actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(f)  The authority shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary, each of whom shall serve for one year or until his successor is chosen. The authority shall adopt and promulgate rules governing its procedures and shall hold regular meetings no less often than once each month. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairman or any three members of the authority. A majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of meeting and transacting business. Each member of the authority shall have one vote. 
(g)  Upon the effective date of this subdivision, the members of the authority shall organize and enter upon the performance of their duties. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 3) 
Sec. 2-454. - Purposes. 
It is hereby determined, declared and established that the creation of the authority and the implementation of the corporate purposes set forth in this subdivision is in all respects for the benefit of the people of this state and that the authority is an institution of purely public charity and it is further declared that the revitalization and redevelopment of the urban, central city and downtown areas of Bibb County (project areas) is a proper public purpose and this law is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare the public facilities of said areas including the construction of streets, roadways, parks, malls, transportation systems, vehicular parking facilities and any and all other necessary and desirable appurtenances to the revitalization and modernization of said project areas and it is further declared that the expenditure of public funds for such purposes by said authority is and shall be in the public interest. 
It is further found, determined, and declared that all property of said authority is hereby declared and shall in all respects be considered to be public property and title to such property shall be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public, and the use of such property pursuant to the terms of this subdivision shall be and is hereby declared to be for public and governmental purposes, that is, for the promotion of the general public welfare in matters of cultural development, education, pleasure, convenience and recreation of the public at large, in an effort to better the general condition of society, or that considerable part of society residing in Middle Georgia, which promotion is hereby declared to be a public beneficence for the good of humanity and for the general improvement and happiness of society, and all the property, income, obligations, and interest on the obligations of the authority and the transfer thereof shall be and hereby are declared to be nontaxable for any and all purposes. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 4) 
Sec. 2-455. - Powers. 
The authority shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions set forth in this law including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To sue and be sued; 
(2)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(3)  To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary to exercise the power of the authority. Such contracts may be made with the county or may be made with one or more municipal corporations in the county, or may be made with the county and a single municipal corporation or multiple municipal corporations of the county. The county and all such municipalities are hereby authorized to enter into contracts with the authority. The authority may also contract with private legal entities or persons; 
(4)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and devices of any property and to administer trusts; 
(5)  To acquire by purchase, gift or construction any real or personal property desired to be acquired as a part of any project or for the purpose of improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovating or remodeling any project or part thereof already acquired, or for the purpose of demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof; 
(6)  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage or dispose of, or grant options for any such purposes, any real or personal property or interest therein; 
(7)  To mortgage, convey, pledge or assign any properties revenues, income, tolls, charges or fees owned or received by the authority; 
(8)  To issue revenue obligations for the purpose of providing funds for carrying out the purpose of the authority; 
(9)  To appoint officers and retain agents, engineers, attorneys, fiscal agents, accountants and employees and to provide their compensation and duties; 
(10)  To acquire or damage property through the exercise of the right of eminent domain for public purposes; and to acquire by purchase, gift or lease any property owned by the city or county which has been acquired or damaged through the exercise of the right of eminent domain by the city or county; provided that said authority shall acquire such properties or damages such properties through the exercise of such power of eminent domain only in a manner prescribed by law for the exercise of such power by counties and municipalities in the state and only upon payment of just and fair compensation as required by the constitution and laws of this state; provided further that the authority shall not acquire or damage property through the exercise of the right of eminent domain unless the authority is granted prior written approval for such actions by the governing authorities of the city and the county for property located in the county within the corporate limits of the city, or the county for property located in the county but not in the city, or by the Georgia Public Service Commission for property owned by a public utility; 
(11)  To construct, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the authority, and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms or corporations, or any other contribution, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use; 
(12)  To issue revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to or improving such project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued. Such revenue bonds shall bear interest at the rate or rates and shall mature in the years and amounts as may be determined by the authority and shall otherwise be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Revenue Bond Law of the State of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.) as heretofore or hereafter amended. As security for the payment of any revenue bonds so authorized, any property, real or personal, of an authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered and any such authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture containing any provisions not in conflict with law for the security of such bonds, which trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default of such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or upon default in the performance of any term or condition contained in such agreement or indenture. The State of Georgia, in behalf of the state and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision and taxing district therein, hereby waives any right it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the authority so mortgaged or encumbered and any such mortgage or encumbrance may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof; 
(13)  To make or cause to be made studies and analyses of economic changes taking place in the downtown areas of Bibb County and of the impact of metropolitan growth upon those areas; 
(14)  To prepare a plan or plans for the development and redevelopment of such downtown areas (such plan or plans shall be coordinated with governmental planning boards and agencies but the authority shall have the ultimate responsibility for preparation of such plan or plans); 
(15)  To implement any general plan of development in the urban, central or downtown areas which have been approved by the county and the municipality in which said development is located, by: 
a.  Coordinating development and redevelopment by public and private enterprise; 
b.  Encouraging private development and redevelopment in a manner consistent with the plan; 
c.  From time to time proposing such revisions in the plan as appear to the authority to be appropriate and in the best interest of the city, consistent with the purposes of this subdivision; 
d.  Constructing; acquiring, repairing, and operating any public development or project covered by the plan, or coordinating any of the foregoing among other governmental agencies; 
e.  In coordination with said planning boards, or agencies, develop long-range plans designed to halt the deterioration of property values in the urban, central city and downtown areas, and encourage property owners to implement the plans to the fullest extent possible; 
f.  To acquire in the best interest of the public, for public purposes only, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper and to own, convey and otherwise dispose of and to lease as lessor and lessee, any land and any other property, real and personal, and any rights and interests therein which it may determine to be reasonably necessary in furtherance of its other powers under this article, and to grant and acquire licenses, easements and options with respect thereto; 
g.  To improve land, construct, reconstruct, equip, improve, maintain and repair parking facilities, parks, plazas, malls, walkways and other public facilities and any necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto within project areas; 
h.  To fix, change and collect fees, rents and charges for the use of any project, any part thereof, and any facilities furnished thereby, and of any property under its control, and to pledge such revenue to the payment of revenue bonds issued by it; 
(16)  To have and exercise any and all of the usual powers of private and public corporation except such as are inconsistent with this subdivision, including the power to adopt and amend bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
(17)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(18)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
(19)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish or to complement the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 5; 1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1327), page 3950, § 1; 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 730), page 4872, § 1) 
Sec. 2-456. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this subdivision shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 6) 
Sec. 2-457. - Advisory committee. 
The City of Macon and Bibb County by joint resolution may establish an advisory committee to the authority. Said committee shall be composed of from ten to 20 citizens of Bibb County and said committee shall be charged with the responsibility to make recommendations to the authority in connection with the redevelopment of project areas. It shall be the responsibility of the city and county to advise the authority of the composition of the committee and to notify the authority of changes in membership from time to time, terms of members of the committee resting in the discretion of the city and county. The authority shall notify all members of the advisory committee of the date, time and place of each meeting of the authority and the members of the committee are authorized to attend such meetings. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 7) 
Sec. 2-458. - Public funds. 
The City of Macon and the County of Bibb, either and both, are authorized and permitted to provide public funds to the authority for the purposes of the authority set forth in this law, provided, however, that the debts of the authority shall not constitute debts of the state nor of any city, town, municipality or county thereof. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 8) 
Secs. 2-459—2-470. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Constitutional Provisions 

Sec. 2-471. - Appropriations authorized. 
The governing authorities of the County of Bibb and of the City of Macon, either and both, are by this self-executing amendment, authorized and permitted, directly, or through the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, to appropriate properties, moneys and services, any or all, for the purposes of acquiring, constructing, improving, altering, repairing or maintaining properties within Bibb County, Georgia, so as to develop and redevelop for the public good urban, central city and downtown areas located within Bibb County and in a manner that said powers may be exercised directly by the County of Bibb, the City of Macon or the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority created by an act of the General Assembly at the 1974 Session thereof [subdivision I of this division] and provided further that said Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority shall be authorized to exercise the powers of eminent domain subject to the limitations set forth in said act creating said authority and provided further that an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia entitled "An Act to create the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority; to establish said Authority as a public body corporate and politic; to authorize the Authority to exercise certain powers including the right and authority to acquire, construct, improve, alter, repair and maintain properties within Bibb County, Georgia, for the purpose of providing improvements for the public good of urban, central city and downtown areas located within Bibb County, Georgia; to provide for the exercise of the power of eminent domain by said Authority and to establish the procedures by which such powers shall be exercised; to impose duties on the Authority; to designate the members of the Authority; to authorize the City of Macon and Bibb County to execute leases and contracts with said Authority in furtherance of the purposes and responsibilities of the Authority; to authorize the Authority to incur debt by promissory notes or the issuance of revenue bonds of the Authority and to provide for the collection of revenues, rents and earnings by the Authority for the amortization and payment of such revenue bonds or other debts incurred by said Authority and the pledging of said revenues or other funds for such purposes; to authorize the execution of contracts, trust instruments, deeds to secure debt and the encumbrancing of the Authority's property to secure the payment of bonds, debts or other evidence of indebtedness; to provide rights for the holders of bonds or other debts of the Authority; to provide that the debts of the Authority shall not constitute debts of the State nor of any city, town, municipality or county thereof; to make such bonds legal investments and exempt the same and the income therefrom and interest thereon and all property of the Authority from taxation; to authorize the issuance of refunding bonds; to provide for validation of bonds of the Authority and the security therefor; to provide for the severability of the provisions of this act; to repeal all laws and parts of laws in conflict herewith; and for other purposes," which was enacted at the Session of the General Assembly of Georgia commencing in January, 1974 [subdivision I of this division], is ratified and confirmed as of the dates of both its passage and approval; and provided further that, insofar as this amendment relates to the said act creating said Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, the effectiveness of this amendment shall be retroactive to such dates as may be required to assure said act of full force, effect and validity. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 160), page 1754, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VII, § V, ¶ I was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1152), page 4698. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. The amendment was also continued by a City of Macon ordinance adopted on May 21, 1984. Such ordinance can be found in 1985 Ga. Laws, page 5269. 
Sec. 2-472. - Issuance of bonds authorized. 
The Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority is further authorized to issue bonds for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating, extending, repairing and improving land, buildings and facilities for use by the County of Bibb and the City of Macon, either or both, for their governmental, proprietary or administrative functions. Said Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, the County of Bibb and the City of Macon are authorized to enter into contracts and leases pertaining to the use of such facilities for terms not exceeding 50 years, obligating the County of Bibb and the City of Macon to pay such sums as may be agreed upon for the use of such facilities. The County of Bibb and the City of Macon are authorized to levy taxes in order to provide funds to make the payments required under any such contract or lease, and to expend money derived from taxation or other available sources and pledge same as provided in any such contract or lease with the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority. Bonds issued and contracts or leases entered into by the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority shall not be deemed to constitute debts of the County of Bibb or the City of Macon within the meaning of Ga. Const. VII, Section VII, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. This amendment is self-enacting and does not require any enabling legislation for it to become effective. However, the General Assembly may amend the provisions of the act creating the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority (subdivision I of this division) to make it more perfectly reflect the purposes, terms and provisions hereof, to further define the purposes of the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, to further define, prescribe and enlarge the powers and duties of said authority (and of the County of Bibb and the City of Macon as same relate to the authority and its undertakings) and the exercise thereof, to further regulate the management and conduct of said authority, and to otherwise amend said act in any manner not inconsistent with the provisions of this amendment as the General Assembly deems appropriate, and all amendments to said act heretofore enacted by the General Assembly are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 190), page 1827, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VII, § V, ¶ I was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1152), page 4698. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such amendment was also continued by a City of Macon ordinance adopted on May 21, 1984. Such ordinance can be found in 1985 Ga. Laws, page 5269. 
Sec. 2-473. - Issuance of bonds for construction. 
In addition to those powers granted to the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority by act of the General Assembly at the 1974 Session thereof (subdivision I of this division), and amendments to the Constitution of the State of Georgia (sections 2-471 and 2-472 of this compilation) said authority is further authorized to issue its revenue bonds, notes or other obligations for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating, extending, repairing and improving lands, buildings and facilities of any kind for use by any industrial, commercial, business, civic, educational, agricultural or other enterprise, public or private, upon a determination by the governing body of the authority that such undertaking will further the development and redevelopment for the public good of urban, central city and downtown areas located within Bibb County, and, in addition to those specific powers granted to the authority, said authority is empowered to extend credit or make loans to any enterprise for the purpose of financing undertakings for the purposes described herein, subject to such terms as the authority may deem necessary or desirable. Bonds, notes or other obligations issued and contracts entered into by said authority shall not be deemed to constitute debts of the County of Bibb nor the City of Macon within the meaning of Article IX, Section VII, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. This amendment is self-enacting and shall not require any enabling legislation for it to become effective. However, the General Assembly may amend the provisions of the act creating the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority to make it more perfectly reflect the purposes, terms and provisions hereof, to further define the purposes of the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, to further define, prescribe and enlarge the powers and duties of said authority (and of the County of Bibb and the City of Macon as the same relate to the authority and its undertakings) and the exercise thereof, to further regulate the management and conduct of said authority, and to otherwise amend said act in any manner not inconsistent with the provisions of this amendment as the General Assembly deems appropriate and all amendments to said act heretofore enacted by the General Assembly are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 190), page 2128, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1976) art. IX, § IV, ¶ III and art. IX, § VIII, ¶ I was continued in force and effect by 1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1152), page 2128. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such amendment was also continued by a City of Macon ordinance adopted on May 21, 1984. Such ordinance can be found in 1985 Ga. Laws, page 5269. 
Secs. 2-474—2-500. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MACON WATER AUTHORITY 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-501. - Definitions. 
As used in this act, the term: 
(1)  Authority shall mean the Macon Water Authority created by section 2-502. 
(2)  Cost of the project shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one year after completion of construction, the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this division, the construction of any project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this division for such project. 
(3)  Project shall mean and include the acquisition and construction of systems, plants, works, instrumentalities, and properties: 
a.  Used or useful in connection with the obtaining of a water supply and the conservation, treatment, distribution, and sale of water for public and private uses; or 
b.  Used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewage and like waste water; 
together with all parts of any such system, plant, work, instrumentality, and property and all appurtenances thereto, including lands, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, approaches, dams, reservoirs, generating stations, sewage disposal plants, intercepting sewers, trunk, connecting, and other sewers and water mains, filtration works, pumping stations, and equipment. 
"Project" shall also include all things used or useful in connection with the performance of any of the contracts with respect to industrial development as authorized in [subsection 2-504(19.1)]. 
(4)  Revenue bonds and bonds shall mean revenue bonds authorized to be issued pursuant to this division. 
(5)  Self-liquidating shall mean that the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all properties used, leased, and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(4); 1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 296), page 4991, § 2) 
Sec. 2-502. - Created. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the Macon Water Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, an instrumentality of Bibb County, and a public corporation, and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority or the trustee acting under any trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by its officers, agents, or employees. 
(b)  (1) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, the authority shall consist of seven members, five of whom shall be elected as provided in this section. Of the remaining two members of the authority, one shall be a member of the governing authority of the City of Macon to be appointed by the governing authority of the City of Macon and one shall be a member of the governing authority of Bibb County to be appointed by the governing authority of Bibb County. 
(2)  For the purpose of electing members of the authority, Bibb County is divided into five electoral districts as follows: 
District: 1 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0001 EM01 
VTD: 0002 EM02 
VTD: 0003 EM03 
VTD: 0004 EM04 
VTD: 0005 EM05 
VTD: 0006 EM06 
VTD: 0007 EM07 
VTD: 0008 EM08 
VTD: 0010 GODFREY 01 
VTD: 0011 GODFREY 02 
VTD: 0013 GODFREY 04 (part) 
Tract: 0128. 
Block(s): 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415 
Tract: 0130. 
Block(s): 271, 272, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297 
VTD: 0034 VINEVILLE 01 
JONES COUNTY 
VTD: 0008 ROBERTS 4 (part) 
Tract: 0301.02 
Block(s): 904A, 914A, 914B, 927, 928, 929A, 930, 931, 932 
District: 2 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0012 GODFREY 03 
VTD: 0016 GODFREY 07 
VTD: 0019 HAZARD 05 
VTD: 0022 MACON 03 
VTD: 0023 HAZARD 01 
VTD: 0035 VINEVILLE 02 
VTD: 0036 VINEVILLE 03 
VTD: 0037 VINEVILLE 04 
VTD: 0038 VINEVILLE 05 
VTD: 0040 VINEVILLE 07 
VTD: 0043 MACON 02 
VTD: 0044 MACON 01 
District: 3 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0009 EM09 
VTD: 0024 HO 01 
VTD: 0025 HO 02 
VTD: 0026 HO 03 
VTD: 0027 HO 04 
VTD: 0028 HO 05 
VTD: 0029 HO 06 
VTD: 0030 HO 07 
VTD: 0031 HO 08 
VTD: 0039 VINEVILLE 06 
VTD: 0041 VINEVILLE 08 
VTD: 0042 VINEVILLE 09 
VTD: 0047 HAZARD 02 
District: 4 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0013 GODFREY 04 (part) 
Tract: 0128. 
Block(s): 101, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 217, 219, 222 
VTD: 0014 GODFREY 05 
VTD: 0015 GODFREY 06 
VTD: 0017 GODFREY 08 
VTD: 0018 GODFREY 09 
VTD: 0020 HAZARD 06 
VTD: 0021 HAZARD 03 
VTD: 0032 RUTLAND 01 
VTD: 0033 RUTLAND 02 
VTD: 0045 WA 01 
VTD: 0046 WA 02 
VTD: 0048 HAZARD 04 
District: 5 
All of Bibb County and that part of Jones County included in district 1 as described above. 
(3)  For the purposes of this section: 
a.  The terms "voting district," "tract" or "census tract," "block group," and "block" shall mean and shall describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; 
b.  Whenever the description of any electoral district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; and 
c.  Any part of Bibb County which is not included in any district described in this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia. 
(4)  One member of the authority shall be elected to represent each electoral district. Each member shall reside within the district he or she represents. 
(c)  (1) In the 1992 general election, candidates shall be elected from districts 2 and 3. In the 1996 general election candidates shall be elected from districts 1, 4, and 5. Candidates elected from such districts shall take office on January 1 following their election and serve for a term of office of six years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors to the elected members of the authority shall be elected in the general election conducted immediately prior to the expiration of the term of office for which they offer as candidates, shall take office on January 1 following their election, and shall serve for terms of office of six years and until the election and qualification of their successors. Members of the authority from the City of Macon and Bibb County shall be appointed by the respective appointing body, and such members shall serve on the authority at the pleasure of each appointing body and only so long as they are members of the respective appointing body. 
(2)  The members of the authority in office on the effective date of this division shall continue in office until the expiration of the terms for which they are serving on the effective date of this division. 
(d)  Any person eligible to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia in Bibb and Jones Counties shall be deemed qualified to hold the office of elected member of the authority; provided, however, that no person shall be eligible to hold office, unless at the time of his or her election, he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years; provided, further, that he or she shall not remove his or her residence from his or her district during his or her term of office on pain of forfeiture thereof. 
(e)  All elections for members of the authority shall be conducted by the Macon-Bibb County Board of Elections in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), the Georgia Election Code, as the same now exists or may hereafter exist. 
(f)  Should any vacancy occur among the elective members of the authority with respect to a term having more than 120 days to run, the remaining members of the authority shall forthwith notify the judge of the probate court who shall appoint a qualified person to serve until the next general election, at which time a successor shall be elected for the unexpired term. The appointee of the judge of the probate court shall serve until a successor shall have been elected and shall qualify. Any person so elected at such special election shall hold office for the unexpired term for which he or she was elected. If a vacancy occurs within 120 days from the expiration of the term of the elected member causing the vacancy, no such election shall be held, but the remaining or surviving members of the authority shall constitute the authority until the next election; provided, however, that appointments shall be made in any event and regardless of the time that the vacancy commences if the vacancy of a member causes more than one vacancy to exist on the authority. 
(g)  Immediately after election, all members of the authority shall give bond for the faithful performance of their duties in the sum of $10,000.00, payable to the Governor of the State of Georgia and approved by the judge of the Probate Court of Bibb County. 
(h)  The salary for each elected member of the authority shall be $5,400.00 per annum, payable monthly at the rate of $450.00. All members of the authority, elected and appointed, may be reimbursed for the actual expenses necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(i)  The authority shall have full power to organize, adopt rules for its government, and generally to direct the affairs of the authority. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the power of the authority to exercise all of the rights and powers of and perform all of the duties and obligations of the authority. 
(j)  The chairman of the authority shall be the member elected to represent district 5. 
(k)  A majority of the members in office shall constitute a quorum. The authority shall have perpetual existence; provided, however, that nothing contained in this division shall preclude the General Assembly of Georgia from amending this division. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(2); 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 371), § 1) 
Sec. 2-503. - Purpose. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this division, the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, and operating adequate water supply, treatment, and distribution facilities and sewerage collection, treatment, and distribution facilities and sewerage collection, treatment, and distribution facilities; making such facilities and the services thereof available to public and private consumers and users located in Bibb County and its environs, including municipalities inside and outside the county and to adjoining counties; extending and improving such facilities; acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, with the right to contract for the use of or to lease or sell any or all of such facilities, including real property, to any persons, firms, or corporations, whether public or private, if in the sole judgment of the authority such use, lease, or sale supports the general purposes of the authority; and, doing all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient, and desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such type of undertakings. 
The authority shall also have the purpose of assisting the City of Macon, Bibb County, and the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority with respect to industrial development as set forth in [subsection 2-504(19.1)]. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(3); 1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 296), page 4991, § 1) 
Sec. 2-504. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority. The authority shall be under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this division except from the funds provided under the authority of this division, and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned; provided, however, that the power of eminent domain shall not be exercised outside the limits of Bibb County; 
(4)  To enter into an agreement with Bibb County or the City of Macon with respect to acquiring a source of water supply, providing sewerage service, preparing engineering data, plans, and specifications for a water and sewerage system, extending water mains, apportioning the costs of constructing, extending, and maintaining a water or sewerage system, or both, providing for the testing and inspection of facilities constructed, providing for rates to be charged for water and sewerage services furnished to users of the system, providing for the reading of meters and keeping of pertinent records, apportioning or designating the responsibility for any functions normally maintained by a water and sewerage system, providing for the ownership of the various facilities constructed or acquired, and providing for such other matters or contingencies as might be necessary or desirable in order to secure for Macon and Bibb County a satisfactory and reliable water and sewerage system at the most reasonable cost possible; 
(5)  To appoint, select, and employ such officers, agents, and employees as shall be necessary in the judgment of the authority to accomplish the purposes of the authority, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys; to fix their respective compensation; and, to provide for pension and retirement plans for these officers, agents, and employees; provided, however, that any contract for the design of a sewerage system shall contain a provision insuring proper supervision and inspection of the installation of the system, either by agreeing with the design engineer to supervise and inspect the installation or by agreeing that the supervision and inspection shall be performed by another engineer not associated with any contractor or subcontractor responsible for installing the system. The authority may require bond of any person handling funds of the authority; 
(6)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which the authority causes to be erected or acquired. Any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable. Without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations and counties and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of water or sewerage service and facilities, or both, by the authority to such municipal corporations and counties and by such municipal corporations and counties to the authority for a term not exceeding 50 years. As to any political subdivision, department, institution, or agency of this state which shall enter into an agreement under the authority granted in this paragraph or in paragraph (4) of this section, the obligation to perform and fulfill such agreement shall constitute a general obligation of such entity for which its full faith and credit shall be pledged; 
(7)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects, as defined in section 2-501(3), the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof; 
(8)  To make loans with and accept grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(9)  To make loans with and accept grants of money, materials, or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision may impose; 
(10)  To borrow money for any of the authority's corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(11)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to make short term loans and to approve, execute, deliver, or accept appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness; provided, however, that no such power is in conflict with the constitution or general laws of this state; 
(12)  The authority and any trustee acting under any trust indenture are specifically authorized from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange, or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real and personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the authority was created, except as such right and power might be limited as provided in section 2-542; 
(13)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, the authority may exercise any of its powers or provide any of its services inside the boundaries of any local government within Bibb County and, when authorized by contract with the governing authority thereof, within the limits of another municipality or county; 
(14)  The authority shall further have full and plenary power and duty to make and enforce rules and regulations for the management and operation of the water and sewerage systems which now exist and as hereafter added to, extended, or improved by any project or projects constructed under the provisions of this division; to prescribe, fix, and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished; and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this division to finance in whole or in part the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of the water and sewerage systems; and to pledge to the punctual payment of the bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto; and to classify and differentiate such rates, fees, tolls, or charges in any reasonable manner, including, but not limited to, consumers inside the corporate limits of the City of Macon and those outside such corporate limits, as to small, intermediate and large consumers and industrial, commercial, and residential consumers and, with respect to sewer rates, according to the amount of suspended solids and the biological oxygen demand of sewerage users. Additionally, and not in limitation of the foregoing, the authority, in fixing water or sewerage rates, or both, shall be fully authorized and empowered to comply with any state or federal acts and any lawful regulations adopted pursuant to any such act. As a limitation of the power of the authority, however, if at any time there are issued and outstanding revenue bonds for the payment of which the revenues of the authority are pledged, the authority shall make no decrease in rates for water and sewer service which will in any way impair the obligations contained in the revenue bonds; 
(15)  The authority shall further have the power to acquire insurance for its property, its authority members, and its officers and employees, including but not limited to fire, wind, storm, extended coverage insurance, and vehicular liability insurance; all other types of liability insurance; casualty insurance, fidelity insurance, comprehensive insurance, public officials liability insurance, general public liability insurance covering all hazards, group life insurance, group accident insurance, group health insurance, group hospitalization insurance, group medical insurance, or any combination thereof; together with any and all other types of insurance on its property, officers, authority members, and employees as the authority in its judgment and discretion deems meet and proper in the conduct of its business; and on such terms and conditions and in such amounts as the authority deems appropriate in its judgment and discretion; and with the payment of premiums and charges therefor, together with any other costs incident thereto, to be paid in whole or in part by the authority and out of the general funds of the authority as the authority may determine; 
(16)  The authority is further authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations providing for the suspension of service to delinquent customers. The authority, through its executive director, or such other employees as the authority designates, shall have the right and power to issue executions for any past due charges, which executions shall be a lien upon and against the land and other properties of the assessed party which lien shall be of equal priority, rank, and dignity having the same attributes rights, and powers as to collection and foreclosure thereof as an execution for unpaid ad valorem taxes of the State of Georgia or the County of Bibb; provided, however, that no such lien shall exist as to third parties until execution therefor shall have been issued by the authority and placed upon the general execution docket of the Superior Court of Bibb County. In the event that sewerage service is discontinued pursuant to this section, the appropriate health authorities shall be immediately notified; 
(17)  The authority shall continue to be liable for and obligated to fulfill, pay, extinguish, and discharge all obligations, debts, and liabilities of the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Macon existing at the time of the transfer, conveyance, and delivery of the properties and assets of the board of water commissioners to the authority, including, but not limited to, any and all outstanding and unpaid revenue certificates and revenue bonds heretofore issued by the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Macon, Georgia, and identified as follows: Water and Sewer Revenue Anticipation Certificates, Series 1955; Water and Sewerage Revenue Bonds, Series 1961; Water and Sewerage Revenue Bonds, Series 1970; Water and Sewerage Revenue Bonds, Series 1971; 
(18)  The authority shall further have the right and power to purchase, install, construct, repair, and replace fire hydrants on public property, together with all needful and necessary accessories and adjuncts thereto, in connection with existing or new water lines or mains of the authority and to defray and pay for any part or all of the cost and expense thereof, labor, material, and otherwise, utilizing any available funds of the authority therefor; 
(19)  The authority is authorized to: 
a.  Qualify, apply for, and obtain a license or permit, known as a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (N.P.D.E.S.) permit, or monetary grants for the collection, treatment, and discharge of waste waters pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," as amended, and the respective regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
b.  By regulations provide for the adoption, promulgation, administration, setting of standards and provisions for, regulating, enforcing, amending, monitoring, and compelling compliance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of a pretreatment program pertaining to the pretreatment of industrial waste-water effluent that is to be delivered into the authority's sewerage system and is to be treated by the waste-water treatment facilities of such authority, which pretreatment program shall include and comply with all requirements and provisions applicable thereto as set forth in both the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," as amended, and the respective regulations thereto; and additional restrictions that are required in order to allow the authority to comply with their N.P.D.E.S. permit; provided, however, that any regulations issued subsequent to the initial regulations issued pursuant to the authority in this act or any amendment to such initial regulation shall not go into effect until notice thereof has been advertised in the official organ of Bibb County at least twice, not later than 15 days prior to the effective date thereof, and until an opportunity for interested parties to be heard thereon has been provided at least five days before such effective date; 
c.  Make application to the Superior Court of Bibb County, Georgia, for injunctive relief against any person who has engaged in or is about to engage in any act or practice which constitutes or will constitute a violation of any provision of such pretreatment regulations by seeking an order enjoining and restraining such act or practice. Upon a showing by the authority that such person has engaged in or is about to engage in any such act or practice, a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or other order shall be granted without the necessity of showing a lack of adequate remedy at law; 
d.  To provide that any person, firm, or corporation that fails to comply with any of the pretreatment standards or requirements set forth in such pretreatment regulations shall be liable to civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for each day during which such noncompliance continues. The executive director of the authority, or such other employee the authority designates, after a hearing shall determine whether or not any such person is in noncompliance of any such standard or requirement and may, upon a proper finding, issue his order imposing such civil penalties as provided in this act. Any person so penalized is entitled to judicial review. In this connection, all hearings and proceedings for judicial review shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-13-19 and venue shall be in the Superior Court of Bibb County. All penalties recovered by the executive director shall be paid into the general treasury of the authority and to the credit of its general fund; 
e.  In any instance of an emergency, where there is a violation of a regulation of the pretreatment program of the authority or where a condition exists which presently causes or where the continuance of which causes (i) a present danger to the life or health of persons or (ii) is permanently and seriously damaging water or wastewater treatment equipment or facilities, the executive director, or such employee as the authority designates, is authorized to immediately terminate water or sewer service, or both, as is necessary to stop and eliminate such danger or damage; and 
f.  Upon the issuance of any order assessing a civil penalty and after the expiration of 30 days following the date of any such order, with no appeal taken as provided in O.C.G.A. § 50-13-19, the authority, through and by its executive director, or such other employee as the authority designates, shall have the right and power to issue executions on any such order assessing a civil penalty, and, in the amount thereof, such execution shall be a lien upon and against the land and other properties of the assessed party which lien shall be of equal priority, rank, and dignity having the same attributes, rights, and powers as to collection and foreclosure thereof as an execution for unpaid ad valorem taxes of the State of Georgia or the County of Bibb; 
(19.1)  (A)  To enter into a contract or contracts with Bibb County, the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority, or both, with respect to acquiring and developing industrial sites and facilities, including, without limitation, the construction or renovation of buildings and facilities for lease or sale to industrial or other companies providing employment within Bibb County. The power granted by this paragraph (19.1) shall not extend to any activities used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment, reuse, or disposal of municipal solid waste as defined in paragraph (18) of Code Section 12-8-22. The authority may utilize its revenues from its water and sewer operations for the performance of such contracts; provided, however, such contracts shall not require nor permit the expenditure of authority funds in excess of $704,000.00 per annum nor an aggregate of more than $17,600,000.00 over the life of the contract; 
(B)  To create a revolving fund for the funding of the contracts authorized in subparagraph (A) or in anticipation of such contracts. Any funds paid into such fund by the authority shall be subject to the limitation provided in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph and funds deposited therein shall be utilized solely for the purposes authorized by said subparagraph (A). Any funds received by the authority from any contract authorized in said paragraph (A) not required to be utilized in the performance of such contract or contracts shall be deposited into such revolving fund so as to maintain the availability of funds for additional or new contracts of the same type or nature. Funds recovered from any such project and deposited into the revolving fund shall not be counted for the limitation purposes provided in said subparagraph (A); 
(C)  No contract authorized by this paragraph (19.1) shall extend for a period longer than 50 years; 
(D)  No contract will entered into pursuant to the authority of this paragraph (19.1) which would impair the payment of any obligations on revenue bonds issued by or on behalf of the authority; 
(E)  To pledge the payment of any funds authorized by this paragraph (19.1) to be used for any of the purposes set forth in this paragraph (19.1) to the repayment of any revenue bonds issued by the authority, the City of Macon, Bibb County, or the Development Authority of Bibb County for the purpose of raising funds to carry out the provisions of any contract or contracts entered into under the authority of this paragraph (19.1); and 
(F)  To use reasonable amounts of the funds authorized in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph to obtain options on property or properties sought to be acquired for the purposes set out in that subparagraph; and 
(20)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this division. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(5); 1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 296), page 4991, § 3) 
Sec. 2-505. - Petition for eight-inch water line. 
(a)  Upon the filing with the authority of a written petition signed by the owners of more than 50 percent of the lineal footage of land abutting a particular public, dedicated, and publicly utilized roadway, or portion thereof, in Bibb County, Georgia, requesting the authority to lay and construct therein an eight-inch water line to provide potable water to such property, setting forth factual data with respect thereto which the authority shall prescribe by resolution or ordinance, the authority with respect to the requested project shall have the right, power, and authority to: 
(1)  Verify the correctness of the factual data in the petition and ascertain the entire costs of the project which shall include all costs and expenses of material, labor, supervision, engineering, management, legal, overhead, and all other costs and expenses needful and necessary to the completion of the project; 
(2)  After advertisement and public hearing, as hereafter set out, assess two-thirds of the entire costs of said project to and against the respective landowners and their land, their pro rata cost of the project being based on their ownership of the lineal footage abutting the roadway, or portion thereof, involved; 
(3)  Ascertain the pro rata share of the respective landowners according to their ownership of lineal footage abutting the roadway, or portion thereof, involved which shall be calculated and determined as follows: deduct from the entire costs one-third thereof which shall be borne by the authority; the remaining two-thirds of the entire costs shall be divided by the total of the lineal footage of land abutting the roadway, or portion thereof, on both sides of such roadway and the quotient shall be the dollar amount per lineal frontage foot; such amount per lineal frontage foot multiplied by the total lineal footage of the land of each respective landowner abutting the roadway, or portion thereof, shall be the pro rata share of such landowner; 
(4)  Publish in The Macon Telegraph once a week during each of two calendar weeks a notice setting forth all the factual data of the project; setting a time, date, and place for a public hearing to be had which shall not be sooner than four days following the last date of the publication; setting forth that two-thirds of the entire costs are to be assessed against the landowners, as aforesaid, and that such assessments shall be due within 90 days following completion of the project and upon default of payment shall bear interest at the legal rate and that execution therefor will issue against the defaulting landowner and his involved land which will constitute a lien thereon having equal priority, rank, and dignity and having the same attributes, rights, and powers as to collection and foreclosure thereof as an execution for unpaid State of Georgia and County of Bibb ad valorem taxes; and 
(5)  Following the public hearing, the authority shall, within 30 days thereof, accept or reject the petition and, if accepted, shall proceed promptly with work on the project. 
(b)  The authority shall have the right and power by resolution or ordinance to assess two-thirds of the entire costs and expenses of an accepted project upon and against the respective owners and their land abutting the roadway based on their pro rata share as set forth in paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Assessments shall be due and payable, without interest, within 90 days following the date of notice thereof to the landowner by United States first class mail from the authority that such assessment is due; and, if the assessment is not paid within the 90-day period, the same shall bear interest at the legal rate. 
(d)  The authority shall have the right and power by ordinance or resolution to issue executions on any assessment that is in default, the same to be issued by the executive director, or such other officer as the authority designates, and such execution shall be a lien upon and against the involved land of the defaulting landowner and shall be of equal priority, rank, and dignity and having the same attributes, rights, and powers as to collection and foreclosure thereof as an execution for unpaid State of Georgia and County of Bibb ad valorem taxes. 
(e)  As to any execution issued by the authority, the landowner therein involved shall have the right to file an affidavit of illegality, denying that the whole or any part of the amount for which the execution issued is due and stating what amount is admitted to be due, if any, which amounts so admitted to be due shall be paid and collected before the affidavit is received and the affidavit shall be received for the balance; provided, however, that all such affidavits shall set out in detail the reasons why the affiant claims the amount is not due and when such affidavit is received by the authority the same shall be returned to the Superior Court of Bibb County, there to be tried and the issue shall be determined as in cases of affidavits of illegality to ad valorem tax executions, subject to all the pains and penalties provided for in other cases of illegality for delay as provided by law. 
(f)  The authority is authorized to adopt by ordinance or resolution any and all reasonable rules and regulations implementing and effectuating the foregoing rights and powers so as to fairly and equitably apply and enforce such rights and powers. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(6)) 
Sec. 2-506. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this division, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as proceeds of short-term loans, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this division. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(25)) 
Sec. 2-507. - Audits. 
The books of the authority shall be audited annually by a competent certified public accountant, and an operating statement and a balance sheet showing the affairs of the authority shall be published annually in the official organ of Bibb County. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(26)) 
Sec. 2-508. - Tax-exempt status of the authority. 
The properties of the authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the State of Georgia and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city, county, or the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(27)) 
Sec. 2-508. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this division shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(28)) 
Sec. 2-509. - Power cumulative. 
This division does not in any way take from Bibb County or the City of Macon or any other municipality located in Bibb County or in any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain water, sanitary sewerage, and water pollution control facilities, or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.), the Revenue Bond Law; but the powers granted by this division to the authority shall be in addition to and cumulative of all other powers now or hereafter given to any municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(31)) 
Secs. 2-510—2-525. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Revenue Bonds 

Sec. 2-526. - Financing projects. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created in this division, shall have power and is authorized at one time, or from time to time, to borrow money for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost, as defined in this division, of any one or more projects and to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for that purpose. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this section for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not to exceed the maximum limit prescribed in O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.), the Revenue Bond Law, as now or hereafter amended, shall be payable semiannually, and shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(7)) 
Sec. 2-527. - Form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(8)) 
Sec. 2-528. - Signatures; seal. 
All such bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman of the authority and the attesting manual or facsimile signature of the secretary of the authority, and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto. The signature of one of such officers shall be placed manually on each bond. Any coupons attached thereto shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman or the secretary of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of such person and any bond may bear the facsimile signature of and may be manually signed, sealed, and attested to on behalf of the authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he or she had remained in office until such delivery. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(9)) 
Sec. 2-529. - Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this division shall have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to negotiable instruments. Such bonds are declared to be issued for essential public and governmental purposes, and the bonds, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(10)) 
Sec. 2-530. - Sale; price. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interests of the authority. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(11)) 
Sec. 2-531. - Proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit which, unless otherwise provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund provided for in this division to be used for paying the principal of and the interest on such bonds. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(12)) 
Sec. 2-532. - Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(13)) 
Sec. 2-533. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(14)) 
Sec. 2-534. - Conditions precedent to issue; object of issue. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this division. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this division shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolutions may be passed at any regular, special, or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of the quorum as provided in this division. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(15)) 
Sec. 2-535. - Credit not pledged; special power of contract. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this division shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the City of Macon or of Bibb County or a pledge of the faith and credit of the city or the county, but the bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this act, and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section; provided, however, that the City of Macon and Bibb County are authorized to contract with each other and with the authority for any of the undertakings authorized in this division. Such city and county may in connection therewith, jointly or severally, use any funds from any lawful source or from the proceeds of the issue and sale of bonds for such purpose. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(16)) 
Sec. 2-536. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank inside or outside the state having the power of a trust company. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, charges, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys; and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority who are satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor; and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or any other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of the bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of private corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholder. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(17)) 
Sec. 2-537. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in any trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such bonds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this division and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(18)) 
Sec. 2-538. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, charges, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, tolls, charges, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund, which sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of: 
(1)  The interest on such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  The necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal, interest; and 
(4)  Any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as provided in this section. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in any trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds, and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(19)) 
Sec. 2-539. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this division or any of the coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights provided for in this division may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by any trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted under this division or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this division or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(20)) 
Sec. 2-540. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this division and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this division insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(21)) 
Sec. 2-541. - Jurisdiction and venue. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this division or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Bibb County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this division shall likewise be brought in such court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions; provided, however, that the venue of any action against the authority shall be in the superior court of the county in which the power of the authority is exercised or services are provided by the authority if the act giving rise to such action is committed within such county. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(22)) 
Sec. 2-542. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 82, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.), the Revenue Bond Law, as now or hereafter amended. The petition for validation shall also make defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority to furnish or receive the services and facilities of the water and sewerage system for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated, and the judgment of validation, shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds against the authority issuing the same and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality contracting with the Macon Water Authority. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(23)) 
Sec. 2-543. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of the authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. The provisions of this act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to abrogate or in any way impair the obligations of any revenue bonds issued as of the effective date of this division which have water revenues or sewer revenues derived from either the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Macon or the Macon-Bibb County Water and Sewerage Authority pledged as their security. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665), page 4991, § 1(24)) 
CHAPTER 3. - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 3-1. - Local constitutional amendment authorizing building regulations. 
The County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb are authorized, without further approval or authority other than the action of said board, to prescribe, administer and enforce rules, regulations and standards for building, construction or installation of any kind or character, and for electrical and plumbing fixtures and appliances and the installation thereof, and for safe and sanitary maintenance of such building, construction, installation, electrical and plumbing fixtures and appliances, and the installation thereof, in and for that area of Bibb County lying outside the corporate limits of any incorporated municipality in said county. 
The County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb are authorized to vary the application, rigidity and uniformity of such rules, regulations, and standards in different and various areas and locations, in accordance with the needs and hazards of each such area or locality and the welfare of its inhabitants. 
In administering and enforcing such rules, regulations and standards, the County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb are hereby authorized, in their discretion, to utilize employees, officials and facilities of Bibb County, or those of the City of Macon, and/or the Macon-Bibb County Board of Health and/or of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission or employees, officials or facilities in common with any or all of them. 
The County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb are authorized to levy an ad valorem tax upon the taxable properties within Bibb County and/or to fix and collect permit and inspection fees to pay the expense of administering and enforcing such rules, regulations or standards. Such permit and inspection fees may be collected in the same manner as provided by law for the collection of ad valorem taxes. 
Violators of such rules, regulations or standards shall be tried in the State Court of Bibb County, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by the laws of Georgia pertaining to that court; except that penalties and punishment shall not exceed 60 days in the Bibb County jail and a fine of $300.00, either or both, each day's violation constituting a separate offense. 
(1953 (Nov.-Dec. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 196), page 491, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VI, § XVII, ¶ I, was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-116, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws, page 5112. 
Sec. 3-2. - Regulation of structures outside of cities. 
Said board [of commissioners] is further authorized and empowered to pass necessary rules and ordinances regulating buildings, fences, and similar structures within the limits of said county and other than within the incorporated limits of an incorporated town or city, and to require a permit from said county board of commissioners for the erection of any building, fence, or similar structure where in the opinion of said county board of commissioners the erection of any such building, fence, or structure is so located with reference to other buildings, fences, or structures, or with reference to properties belonging to other parties as to make it to the public interest to have such building, fence, or structure conform to regulations and standards adopted by said board of county commissioners, and said board is further empowered to require the payment of such reasonable fees as may be fixed by the board for the issuance of such permit and the expense of necessary inspection for the purpose of seeing that such rules and regulations are complied with. 
(1)  Anyone erecting any building, fence, or other similar structure within the area aforesaid without first obtaining a permit therefor, where such permit is required, or failing or refusing to comply with any of the rules, regulations, and standards adopted by said board of county commissioners, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction therefor shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $50.00 or imprisonment, not exceeding 30 days, either one or both, in the discretion of the presiding judge. 
(1945 Ga. Laws (Act No. 194), page 863, § 1(2)) 
CHAPTER 4. - BUSINESSES 

Sec. 4-1. - Local constitutional amendment authorizing regulation of businesses. 
In the interest of the welfare of Bibb County and its inhabitants, the governing authority of Bibb County may, in its discretion and from time to time, and without further authority than provided hereby and by ratification hereof: 
Prescribe, levy, assess and collect license fees and taxes, either or both, against and from all persons, firm and corporations (except those subject to regulation by the state public service commission), conducting business in any area of Bibb County outside the incorporated limits of municipalities, make classifications of the same and apply to such classifications different and varying license fees and taxes, using for any such classifications any reasonable factors, including the gross and net receipts, either or both, of any such business enterprise; 
Prescribe and enforce regulations concerning any of the aforesaid business enterprises or classifications of the same and the persons, firms and corporations conducting the same. Any such license tax and fee shall, from the time it is prescribed, be a lien upon the assets and properties of the business to which it is applicable, and may be collected in the same manner as provided by law for the collection of ad valorem taxes due to Bibb County. Any person, firm or corporation violating any applicable regulation prescribed or failing to pay any applicable license fee or tax shall be subject to prosecution and punishment, as for a misdemeanor, in the State Court of Bibb County. 
(1961 Ga. Laws (Act No. 130-383), page 611, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VI, § I, ¶ III was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-119, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws, page 5129. 
CHAPTER 5. - COURTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Supplementation of superior courts judges' salaries. 
(a)  The salary of the judges of the Superior Courts of the Macon Judicial Circuit shall be supplemented by payments out of the treasuries of Bibb County, Peach County, and Crawford County as follows: 
(1)  Out of the treasury of Bibb County, the salary of each judge shall be supplemented in the amount of $13,000.00 per annum; 
(2)  Out of the treasury of Peach County, the salary of each judge other than the senior judges shall be supplemented in the amount of $3,000.00 per annum; 
(3)  Out of the treasury of Crawford County, the salary of each judge other than the senior judges shall be supplemented in the amount of $1,000.00 per annum. 
(b)  The senior judges of the Superior Court of the Macon Judicial Circuit shall each receive a supplement equal to two-thirds of the supplement paid out of the treasury of Bibb County to the judges of the Superior Courts of the Macon Judicial Circuit. Such supplement shall be paid out of the treasury of Bibb County. 
(c)  The supplemental payments provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be paid in equal monthly installments by the governing authorities of the respective counties or other authorities having control of expenditures of county funds. 
(1973 Ga. Laws (Act No. 78), page 176, § 1; 1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 644), page 343, § 1; 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 191), page 4286, § 1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Transfer of county intake and probation services to state. 
Pursuant to the authority provided under O.C.G.A. § 15-11-9.1, the transfer of the intake and probation services of the Juvenile Court of Bibb County to the department of human resources to become a part of the statewide juvenile intake and probation services and to be fully funded by the department is approved. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 814), page 5600, § 1) 
Sec. 5-3. - Supplementation of district attorney's salary. 
(a)  The salary of the district attorney of the Macon Judicial Circuit shall be supplemented by payments out of the treasuries of Bibb County, Peach County and Crawford County in the following amounts: 
(1)  Out of the treasury of Bibb County, the salary of said district attorney shall be supplemented in the amount of $3,425.00 per annum. 
(2)  Out of the treasury of Peach County, the salary of the district attorney shall be supplemented in the amount of $1,200.00 per annum. 
(3)  Out of the treasury of Crawford County, the salary of the district attorney shall be supplemented in the amount of $600 per annum. 
(b)  The supplemental payments provided for in subsection (a) shall be paid monthly by the governing authorities of the respective counties or other authorities having control of expenditures of county funds. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision contained in this section, the governing authorities of Bibb County, Peach County, or Crawford County may by resolution provide for a supplemental payment in any amount in excess of the amounts provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(1973 Ga. Laws (Act No. 78), page 0176, § 2; 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 98), page 4009, § 1) 
Secs. 5-4—5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE COURT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 438), page 3302 renamed the City Court of Macon the State Court of Bibb County. The text of the 1966 act has not been codified; however, all references to the City Court of Macon are changed to State Court of Bibb County. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-26. - Created. 
The State Court of Bibb County is hereby established and created with civil and criminal jurisdiction over the whole County of Bibb. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § I) 
Sec. 5-27. - Jurisdiction; costs. 
Said State Court of Bibb County shall have jurisdiction to try and dispose of all civil cases of whatsoever nature, but in all suits brought in said court in sums of $100.00 or less, the plaintiff shall only receive magistrate court costs, except in those cases over which exclusive jurisdiction is vested in the superior courts by the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; always provided, that said State Court of Bibb County shall not have power to correct errors in inferior jurisdiction by writ of certiorari, and said state court shall not have power to issue writs of mandamus or prohibition, or quo warranto, or to foreclose mortgages on real estate. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § II) 
Sec. 5-28. - Jurisdiction in criminal cases. 
Said State Court of Bibb County shall have jurisdiction to try and dispose of all criminal cases, when the offender is not subjected to loss of life or confinement in the penitentiary, committed in the County of Bibb. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § III) 
Sec. 5-29. - Issuance of writs of habeas corpus. 
The judge of said state court shall have power to issue writs of habeas corpus, and to hear and dispose of the same in the same way and with the same power as the judge of the superior court. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § X) 
Sec. 5-30. - Enforcement powers. 
The judge of said state court shall have the same power to enforce his orders, to preserve order, punish for contempt and to enforce all his judgments as is vested by law in the judges of the superior courts of this state. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXV) 
Sec. 5-31. - Court of record; records; minutes; duties of officers. 
Said State Court of Bibb County shall be a court of record, and shall have a seal, and the minutes, records, order and other books and files that are required by law and rules to be kept for the superior court shall be kept in and for said state court and in the same manner, and all laws applicable to the duties of the clerk and sheriff in said superior court shall apply to them in said state court, except where they conflict with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Provided further that the clerk of the State Court of Bibb County, or other officer now or hereafter authorized by law to perform the duties now performed by the clerk of said court, is hereby authorized to install and use microfilm photographic equipment and to utilize said equipment in recording all original papers, and said clerk as aforesaid is authorized to destroy all such original court papers after obtaining an appropriate order of the court relating thereto. The judge of the State Court of Bibb County is authorized and empowered to order the destruction of such records as, in his opinion, are no longer needed. 
(2)  The clerk shall first cause microfilms of all records to be made capable of development into photostatic copies prior to destruction thereof, and photostatic copies of any such records produced from such microfilms shall be received in any court of this state as primary evidence when properly authenticated. 
(3)  When such records are microfilmed, adequate equipment for viewing the microfilm of such records shall be maintained, and such equipment shall be provided by the County Commissioners of Bibb County out of county funds. 
(4)  No provision of this section shall be construed to change or repeal any rule of court or any provision of law relating to records on appeal for review in the courts of this state. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXIII; 1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 827), page 2780, § 1) 
Sec. 5-32. - Terms. 
The regular terms of said State Court of Bibb County shall be held bimonthly, beginning on the first Mondays in January, March, May, July, September and November in each year. The first term of the court under this article shall be the May term, 1941. The judge of said court shall have power to hold said court in session at such regular terms from day to day as long as he may deem necessary for the purpose of disposing of the business of said court, both civil and criminal, and said terms shall continue in session from the beginning of each term until finally adjourned by the judge. At such terms the judge, in his discretion, may impanel 36 jurors, from which number a panel of 24 jurors may be made for the trial of all cases, and for this purpose the judge may cause tales traverse jurors to be summoned. 
(1897 Ga. Laws (Act No. 266), page 495, § 2; 1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 266), page 495, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— The title of the 1897 act purported to amend 1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, but the text did not. The 1897 act, as amended, supersedes § XI of the 1884-1885 act, as amended by 1890-1891 Ga. Laws, vol. II, (Act No. 304), page 947, § I. 
Sec. 5-33. - Place for holding court; keeping records. 
The County Board of Commissioners of Bibb County shall provide a suitable place for the holding of said state court, and provide the necessary books for keeping the dockets, minutes and records of said state court. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XLIV) 
Sec. 5-34. - Costs. 
The costs in said [state] court for all civil proceedings shall be the same as are now or as may hereafter be provided for civil cases in the superior courts of this state. 
(1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1462), page 3838, § 1) 
Editor's note— The 1972 act added the above section as § 9A of 1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470. 
Sec. 5-35. - Clerk to collect costs, fees; purpose. 
It shall be the duty of the clerk of said [state] court to collect all costs, fines and forfeitures, and other fees in cases, both civil and criminal, in said court, and to pay the same monthly to the treasurer of the County of Bibb to be deposited by said treasurer in the general treasury of said county, and such funds shall be appropriated for any public purpose, including but not limited to, the athletic program of the public school system in Bibb County. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of this section that the athletic program of the public school system in Bibb County is a public purpose. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § IX; 1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 196), page 103, § 3; 1970 Ga. Laws (Act No. 881), page 2324, § 2(9)) 
Sec. 5-36. - Bailiffs. 
The judge of said State Court of Bibb County is hereby authorized and empowered to appoint at each term of said court not exceeding four bailiffs as officers of said court. 
(1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 196), page 103, § 8) 
Sec. 5-37. - Compensation of officers; payment. 
(a)  The compensation of all other officers of said [state] court, to wit: the judge, solicitor, criminal bailiff appointed by said solicitor with the approval of the judge, and the court reporter of said court, shall be fixed in like manner as that of the clerk of said court and paid as the salary of said clerk is paid; provided the salaries already fixed by said board of county commissioners for all of said officers shall continue through August 31, 1935, the end of the present fiscal year of said county. 
(b)  After said salaries have been so fixed, the same shall be paid monthly on the 1st of each month for the preceding month to the officers entitled thereto, said funds to be paid out of the treasury of Bibb County as other salaries payable by said county are now paid. 
(c)  When the salaries of the said officials have been fixed as aforesaid, same shall be, as to all of said officials, the sole and only compensation of said officials, for services rendered in their official capacities in the City Court of Macon; and the provisions of any prior Act or law, general or local, fixing any different compensation or any different manner of fixing the compensation of said officers is hereby expressly repealed. 
(1933 Ga. Laws (Act No. 151), page 345, §§ 2, 3; 1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 138), page 532, § 2) 
Editor's note— Subsection (a) is derived from the 1935 act. Subsections (b) and (c) are derived from the 1933 act. Section 1 of the 1933 act was superseded by the 1935 act. The title of the 1935 act purported to amend 1884-1885 Georgia Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, but the text of § 2 thereof did not amend such act. 
Sec. 5-38. - Expenses of the court. 
The compensation of the officers of said city court, as herein provided for, as well as the salary of the judge of said court, is hereby declared to be a part of the legitimate expenses of said State Court of Bibb County. 
(1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 196), page 103, § 6) 
Secs. 5-39—5-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUDGE 

Sec. 5-51. - Election; term; vacancy. 
There shall be a Judge of said State Court of Bibb County, who shall be elected by the qualified voters of Bibb County, at the general state election in the year 1942 and quadrennially thereafter and the returns shall be made and the result declared in the same manner as provided by law for elections of state house officers. Said judge shall hold office for four years and until his successor is elected and qualified and the term of office of the judge first elected shall begin Jan. 1, 1943. The judge of said court shall be commissioned by the governor. All vacancies in the office of judge shall be filled by appointment of the governor until the first day of January after the general election held next after the expiration of 30 days from the time such vacancy occurs, at which election a successor for the unexpired term shall be elected. Provided that nothing herein contained shall in anywise affect the term of office of the present incumbent. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § IV; 1897 Ga. Laws (Act No. 266), page 485, § 1; 1939 Ga. Laws (Act No. 99), page 485, § 1) 
Sec. 5-52. - Qualifications; oath; authority. 
Any person who shall be elected judge of said state court must at the time of said election be at least 27 years of age; he must also have been a resident of Bibb County at least four years immediately preceding his election, and he must also have been a practicing attorney at law at least five years before his election, and he shall, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his office, take and subscribe the following oath: 
"I solemnly swear that I will administer justice without respect to persons, and do equal right to the poor and the rich, and that I will faithfully and impartially discharge and perform all the duties which may be required of me as Judge of the State Court of Bibb County of this state, according to the best of my ability and understanding agreeably to the laws and constitution of this state and the constitution of the United States. So help me God:" 
and said oath shall immediately thereafter be forwarded to the governor and filed in the executive department; said judge shall not practice law; he shall have authority to issue criminal warrants, warrants to dispossess tenants holding over and intruders, to issue distress warrants and generally to do all acts which the Judges of the county courts of this state are authorized to do, unless otherwise provided in this article." 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § V; 1939 Ga. Laws (Act No. 99), page 485, § 2) 
Sec. 5-53. - Designation of temporary replacement judge. 
Whenever the judge of said state court is unable, from any cause, to discharge the duties of his office, or from any cause is disqualified or prevented from presiding; or whenever, in the opinion of said judge, the business of said court is congested, the said judge shall have the power to designate a judge of a superior court or a judge of a city court to preside in said State Court of Bibb County; and the said judge of the said State Court of Bibb County shall have the power and authority to appoint some competent attorney at law resident of Bibb County, as judge pro tem of said court, to preside in said court in his stead, in the trial of both civil and criminal cases, and the attorney so appointed as judge pro tem, when the appointment is entered upon the minutes of said court, shall exercise all the functions of the judge thereof. The compensation of said attorney for actual services as judge pro tem and/or the presiding judge of the superior or city court shall be $100.00 per diem, to be paid as the other officers of said court are paid. The County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb are authorized in their discretion, to pay in addition to the per diem compensation set forth above, and similarly from the funds of Bibb County, the actual expense of persons, nonresident of Bibb County, which expenses are incurred by such persons in serving as such judge pro tem. 
(1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 196), page 103, § 7; 1949 Ga. Laws (Act No. 21), page 91, § 1; 1953 Ga. Laws (Nov.-Dec. Sess.) (Act No. 639), page 2516, § 1; 1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1174), page 3899, § 1) 
Editor's note— The title of the 1915 act stated that it amended 1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, but the text of § 7 of the 1915 act did not. 
Sec. 5-54. - Disqualification of judge. 
Whenever the judge of said state court is from any cause disqualified from presiding, and the judge of the superior court cannot from any cause preside in said court, as provided for in the constitution, then, upon consent of the parties, or upon their failure or refusal to agree, said cause shall be tried by a judge pro hac vice, selected in the same manner as now provided for in the superior courts. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XLI) 
Secs. 5-55—5-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLICITOR, CLERK AND OTHER PERSONNEL 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 5-71. - Appointment of clerk; term; compensation; deputy clerks. 
There shall be a clerk of said [state] court, who shall be appointed by the judge thereof. Said clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of this office, take and subscribe an oath to faithfully and impartially discharge the duties thereof, which oath shall be entered on the book of minutes of said court; he shall also, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute a bond with good security, to be approved by the judge of said court, in the sum of $10,000.00 conditioned to account for all money which may come into his hands as clerk, and for the faithful discharge of the duties of his office. He shall hold his office during the pleasure of the judge of said court. Said clerk shall receive, in lieu of fees in both civil and criminal cases, a salary to be fixed annually, on either a calendar or fiscal year basis, by the County Board of Commissioners of Bibb County, to be paid monthly out of the treasury of Bibb County by the person or persons charged by law with paying out the money of said county. The judge of said court shall have the power to appoint a deputy clerk of said court, who shall serve during the pleasure of said judge. Said deputy clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe an oath to faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of his office, which oath shall be entered on the book of minutes of said court. He shall also, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute a bond with good security, to be approved by the judge of said court, in the sum of $10,000.00, conditioned to account for all money which may come into his hands as deputy clerk and for the faithful discharge of the duties of his office. The compensation of said deputy clerk shall be fixed annually, on either a calendar or fiscal year basis, by the County Board of Commissioners of Bibb County, to be paid as the salary of said clerk is paid. Appointments of a deputy clerk heretofore made by the clerk of the city court are hereby terminated. 
Positions for one or more additional deputy clerks may be created, from time to time, by authority, jointly exercised, of the then judge of said court and county board of commissioners. Appointments to such positions shall be made by the judge but the tenure of any incumbent shall continue only so long as the aforesaid judge and board are jointly agreeable thereto. The compensation of such additional deputy clerks shall be determined by the aforesaid county board of commissioners. The additional deputy clerks shall each give bond with good security, to be approved by the judge, in the sum of $3,000.00, conditioned to account for all money received as deputy clerk and for the faithful discharge of the duties of office. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § VII; 1890-1891, Vol. II Ga. Laws (Act No. 304), page 947, § 2; 1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 196), page 103, § 2; 1920 Ga. Laws (Act No. 422), page 359, § 1; 1921 Ga. Laws (Act No. 163), page 378, § 1; 1925 Ga. Laws (Act No. 349), page 461, § 1; 1929 Ga. Laws (Act No. 233), page 450, § 1; 1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 138), page 532, § 1; 1958 Ga. Laws (Act No. 165), page 2588, § 1; 1970 Ga. Laws (Act No. 987), page 2577, § 1) 
Sec. 5-72. - Warrant officer. 
There shall be a warrant officer of Bibb County who shall serve the State Court of Bibb County and other appropriate courts in Bibb County. The powers and duties of the warrant officer shall consist of the hearing of applications for and the issuance of arrest warrants. The warrant officer provided herein shall issue peace warrants, felony warrants, and misdemeanor warrants returnable to the appropriate court in Bibb County. The warrant officer shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the judge of the State Court of Bibb County. The compensation of the warrant officer shall be fixed by the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County and paid from funds of Bibb County. The warrant officer shall be qualified and trained in legal matters relevant to his duties but shall not be required to be an attorney. 
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 367), page 4220, § 1) 
Editor's note— The 1983 act added the above section as § 7.1 of 1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470. 
Sec. 5-73. - Sheriff; bond; powers; authority of judge over officers. 
The Sheriff of Bibb County shall be ex-officio Sheriff of the State Court of Bibb County, and in his official connection with said court, he shall be known as the Sheriff of the State Court of Bibb County; before entering on the discharge of the duties of his office, he shall execute a bond with good security in the sum of $5,000.00 for the faithful discharge of the duties of his office; he shall have power to appoint a deputy or deputies with the consent of said judge; all the duties and liabilities attached to the office of clerk of the superior court and to the office of sheriff shall be attached to the office of Clerk of the State Court of Bibb County, and to the office of Sheriff of the State Court of Bibb County respectively, and the Judge of said State Court of Bibb County is empowered to exercise the same authority over the said clerk and sheriff and his deputy or deputies as is exercised by the judge of the superior courts over the clerks of the superior courts and sheriffs of the counties in Georgia. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § VIII) 
Sec. 5-74. - Reporter and secretary. 
(a)  The Judge of the State Court of Bibb County shall have the power to appoint, and at pleasure to remove, an official court reporter of said court. Such reporter, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall be duly sworn in open court faithfully to perform all the duties required of him under this section, and it shall be his duty to attend all sessions of the court for which he is appointed, and when directed by the judge, to exactly and truly record or take stenographic notes of the testimony and proceedings in cases tried, except the arguments of counsel, and he shall also act as secretary to the judge of said court and perform such other duties as the judge may require. 
(b)  When any party to any civil case desires such case to be reported, said court reporter shall record the proceedings therein, for which he shall receive the rate of $0.12 per 100 words, this expense to be shared equally by both parties to the case. 
(c)  All moneys collected by said reporter for reporting the testimony and proceedings in all civil cases which shall be reported by him shall be paid by said reporter to the Treasurer of Bibb County on or before the tenth day of the month following their collection. 
(d)  Upon the failure of any party to pay the costs of reporting as provided in this section, judgment shall be entered up against said party for the costs of reporting, on which judgment the State Court of Bibb County shall issue an execution in the name of the court reporter for the use and benefit of the County Board of Commissioners of Bibb County, and the money arising therefrom shall be paid to the Treasurer of Bibb County by the tenth day of the following month after collection is made. 
(e)  The compensation of the court reporter and secretary shall be fixed annually by the Board of County Commissioners of Bibb County at the same time as the compensation is fixed for the other officers of the court and shall be paid in the same manner as the other officers of the court receive their compensation. The compensation so fixed shall be the sole compensation of the secretary and court reporter for his services as secretary and reporting civil proceedings. 
(1950 Ga. Laws (Act No. 615), page 2259, §§ 1—5) 
Editor's note— While the title of 1950 Ga. Laws (Act No. 615), page 2259 purported to amend 1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, the text did not. 
Sec. 5-75. - Chief probation officer. 
(a)  The judge of the State Court of Bibb County or its successor in name may appoint a chief probation officer and such assistants as he may deem necessary, who shall have supervision and oversight over all probationers under the criminal jurisdiction of this court. It shall be the duty of such judge to appoint such person or persons as seem best qualified for the duties devolving upon a probation officer to serve during the pleasure of the court making the appointment, and to fix the salary which shall be paid out of the county treasury as a part of the court expenses. It is further provided that the judge making the appointment in accordance with the provisions of this article may require of said appointee a bond in such sum and with such security, as the court making the appointment may deem proper. 
(b)  The chief probation officer and such assistants as the court shall appoint shall perform all of the duties and carry out all of the orders required of them by the judge of said court and in the performance of said duties shall have all of the rights, powers and duties prescribed for a county probation officer as set out in Georgia Laws 1913, pp. 112—114, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, including specifically, insofar as necessary to the performance of their official duties, all of the powers of police officers. 
(c)  The probation office created hereby shall be entitled to all of the rights and privileges any other officer or employee of the State Court of Bibb County or its successor in name is presently or may hereinafter be entitled to receive and said employee of said probation office shall be entitled to the same retirement rights and privileges heretofore or hereinafter enacted which affects employees of the State Court of Bibb County or its successor in name. 
(1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 432), page 3292, §§ 1—3) 
Secs. 5-76—5-90. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Solicitor 

Sec. 5-91. - Duties; fees; stenographer. 
The solicitor-general of the Macon Judicial Circuit shall prosecute, for all offenses cognizant before said State Court of Bibb County; but in his absence from said court, the judge shall have power to appoint a solicitor-general pro tem, who shall receive the same fees as are allowed by law to the solicitor-general in cases conducted by him. The fees of the solicitor-general in said state court shall be, until January 1, 1917, as now allowed by law; from and after January 1, 1917, the fees of the solicitor of said state court, herein created, to be collected and disposed of as hereinafter set forth, shall be as follows: For every case prosecuted to trial or plea of guilty which originates by accusation in said city court, or which is transferred to said state court from the Superior Court of Bibb County $10.00; for representing the state in each case carried to the court of appeals from said state court $15.00; for all services for which this article does not provide he shall receive the same fees as are now allowed by law to solicitors-general for similar services in the superior court. There shall be a solicitor of said court, to be elected by the qualified voters of Bibb County, at the general state election in the year 1916 and quadrennially thereafter and the returns shall be made and the result declared in the same manner as provided by law for elections of county officers. Said solicitor shall hold office for four years and until his successor is elected and qualified and the term of office of the solicitor first elected shall begin January 1, 1917. Said solicitor shall possess the same qualifications as are now required of solicitors-general of this state, and vacancies in said office shall be filled as vacancies in the office of solicitors-general are now filled. It shall be the duty of said solicitor to prosecute for all offenses cognizant before said state court and he shall receive as full compensation for such services a salary of $3,600.00 per annum, to be paid in monthly installments out of the treasury of Bibb County as the judge of said court is paid. The salary of the solicitor, as herein provided, shall not be increased or diminished during his term of office, and his salary shall be his only compensation for the services rendered by him as said solicitor of the State Court of Bibb County. Before entering upon the duties of his office the said solicitor shall give bond payable to the Governor of Georgia, and his successors in office, with good security, to be approved by the judge of said court, in the sum of $5,000.00, conditioned to account for all money which may come into his hands as solicitor, and for the faithful discharge of the duties of said office and shall in addition to the oath required of civil officers take and subscribe the following oath: 
"I do swear that I will faithfully and impartially and without fear, favor or affection, discharge my duty as solicitor of the State Court of Bibb County; so help me God." 
Said bond and oath shall be entered on the minutes of the court by the clerk of the State Court of Bibb County and may be sued on by any person interested. In the event said solicitor is, from providential causes unable to perform the duties of his office, or is from any cause disqualified from acting, the judge of said court shall have power to appoint some competent attorney resident in Bibb County as solicitor pro tem for said court, and the attorney so appointed, when the appointment is entered upon the minutes of said court, shall exercise all of the functions of the solicitor, thereof. The compensation of said attorney for actual service as solicitor pro tem shall be $10.00 per diem, to be paid as the solicitor of said court is paid. It shall be the duty of said solicitor to collect all costs and fees due him as solicitor of said court and to pay the same monthly to the treasurer of the board of public education and orphanage for Bibb County for the use of the schools of said county, accompanied by a sworn, itemized statement thereof. 
(1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 196), page 103, § 1) 
The solicitor of said court, by and with the approval of the County Board of Commissioners of Bibb County, may from time to time employ a stenographer who shall perform such stenographic and clerical services in the office of the solicitor as may be required by such solicitor in connection with his official duties. The compensation of such stenographer shall be such sum as may be fixed therefor by the County Board of Commissioners for Bibb County, and when so fixed shall be paid on a monthly basis as a part of the expense of said court out of the treasury of Bibb County in the same manner that salaries of the officers of said state court are paid. The employment of such stenographer shall continue only so long as her services in the opinion of both the solicitor and a majority of the County Board of Commissioners for Bibb County are reasonably necessary to the efficient operation of the office of solicitor of said court; it being the intention of this section that at any time such services are deemed necessary by the solicitor and a majority of the members of said board such a stenographer may be employed, and at such times as either the solicitor or a majority of the said board of county commissioners shall consider such employment unnecessary the same shall be discontinued until such time as the solicitor and a majority of the members of said board again concur in the appointment of such stenographer; provided that at such times as the employment of a stenographer as herein provided may be authorized under the terms of this article, the solicitor of said court shall have the right and authority to designate such stenographer and in his discretion remove such stenographer. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § VI; 1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 196), page 103, § 1; 1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 29), page 692, § 1) 
Sec. 5-92. - Fees of solicitor in supreme court. 
The solicitor-general shall, for his services in the supreme court, be paid out of the treasury of the state, by warrant drawn by the governor upon certificate of the clerk of the supreme court as to the performance of such services, and the certificate of the clerk of the state court of the insolvency or acquittal of defendant. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XL) 
Sec. 5-93. - Assistant solicitors. 
(a)  The State Court of Bibb County is authorized to employ three full-time assistant solicitors. 
(b)  The solicitor of said court, by and with the approval of the judge of said court, shall appoint the assistant solicitors. The Board of County Commissioners of Bibb County shall provide funding for the assistant solicitors. 
(c)  The said assistant solicitor shall have the same authority as the Solicitor of the State Court of Bibb County to appear in court and to prosecute cases for the State of Georgia in said State Court of Bibb County; or to issue warrants, or to direct the issuance of warrants; he shall have the same authority to examine witnesses and conduct investigations into all matters within the jurisdiction of said court; he shall have the same authority to draw, prepare, sign, and file accusations, enter pleas, and to perform all other duties of the solicitor of said court. 
(d)  The said assistant solicitor shall be paid a salary out of the treasury of Bibb County, in the amount set by the board of commissioners of said county, in equal monthly installments. 
(e)  Said assistant solicitor may be removed from office at any time by the Solicitor of the State Court of Bibb County by and with the consent of the Judge of the State Court of Bibb County. In the absence of removal of the said assistant solicitor, he shall have a term of office concurrent with the term of office of the person appointing him, as solicitor, or his successor in office. 
(1953 Ga. Laws (Jan.-Feb. Sess.) (Act No. 464), page 3191, §§ 1, 2, 4, 5; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 380), page 2947, § 1; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 101), page 4248, § 1) 
Editor's note— While the title of the 1953 act purported to amend 1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, the text did not. 
Secs. 5-94—5-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROCEDURE AND RELATED MATTERS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 5-111. - Service of process. 
Suits in said state court shall in all respects be conformable to the mode of proceedings in the superior court, except as hereinafter provided, but the process to writs shall be annexed by the clerk of said state court, be tested in the name of the judge thereof, and may be directed to and served by the sheriff of the State Court of Bibb County or his deputies thereof, or may be directed to and served by the sheriff of the county of this state in which such service is to be made, or by his deputies thereof. The judge of said State Court of Bibb County is empowered, with respect to services and duties performed for said State Court of Bibb County, to exercise the same authority over the sheriff of Bibb County and his deputies as is exercised by the judge of the superior courts over the sheriffs of the counties in Georgia. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XII; 1957 Ga. Laws (Act No. 326), page 2867, § 1) 
Sec. 5-112. - Applicability of state law. 
In all matters pertaining to service, pleadings and practice, the laws governing the superior court, where not inconsistent with this act, and unless otherwise specially provided by this article, shall be applicable to said state court. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XIII) 
Sec. 5-113. - Applicability of rules of superior court. 
All rules of the superior court relating to continuances, motions, pleas and practice shall be applicable to said state court and shall obtain therein, except where they are in conflict with the provisions of this article. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXXIX; 1900 Ga. Laws (Act No. 60), page 144, § 5) 
Sec. 5-114. - Depositing of original petition of suits. 
The original petition of all suits filed in the State Court of Bibb County shall be deposited in the clerk's office. The day on which an original petition is deposited in the clerk's office shall be known as the return day of that petition. The day on which defensive pleadings shall be filed with respect to a petition shall be known as the appearance day of that case. The clerk shall endorse upon every petition the date of its filing in office, which shall be considered the time of commencement of the suit. All answers and other defensive pleadings shall be filed within 30 days after the service of the petition and process. If the period of time between the appearance day of a case and the day on which a regular term of court is scheduled by law to begin is 30 days or more, the same shall be deemed to be returnable to that term. If the period of time between the appearance day of a case and the day on which the next regular term of court is scheduled by law to begin is less than 30 days, the case shall be deemed to be returnable to the next regular term of court thereafter. No petition shall abate for lack of service until so ordered by the court. At the time the judge shall call the appearance docket, all cases in which defensive pleadings have not been filed within 30 days after the service of the petition and process as required herein shall then and there automatically be in default. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XLI; 1900 Ga. Laws (Act No. 60), page 144, § 4; 1967 Ga. Laws (Act No. 105), page 2289, § 1) 
Sec. 5-115. - Power of judge; jury trials. 
The judge of said state court shall have power and authority to hear and determine all civil causes of which the said court has jurisdiction, and to give judgment and execution thereon without the intervention of a jury; provided always, that either party in any cause shall be entitled to a trial by jury in said court upon entering a demand therefor, by himself or his attorney, in writing, before the close of the term to which the cause is returnable, in all cases where such party is entitled to a trial by jury under the constitution and laws of this state. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XIV; 1894 Ga. Laws (Act No. 91), page 214, § I) 
Sec. 5-116. - Suits, defenses. 
The general laws of this state with regard to the commencement of suits in the superior courts, defenses, setoff, affidavits of illegality, arbitration, examinations of parties to suits or witnesses by interrogatories or under subpoena, witnesses and their attendance, continuances or other matters of a judicial nature within the jurisdiction of said state court, shall be applicable to said state court. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXI) 
Sec. 5-117. - Waivers. 
In all cases in said state court, the same powers and rights of parties as to waivers in pleading or procedure, or other matters pertaining to the same, shall be allowed and upheld as are allowed and upheld by the laws and rules governing parties in the superior courts. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXXIV) 
Sec. 5-118. - New trials. 
The judge of said state court shall have power to grant a new trial in any case, civil or criminal, in his court, upon the same terms and conditions and under the same laws and regulations, in every respect, governing the granting of new trials in the superior courts. All rules of pleading, practice and procedure governing motions, rules nisi and other proceedings in new trials in the superior courts shall apply to and govern the same in said state court. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXXVI) 
Sec. 5-119. - Testimony de bene esse; oaths; attesting deeds; general powers of judge. 
The judge of said state court shall have power to cause testimony to be taken and used de bene esse, and for the purpose of perpetuating testimony within his jurisdiction in all cases according to the general laws of this state, and the judge and all other officers of said state court shall have power respectively to administer all oaths pertaining to their office as the judge and other officers of the superior court may in like cases do; and said judge shall also have power to attest deeds and other papers and administer affidavits in all cases anywhere in the state in which by existing laws such papers may be attested and affidavits administered by justices of the peace of this state, and the judge of said state court shall have all the powers and authority throughout his jurisdiction of judges of the superior courts, except where by law exclusive power and authority are vested in judges of the superior courts, and all laws relating to and governing judges of the superior courts shall apply to the judge of said state court, so far as the same may be applicable, except as herein provided. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXII) 
Sec. 5-120. - Writ of error. 
A writ of error shall be direct from the said state court to the supreme court of this state upon a bill of exceptions filed under the same rules and regulations as govern and control the issue of writs of error and filing of bills of exception in the superior courts of this state. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXXIII) 
Secs. 5-121—5-140. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Juries 

Sec. 5-141. - Qualifications, challenging, etc., of jurors. 
All laws in reference to the qualifications, relations, empaneling, fining and challenging jurors now of force in this state, or hereafter enacted by the General Assembly regulating the same in the superior courts, shall apply to and be observed in said state court, except when inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXVII) 
Sec. 5-142. - Jury lists; drawing of juries. 
It shall be the duty of the Clerk of said State Court of Bibb County to prepare and file in his office a complete copy of the traverse jury list of the Superior Court of Bibb County, as provided from time to time for such superior court. From said copy so made traverse jurors in said state court shall be drawn in the following manner: The Clerk of said State Court of Bibb County shall write upon separate tickets the names of each traverse juror, and shall number the same and place the same in a box to be prepared for that purpose, from which shall be drawn all traverse jurors as now required by law in the superior courts. All laws with reference to the drawing of, selecting and summoning traverse and tales traverse jurors in the superior courts shall apply to said state court. All exemptions from jury duty now of force in the County of Bibb shall apply and be of effect in said state court. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXVI) 
Sec. 5-143. - Traverse jurors; tales jurors; strikes in criminal and in civil cases. 
From said panel of 24 traverse jurors drawn and summoned by the provisions of this act, the judge of said state court shall cause to be made up two juries, which shall be known and distinguished as juries numbers one and two, and all cases and issues to be tried by jury, civil or criminal, at that term of said state court shall be tried by one of these, or by a jury stricken from both, as hereinafter provided. In case from any cause said panel should be reduced below 24, the judge of said court shall have power to fill it by causing talesmen to be summoned instanter. In criminal cases tried at a regular term of said court, the defendant shall be entitled to seven peremptory challenges and the state five, and in all civil cases the plaintiff and defendant shall be each entitled to six peremptory challenges, and all laws and rules, both civil and criminal, regulating the selection of juries in the superior courts shall apply to said state court, except where they are inconsistent with the terms of this act. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXVIII) 
Sec. 5-144. - Payment. 
The jurors in said state court shall receive the same per diem for their services as shall be fixed by the grand jury of said County of Bibb for the pay of jurors in the superior court of said county, which shall be paid in the same manner and under the same rules and regulations as to the jurors in said superior court. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXXVII; 1890-1891, Vol. II, Ga. Laws (Act No. 304), page 947, § III) 
Secs. 5-145—5-160. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Criminal Matters 

Sec. 5-161. - Duty of magistrates to commit to this court. 
It shall be the duty of all the magistrates and notaries public of Bibb County to bind over to said state court all persons charged with offenses committed within the limits of Bibb County, over which said state court has jurisdiction, to answer for said offenses. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXXI) 
Sec. 5-162. - Trials. 
The defendants in criminal cases in the State Court of Bibb County may be tried on written accusation setting forth plainly the offense charged, founded on affidavit made by the prosecutor. Said affidavit shall be made before the judge, clerk, or deputy clerk, and said accusation shall be signed by the prosecutor and prosecuting officer. Upon such affidavit, and accusation being made and signed and filed in the clerk's office of said court, it shall be the duty of the judge of said court to issue a warrant for the apprehension and arrest of the defendant, directed to the sheriff of said State Court of Bibb County or his deputy, and to all and singular the sheriffs and constables of said state. If the defendant demands a trial by jury, the judge of said court shall proceed with said cause, if at a regular term of said court, according to the rules and laws of the superior courts applicable to the trial of misdemeanors. If the defendant demands a trial by jury and the said court is not sitting at regular term, the judge shall admit the defendant to bail to appear at the next regular term, or on the defendant's failure to give bond shall commit him to jail until the next regular term of said court. Unless the defendant demands trial by jury, the said judge shall proceed to hear and determine such criminal cases conformably to the law governing the superior courts as the same may be applicable; provided, always, that a reasonable time may be granted to the state or the defendant to procure witnesses. 
(1)  The judge of the State Court of Bibb County is hereby authorized and empowered to promulgate rules and regulations allowing a defendant charged with a traffic violation within the jurisdiction of the State Court of Bibb County to appear and dispose of said case under such rules and regulations so promulgated. The judge may also promulgate rules and regulations which provide for payment by mail of fines imposed for traffic violations, game and fish violations, or both. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXX; 1900 Ga. Laws (Act No. 60), page 144, § 1; 1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 828), page 2782, § 1; 1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1174), page 3899, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 5-163. - Indictment. 
In all criminal cases within the jurisdiction of the said State Court of Bibb County the defendant shall not have the right to demand an indictment by the grand jury of the County of Bibb. 
(1900 Ga. Laws (Act No. 60), page 144, § 2) 
Editor's note— The title of the 1900 act purported to amend 1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, but § 2 thereof did not amend such act. 
Sec. 5-164. - Transfer of indictments; procedure. 
The Judge of the Superior Court of Bibb County may send down from the Superior Court of Bibb County all presentments and bills of indictment for misdemeanors to said state court for trial. The order so transmitting said cases shall be entered on the minutes of both of said courts. When the judge of said superior court shall require the clerk thereof to transmit said presentments and bills of indictment to said city court from said superior court, all costs and fees due the clerk of said superior court, and the Sheriff of Bibb County which have accrued in said superior court in the cases so transferred, shall follow said cases and shall participate generally in the distribution of the fines and forfeitures in said state court. The proceedings in said city court in the cases so transferred shall be as provided for the trial of cases in section 5-163. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXXI; 1900 Ga. Laws (Act No. 60), page 144, § 3; 1915 Ga. Laws (Act No. 196), page 103, § 4) 
Secs. 5-165—5-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - JUDGMENTS AND RELATED MATTERS 

Sec. 5-181. - Enforcement. 
All laws regulating the enforcing of judgments of the superior court, whether civil or criminal, shall apply to said state court, and executions shall issue and be levied and sales be had thereunder under the same rules and laws regulating the same in the superior court. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XXIV) 
Sec. 5-182. - Dignity of judgments. 
All judgments obtained in said court shall be a lien on all property belonging to the defendant or defendants throughout the state in the same manner as judgments of the superior courts are; but property exempt from levy and sale under the laws of this state shall be exempt from levy and sale under process from said court, and all executions issuing from said court shall be tested in the name of the judge and signed by the clerk and directed to the sheriff or his deputies of the said State Court of Bibb County, and to all and singular the sheriffs or their deputies of the State of Georgia. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XV) 
Sec. 5-183. - Claims to personalty. 
Said [state] court shall have jurisdiction of all claim cases where personal property is levied on under executions or other process from said court, and such claims shall be tried in the same manner as claims in the superior courts. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XVI) 
Sec. 5-184. - Claims to realty. 
Claims to real property levied on under execution or other process from said state court shall be returned to the superior court of the county where such real property is situated, and shall there proceed as other claims in the superior courts. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XVII) 
Sec. 5-185. - Attachments, garnishments. 
All laws upon the subjects of attachments and garnishments as to any matter whatever in the superior courts of this state shall apply to said state court as if named with the superior court, so far as the nature of the state court will admit. Attachments in said court, or returnable to said court, shall be directed to the sheriff or his deputies of the State Court of Bibb County and to all and singular the sheriffs and constables of this state, and the judge of said state court may, or any magistrate or notary public may, issue attachments returnable to said state court under the same laws that govern the issuing of attachments returnable to the superior courts. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XVIII) 
Sec. 5-186. - Garnishment proceedings. 
Garnishment proceedings in said state court shall be conformable to the laws of the state on the subject in the superior courts. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XIX) 
Sec. 5-187. - Scire facias. 
Scire facias to make parties in any cause in said state court shall be had as in the superior court, but such scire facias shall run throughout the state and may be served by any sheriff or his deputy thereof. 
(1884-1885 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 470, § XX) 
Secs. 5-188—5-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CIVIL COURT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-251. - Established. 
A Civil Court of Bibb County is hereby established and created, and that from and after the election or appointment and qualifying of the officers of said Civil Court of Bibb County, no justice court or justice of the peace or notary public, ex officio justice of the peace, or constable shall have or exercise any jurisdiction, civil or criminal, within the incorporate limits of the County of Bibb as they now are or may be hereafter defined. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 1) 
Sec. 5-252. - Name of court. 
The full name and legal title of said court from the effective date of this article shall be "Civil Court of Bibb County." Should this article or any part thereof be held unconstitutional by the supreme court, the corresponding original acts hereby sought to be changed or codified shall ipso facto and pro tanto stand reenacted and restored. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 27) 
Sec. 5-253. - Court of record. 
Said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be a court of record, and shall have a seal, and the minutes, records and other books and files that are required by law to be kept for the superior court shall in the same manner, so far as the jurisdiction of said Civil Court of Bibb County may render necessary, be kept in and for said Civil Court of Bibb County; provided that the Clerk of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall not be required to keep a book of final records, but shall see that the records are preserved in suitable files with all original papers in each case, which shall not be removed from said clerk's office except upon order of the Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County upon good cause shown and then only upon receipt of counsel and such removal from the clerk's office shall not continue for a longer period than five days. 
(1)  Provided, further, however, that the Clerk of the Civil Court of Bibb County, Georgia or other officer now or hereafter authorized by law to perform the duties now performed by the clerk of said court is hereby authorized to install and use microfilm photographic equipment and use said installed equipment in recording all original papers in each court case filed with said clerk, and said clerk as aforesaid is authorized to destroy all such original court papers in each case with the requirement that such clerk charged by law with custody of such original copies shall first cause microfilms of the same to be made capable of development into photostatic copies. (Photostatic copies of any such records produced from such microfilms shall be received in any court of this state as primary evidence of the recitals contained therein.) 
(2)  If such records are microfilmed, adequate equipment for viewing such records shall be maintained and such equipment shall be provided by the county commissioners of Bibb County out of county funds. 
(3)  No provision of this section shall be construed to change or repeal any rule of court or any provision of law relating to records on appeal for review in the courts of this state. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 13; 1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 812), page 2688, § 1) 
Sec. 5-254. - Jurisdiction. 
Said Civil Court of Bibb County shall have jurisdiction within the incorporate limits of the County of Bibb as aforesaid, concurrent with the superior court to try and dispose of all civil cases or proceedings of whatever nature, whether arising ex contractu or ex delicto, under the common law or by statute, in which the principal sum sworn to or claimed to be due or the value of the property in dispute does not exceed $25,000.00 and over which jurisdiction is not vested by the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia exclusively in other courts. The criminal jurisdiction of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall not exceed the jurisdiction now or hereafter vested by law in the justice courts of this state except that the Civil Court of Bibb County shall have jurisdiction in all suits or causes of action brought under the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 12 (O.C.G.A. § 40-12-1 et seq.), to try any action against a nonresident defendant upon whom service was perfected by serving the secretary of state as provided in [such] chapter 12 in the same manner as where the jurisdiction to try such an action is vested in the courts in said counties having jurisdiction of tort and criminal actions. The Civil Court of Bibb County shall have jurisdiction to try and to determine all suits, warrants, and proceedings to evict intruders and to dispossess and remove tenants holding over. The plaintiff in such proceedings shall have the right to direct the return of the same as to any issues to be tried therein to either the Civil Court of Bibb County, or to the Superior Court of Bibb County, providing the election is stated in the warrant or affidavit at the time the same is issued. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 2; 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 26), page 3062, § 1; 1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 666), page 3877, § 1; 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 165), page 4072, § 1) 
Sec. 5-255. - Jurisdiction; civil and criminal. 
Whenever the words "principal amount sworn to or claimed to be due," are used in any act relating to the Civil Court of Bibb County, it shall be held to mean the principal amount sued for, or the value of the property sued for or claimed, or the alleged amount of the lien sought to be enforced by the plaintiff, or the alleged amount of the lien sought to be enforced by the defendant by setoff or counterclaim, exclusive of and not computing interest, hire, attorney's fees and costs so that the jurisdiction of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be concurrent with the superior court to try and dispose of all civil cases or proceedings of whatever nature whether arising ex contractu or ex delicto under the common law or by statute in which the principal sum sworn to or claimed to be due or the value of the property in dispute, does not exceed $7,500.00 and over which jurisdiction is not vested by the constitution or laws of Georgia exclusively in other courts. The jurisdiction of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be concurrent with the superior court to try and dispose of all garnishment proceedings and the monetary limitation provided for in this section shall not apply to such proceedings in said Civil Court of Bibb County. The criminal jurisdiction of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall not exceed the jurisdiction now or hereafter vested by law in the justice courts of Georgia. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 3; 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 26), page 3062, § 1; 1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 666), page 3877, § 1) 
Sec. 5-256. - Terms. 
The terms of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be held monthly on the third Monday in each month; that suits shall be filed in the clerk's office of said court at least 15 days before the first day of the term at which it is returnable, and shall be served at least ten days before the first day of said term. 
The appearance term of said court shall also be the trial term thereof. If, in any case, no answer or other issuable defense in writing is filed or made by the parties sued, on or before its appearance day at 12:00 noon, Eastern Standard Time, which is the third Monday, as required in the process, such case shall automatically become in default unless the time has been extended as provided by law. In all cases of default the judge of said court may enter judgment without any call of the appearance docket before 12:00 noon on the first Wednesday in each term at which the action in default is returnable and in all cases, except actions for unliquidated damages, and there is no issuable defense made by the party sued, the plaintiff shall be permitted to have judgment as if each and every item, or paragraph, were proven by testimony. All actions for unliquidated damages in which there is no issuable defense made by the party sued as required by the process shall be ripe for trial and judgment. All suits upon account, which are in default, shall be considered liquidated for the amount stated in the petition. After rendition of final judgment in a case "in default" the right of opening such default shall terminate, unless for sufficient cause shown and then by order of the court, or by consent of parties or counsel of record evidenced by a written stipulation filed with the clerk of said court. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 18) 
Sec. 5-257. - Warrants, summary writs; returnable, how. 
All warrants, summary processes and writs issuing out of said Civil Court of Bibb County in which the principal sum claimed to be due or the value of the property in dispute does not exceed $1,500.00, exclusive of interest, hire, attorney's fees, and costs, shall be returnable to said Civil Court of Bibb County in the same manner and under the same rules as such writs are required to be returned to the superior courts or the magistrate courts of this state as the case may be. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 14) 
Sec. 5-258. - Court of inquiry. 
With the exception of the Recorder's Court of the City of Macon and the Judge of Bibb Superior Court, the said Civil Court of Bibb County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to sit as a court of inquiry to examine into accusations against residents of Bibb County, Georgia, and others who may be arrested on warrants for offenses committed within the corporate limits of the County of Bibb. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 15) 
Sec. 5-259. - Officers. 
The officers of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall consist of a judge, a clerk, a sheriff, and such number of deputy clerks and deputy sheriffs as from time to time may be appointed pursuant to the provisions of section 5-327. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 33) 
Sec. 5-260. - Salaries of the officers. 
(a)  The salaries of the officers of the said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be fixed annually, on either a calendar or fiscal year basis by the County Board of Commissioners of Bibb County to be paid monthly out of the treasury of Bibb County by the person or persons charged by law with paying out the money of said county. 
(b)  Provided, however, that the salary of the Judge of the Civil Court of Bibb County during his present term of office shall be fixed at not less than the salary presently paid said judge. During any future term of any judge of said court, the salary of said such judge shall not be reduced below the salary set for any such judge for his first year of that term. Provided further, however, that said Judge of the Civil Court of Bibb County may receive any further increase in salary as the County Board of Commissioners of Bibb County may, in their discretion, deem wise and proper. 
In order to effectuate and make effective this provision (b) of [this] section 39 of this Act relating to the salary of the Judge of the Civil Court of Bibb County, in and for the County of Bibb, it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid that so much of the Act of the General Assembly of Georgia of 1933, pages 346 through 347, giving the County Board of Commissioners of Bibb County unlimited authority to fix the salaries of the officers of the Municipal Court City of Macon, now the Civil Court of Bibb County, in and for the County of Bibb, insofar only as the same relates to and concerns the salary of the Judge of the Civil Court of Bibb County, in and for the County of Bibb, be and the same is hereby repealed. Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that so much of the Act of 1933, pages 405 to 408, Paragraphs No. 1 and 2 of Section 1 of an amendment to an Act to establish a County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb which authorizes the County Board of Commissioners of the County of Bibb, without limitation, to fix the salaries and compensation of all officers, employees or other persons whose salaries or compensation is paid out of the treasury of Bibb County, except where express provision is made for the fixing of such salaries by cooperation of said board and the grand jury of said county, insofar only as the same relates to and concerns the salary of the Judge of the Civil Court of Bibb County, in and for the County of Bibb, be and the same is hereby repealed. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 39) 
Sec. 5-261. - Payment of expenses of court. 
It shall be the duty of the County Board of Commissioners for Bibb County to make provisions when levying taxes for the expenses of the courts or to provide for workmen's compensation and retirement or pension funds for officers and employees as provided for by authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1945, Article 7, Section 4, Paragraph 1, sub-paragraph 5 which provides that a county may levy taxes "to pay expenses of courts…", or as provided for by authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1945, Article 7, Section 4, Paragraph 1, sub-paragraph 15, which provides that a county may levy taxes "to provide for workmen's compensation and retirement or pension funds for officers and employees", either or both; for the levying and collection of sufficient taxes for the purpose of paying the salary of said judge emeritus herein provided for, and the power to levy taxes for such purpose is hereby delegated to said County Board of Commissioners for Bibb County. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 297), page 2992, § 5) 
Editor's note— While the title of the 1963 act purports to amend 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, the text of § 5 of the 1963 act does not. 
Sec. 5-262. - Cases reported, when. 
The Judge of the Civil Court of Bibb County shall have the same authority as the Judge of the Superior Court of Bibb County to order a case reported and he may direct the case reported when either party or counsel requests it, or when, in the discretion of the judge, the ends of justice require that the case be reported. Whenever a case is reported in said court, either by agreement of parties or counsel or by direction of the court under the rule, the cost of such reporting shall be taxed equally against the parties to the case and shall be assessed as costs in the case under the same rules as prevail in the superior court, save that the charge for such reporting shall be at the rate of $0.12 per 100 words for taking down the testimony and $0.12 per 100 words for writing it out. If either party or his counsel objects to the reporting of the case, the party so objecting shall not be charged with any expense of reporting the case, unless the judge on preliminary investigation shall determine that the case is one that should be reported, and shall direct it reported under the rule. Whenever it becomes necessary in the opinion of the Judge of the Civil Court of Bibb County that a case shall be reported in said court, the judge of said court may designate a competent and disinterested stenographer to report said case and the compensation of such reporter shall be $0.12 per 100 words for taking down and $0.12 per 100 words for writing out the record of the said case and if not paid by the parties liable therefor, it shall be taxed as costs in said case and fi. fa. issued therefor for the use and benefit of the reporter so reporting said case and paid to said reporter when collected as compensation for reporting said case. It shall be permissible for the judge of said court to appoint as court reporter aforesaid any deputy clerk or officer of said court who is a capable and efficient stenographer. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 24) 
Sec. 5-263. - Appeals, bill of exceptions. 
An appeal direct shall lie by bill of exceptions or writ of error to the Court of Appeals of Georgia or the Supreme Court of Georgia from the judgment, order or ruling of the Civil Court of Bibb County in the same manner that judgments, orders and rulings of the Superior Court of Bibb County are now reviewed, in all warrants to evict intruders, dispossessory warrants, and in all petitions for discharge in bail trover cases and in all cases tried in said court, save as otherwise provided in this article. The costs in cases appealed shall be taxed at the rate of $0.12 per 100 words for making up the transcript of the record and for copying the bill of exceptions and that it shall be taxed as a part of the costs in the case so that in all warrants to evict intruders, possessory warrants, dispossessory warrants and in all petitions for discharge in bail trover cases, and in all other cases tried in said Civil Court of Bibb County, wherein the amount involved exclusive of interest, hire, attorney's fees, and cost is more than $50.00, an appeal shall lie by bill of exceptions and writ of error to the Court of Appeals of Georgia or to the Supreme Court of Georgia from the judgment, order or ruling of said Civil Court of Bibb County in the same manner judgments, orders and rulings of the Superior Court of Bibb County are now reviewed; provided, however, that the bill of exceptions shall be tendered within 30 days from the judgment, order or ruling complained of and certified and filed within ten additional days. The costs on appeals for transcript of the record and copying the bill of exceptions to the Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court shall be at the rate of $0.12 per 100 words and shall be taxed as a part of the costs in said case against the party liable therefor; provided further, that the procedure and method of review and appeal as provided for in this article shall not be exclusive, but shall be cumulative, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to abolish the writ of certiorari. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 26) 
Sec. 5-264. - Duty of county commissioners. 
The Board of County Commissioners of Bibb County shall provide a suitable and convenient place for the holding of said Civil Court of Bibb County; and shall provide all necessary books, stationery, and filing cases for keeping the dockets, files and records of said court. The said commissioners shall also provide and maintain a sufficient number of automobiles for the necessary use of the sheriff's office of said court. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 30) 
Sec. 5-265. - Costs. 
(a)  Each person filing a suit or proceeding of any character shall, if required by the [civil] court, at the time of filing, make a cost deposit with the clerk of said court in an amount equal to all costs to be incurred in the case including judgment and fi. fa., if the case is undefended. The deposit shall not be required of any person who shall subscribe to an affidavit that he is unable to pay the costs of filing the suit or proceeding because of poverty. 
(b)  The deposit shall be a security deposit to insure the payment of the court costs of such proceeding and any overpayment shall be refunded by the clerk of said court to the party making the deposit. If the court cost is recovered from another party, the deposit shall be refunded to the party making the deposit. 
(c)  Whenever the principal amount involved in the suit of the plaintiff or in the cross-action or counterclaim of the defendant does not exceed $300.00 principal, exclusive of interest, attorney's fees, and costs, the costs to be charged and collected by the officers of said court shall be as follows: 
Clerk's Costs 
Filing and docketing suit\$ 2.00 
Summons and copy\2.00 
Extra copies (each)\2.00 
Second original for other counties\2.00 
Extra copies (each)\2.00 
Affidavit to obtain garnishment\2.00 
Issuing summons and copy (each)\2.00 
Issuing garnishment release\1.00 
Filing and docketing each traverse to answer of garnishment, including service\5.00 
Filing and docketing each dispossessory warrant\3.50 
Extra copies (each)\2.00 
Issuing distress warrant\4.50 
Filing and docketing each lien foreclosure\3.50 
Filing pleas\.50 
Docketing pleas\.50 
Issuing subpoenas\.50 
Filing and docketing motion\2.00 
Filing notice of appeal\1.00 
Record on appeal per page\1.50 
Transcript of evidence and proceedings\5.00 
Appellate court remittitur and judgment\3.00 
Final record per page\.75 
Minutes per page\.75 
Certificate as to absence of pending action\1.50 
Certified copy under O.C.G.A. § 24-7-24\2.50 
Issuing fi. fa.\1.00 
Entering fi. fa. on general execution docket\1.00 
Filing bond\1.00 
Entering on minutes verdict and judgment by judge\2.00 
Entering jury verdict and judgment on minutes\4.00 
Each affidavit made before a judge\1.50 
Each order or approval signed by a judge\2.00 
Issuing order to establish lost paper\3.00 
Dismissal or settlement\1.00 
Affidavit and bond to obtain attachment issuing same\4.50 
Issuing each criminal warrant including affidavit\2.50 
For docketing each warrant\.75 
Issuing each peace warrant\12.00 
Sheriff's Costs 
Serving copies of suit (each)\7.50 
Serving summons of garnishment (each)\5.00 
Serving lien foreclosure of any kind\7.50 
Serving dispossessory warrant\7.50 
Serving summons of attachment\7.50 
Serving distress warrant\7.50 
Serving subpoena (each)\3.00 
Suit from another county, to be paid in advance\7.50 
If more than one summons of garnishment to be served, cost for each additional one shall be\4.50 
Dispossessing tenant or intruder\7.50 
Levy\7.50 
Returning nulla bona\5.00 
Attending court (per day)\2.00 
Making out and executing titles to land\7.50 
If presented by purchaser\5.00 
Executing bill of sale to personal property, when demanded by purchaser\5.00 
Forthcoming bonds\5.00 
Taking and returning counter-affidavit when summary process to dispossess tenant or intruder is resisted\5.00 
Collecting tax fi. fa.'s $100.00 or less (each)\4.00 
Collecting tax fi. fa.'s over $100.00 (each)\7.50 
Each fi. fa. or attachment in sheriff's hands settled without sale\5.00 
Commissions on sales of property, on sums of $50.00 or less, 7 percent, on excess above $50.00 up to $550.00, 5 percent. 
For all sums exceeding $550.00, on excess, 2 percent. No commissions shall be charged unless property is actually sold. 
(d)  In all cases in said court where the principal amount involved, exclusive of interest, hire, attorney's fees, and costs, exceeds $250.00 and in all cases where the value of the property involved exceeds $250.00 or where the cross-action or counter-claim of the defendant, exclusive of interest, hire, attorney's fees, and costs exceeds $250.00, the costs to be charged and collected by the officers of said court shall be the same as the costs in the superior court, taxable for clerk and the sheriff respectively. 
(e)  The costs to be taxed in said court in possessory warrant cases, criminal warrants, peace warrants, and search warrants shall be the same as those fixed by law in probate courts. 
(f)  In trover suits where the principal amount involved, exclusive of interest, hire, and costs, or where the alleged value of the property, exclusive of hire and costs, does not exceed $250.00, the costs taxable by the clerk shall be the same as justice of the peace court costs. If the principal amount involved, exclusive of interest, hire, and costs, or if the alleged value of the property involved, exclusive of hire and costs, exceeds $250.00, superior court costs shall be taxed by the clerk against the party cast therein. 
(g)  In all other cases not herein specifically provided for, the costs to be taxed by the clerk shall be the same as justice of the peace court costs in all cases where the principal amount involved, exclusive of interest, hire, attorney's fees, and costs, does not exceed $250.00 and shall be the same as superior court costs where the principal so computed exceeds $250.00. 
(h)  All costs collected in said court by the officers thereof shall be paid into the treasury of Bibb County on the first day of each month, or within three days thereof, by the clerk to be applied to the expenses of operating said court, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(i)  Should the amount claimed by the plaintiff place the suit in one classification as to costs and the amount claimed by the defendant in this cross-action or counter-claim place the suit in another classification, the costs to be charged on the cross-action shall be determined by the judgment or verdict in the case. 
(j)  In all cases or proceedings in which the principal sum, exclusive of interest, hire, attorney's fees, and costs exceeds $250.00, the fees collected by the clerk and paid into the county treasury shall be the same in the Civil Court of Bibb County as those allowed by law to the Clerk of the Superior Court of Bibb County and to the Sheriff of Bibb County. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 38; 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 685), page 4386, § 2) 
Sec. 5-266. - Collection of costs. 
It shall be the duty of the judge of said [civil] court to see to it that the officers of his court are diligent in the collection of costs. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 29) 
Sec. 5-267. - Reports of appellate courts and acts. 
A complete set of published reports of the Supreme Court of Georgia and the Court of Appeals of Georgia, and the Acts of the General Assembly of Georgia, commencing with the Acts of 1910, and the Revised Code of Georgia Annotated of 1933 with all cumulative pocket parts shall be furnished by the state librarian to the clerk of said court for the use of said court. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 31) 
Sec. 5-268. - Certified copy of judgment in certiorari cases. 
On certiorari to Bibb Superior Court from the Civil Court of Bibb County, it shall be the duty of the Clerk of Bibb Superior Court to send down to the Clerk of the Civil Court of Bibb County a certified copy of the judgment disposing of the certiorari, the cost of which certified copy shall be taxed by the Clerk of Bibb Superior Court against the losing party in the case. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 32) 
Secs. 5-269—5-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUDGE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 5-281. - Office established; term; oath. 
There shall be a Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County whose term of office shall be four years, and who shall be elected by the qualified voters of the County of Bibb quadrennially in the regular state election for the election of state house officers and members of the General Assembly; the judge of said court elected in the regular state election of 1954 to hold office until January 1, 1959. The Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be commissioned by the governor, and before entering upon the duties of his office shall take the same oath required by law of the judges of the superior courts. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 4) 
Sec. 5-282. - Restrictions. 
Any person who shall be elected Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County must, at the time of his said election, have been a resident of Bibb County and a practicing attorney at law at least five years immediately preceding his election, must be a qualified voter of Bibb County at the time of his election, and must also be at least 25 years of age; the judge of said court shall be subject to the same restrictions as are imposed by law upon superior court judges. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 5) 
Sec. 5-283. - Judge pro tem. 
In the event the Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County is from providential cause unable to discharge the duties of his office, or from any cause is disqualified or prevented from presiding in any cause in said court, the Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall have the power and right to appoint some competent and disinterested attorney at law, resident of Bibb County to preside in said court in his stead, and the attorney so appointed, when the appointment is entered upon the minutes of said court, shall exercise all the functions and powers of the judge thereof. The compensation of said attorney for actual services as presiding judge shall be $25.00 per hour, but not to exceed $100.00 per day, to be paid as the other officers of said court are paid. The judge pro tempore shall serve at the pleasure of the judge, and also shall serve concurrently with the judge to assist him when the judge deems the court's business heavy enough to require it. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 6; 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1444), page 3741, § 1; 1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 445), page 3453, § 1) 
Sec. 5-284. - Vacancy in judge's office. 
Every vacancy in the office of Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County occasioned by death, resignation or other cause shall be filled by appointment of the governor until the January 1 after the regular state election held in and for the County of Bibb next after the expiration of 30 days from the time said vacancy occurs, at which election a successor for the unexpired term shall be elected. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 7) 
Sec. 5-285. - Powers. 
The Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County is hereby clothed with the same powers and authority as are conferred by the constitution and laws of this state upon a magistrate, and with such additional rights, powers and jurisdiction as are provided by the terms of this article; that the said Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall have the power and authority under the limitations set out in this act to hear, determine and dispose of all cases or actions, civil or criminal, over which said court has jurisdiction and to give judgment and execution therein; to hold court from day to day continuously, if necessary, to the dispatch of the business of said court. The judge of said court shall have the same power to preserve order, to compel obedience to his orders, to inflict summary punishment for contempt, to enforce the judgment of his court as is given by law to the judges of the superior courts of this state. The Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall have, in addition to the powers enumerated in this section, all the powers, prerogatives and authority in matters whereof the subject matter and the amount involved are not beyond the jurisdiction of said court, of the judges of the superior courts. All laws relating to and governing judges of the superior courts shall apply to the Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County so far as the same may be applicable, unless inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 8) 
Secs. 5-286—5-300. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Retirement and Judge Emeritus 

Sec. 5-301. - Availability of retired judges. 
Upon the passage and approval of legislation whereby pension or retirement compensation is provided and extended to judges of the Civil Court of Bibb County, it is provided that upon retirement for reasons of health or by authority of other provisions of this section or other acts, the retired judge shall be a judge emeritus of said court and shall be available for service either as judge pro hac vice of the Civil Court of Bibb County or of the State Court of Bibb County upon the request of the respective regular judges of said courts. The judge emeritus shall not hold any compensating position with the State of Georgia, United States of America, County of Bibb, or City of Macon or any agency thereof, except upon taking a leave of absence as such judge emeritus and forever waiving and relinquishing pension or retirement compensation during and for such leave of absence; the judge emeritus shall be disqualified from engaging in the practice of law in any of the courts in which such judge is qualified to serve as judge pro hac vice. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 297), page 2992, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 115), page 3771, § 1) 
Editor's note— While the title of the 1963 act purports to amend 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, the text of § 1 of the 1963 act does not. 
Sec. 5-302. - Retirement compensation. 
A judge of the Civil Court of Bibb County is a participant under the general pension and retirement plan for Bibb County employees subject to all terms and conditions of the plan as amended. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 297), page 2992, § 2; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 115), page 3771, § 2; Ord. No. RR-05-33, § 2, 10-13-05) 
Editor's note— While the title of the 1963 act purports to amend 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, the text of § 2 of the 1963 act does not. 
Sec. 5-303. - Compensation. 
Said County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb is hereby empowered and authorized to provide for payment of compensation of said judge emeritus from taxes levied or to be levied by authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1945, Article 7, Section 4, Paragraph 1, sub-paragraph 15 which provides that a county may levy taxes "to provide for workmen's compensation and retirement or pension funds for officers and employees," or from taxes levied or to be levied by authority of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1945, Article 7, Section 4, Paragraph 1, sub-paragraph 5 which provides that a county may levy taxes "to pay the expenses of courts…", either or both. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 297), page 2992, § 3) 
Editor's note— While the title of the 1963 act purports to amend 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, the text of § 3 of the 1963 act does not. 
Sec. 5-304. - Ad valorem tax levy authorized. 
The County Board of Commissioners for Bibb County be and they are (it is) hereby authorized and empowered to levy ad valorem tax with respect to taxable properties in Bibb County for the purpose of fulfilling the obligations of Bibb County assumed pursuant to the authority granted hereby. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 297), page 2992, § 4) 
Editor's note— While the title of the 1963 act purports to amend 1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, the text of § 4 of the 1963 act does not. 
Secs. 5-305—5-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CLERK AND SHERIFF 

Sec. 5-326. - Offices created. 
There shall be a Clerk and Sheriff of said Civil Court of Bibb County, each of whom shall be appointed by the judge of said court, and each of whom shall hold office during the pleasure of said judge of said court, and said judge shall have the power to remove from office at any time any officer of said court. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 9) 
Sec. 5-327. - Deputies. 
Any person who shall be appointed Clerk or Sheriff or Deputy Clerk or Deputy Sheriff of said Civil Court of Bibb County must at the time of appointment be a qualified voter of Bibb County. 
The Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall also have the power to appoint a sufficient number of deputy Clerks and Deputy Sheriffs of the Civil Court of Bibb County as from time to time may be needed to efficiently handle and transact the business of the court, the number thereof appointed to be first authorized by the Bibb County Board of Commissioners, and each and all of whom thus appointed shall hold office during the pleasure of the judge of said court. The deputy clerks and the deputy sheriffs, if and when appointed, shall exercise all the functions and be subject to all the responsibilities and requirements of the said clerk and the said sheriff of said court. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 10) 
Sec. 5-328. - Powers. 
All the requirements and duties, powers and authority imposed by law upon, and conferred upon the Clerk of Bibb Superior Court and the Sheriff of Bibb County shall be obligatory upon and shall be vested in the Clerk of said Civil Court of Bibb County and the Sheriff of said Civil Court of Bibb County, respectively, except where inconsistent with or limited by the provisions of this article defining the jurisdiction of said court; provided, however, that the amount of the bond of the Clerk of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be $3,000.00, and the amount of the bond of the Sheriff of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be $1,000.00. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 11) 
Sec. 5-329. - Deputies' powers. 
The Clerk of said Civil Court of Bibb County and also each and every deputy clerk of said court shall have complete power and authority, coincident and coordinate with the power of the judge of said court, under the provisions of this article to issue any and all warrants, civil and criminal, including search warrants, summary processes and writs which are issuable as a matter of right, to accept and approve bonds, and to discharge any and all other functions ministerial in character, which under the laws of this state are performable by a justice of the peace. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 12) 
Secs. 5-330—5-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROCEDURE AND RELATED MATTERS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 5-351. - Applicability of general laws of the state; dismissal for failure to prosecute. 
The general laws of this state in regard to the commencement of actions in the superior courts and defenses thereto of whatever nature, pleadings, the method of procedure, and practice therein and in regard to examinations of parties to suits or witnesses, by interrogatory or under subpoena, witnesses and their attendance, continuances, charge of the court, granting of new trials and other matters of a judicial nature within the jurisdiction of said Civil Court of Bibb County, shall be applicable to said Civil Court of Bibb County, except as may be otherwise provided in this article. The charge of the court shall be given orally to the jury, but on request of either party or counsel in the case, when it is so desired, and the request is made before announcing ready for trial, that the case be reported, the judge presiding shall direct that the case be reported. 
(1)  Any suit filed in the Civil Court of Bibb County, Georgia in which no written order is taken for a period of 12 months from the date of filing, the same shall automatically stand dismissed with costs taxed against the party plaintiff. For the purposes of this section, a written order of continuance shall be deemed such an order. 
(2)  All suits which are pending in said court upon the effective date of this section shall automatically stand dismissed, and costs taxed against the party plaintiff, 12 months from the date and approval of this section unless a written order shall be taken therein as provided above. 
(3)  Any suit, in which no written order, as provided above, has been taken for a period of 12 months, shall automatically stand dismissed, with costs taxed against the party plaintiff, except that, as to suits pending in said court upon the effective date of this section, the described time limitation shall begin as of such effective date. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 16; 1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 675), page 2381, § 1) 
Sec. 5-352. - Mode of procedure. 
Suits in said Civil Court of Bibb County shall in all respects be conformable to the mode of procedure in the superior courts, save as in this article excepted; process to suit shall be annexed by the clerk of said court bearing teste in the name of the judge thereof, and be directed to and served by the sheriff of said court or his lawful deputies. All executions, warrants, writs and summary processes of any kind issuing from said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be issued in the name of the judge thereof, filed by the clerk of said court, and be directed to the sheriff and his lawful deputies of said Civil Court of Bibb County and to all and singular the sheriffs and deputy sheriffs and lawful constables of this state, and shall in the County of Bibb be executed by the sheriff or his deputies of said Civil Court of Bibb County as now provided by law for such proceedings from the superior courts of this state. All rules and laws of whatever kind and nature now of force in this state, or hereinafter enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia regulating the mode of procedure, pleading and practice in the superior courts shall apply and be observed in said Civil Court of Bibb County, except when inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 17) 
Sec. 5-353. - Cases $250.00 and under. 
In all cases in said [civil] court in which the principal sum claimed, or the value of the property in controversy does not exceed $250.00, the rules of pleading as heretofore provided in this article shall not be required of parties prosecuting or defending any such action therein and it shall not be necessary to paragraph either petition or answer, but no suit or proceeding, or answer thereto, shall be accepted or filed by the clerk of said court unless a substantial statement of the cause of action, or matters of defense, of whatever character, be first reduced to writing. No demurrer or special plea shall be required, but every defense in point of law or of fact may be taken advantage of in the answer; provided, that if the plaintiff shall verify his claim or if a suit is brought on an unconditional contract in writing, the defendant shall be required to verify his answer. In the furtherance of justice, the judge of said court shall permit any claim, suit, process, pleading, or record to be amended in form or in substance, or material supplemental matter to be set forth in an amended written pleading, and shall disregard any error or defect which does not affect the substantial rights of the parties, but no amendment presenting a new and distinct cause of action or new party shall be allowed. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 19; 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 685), page 4386, § 1) 
Sec. 5-354. - Non-jury trials. 
Every case in said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be tried by the judge thereof without a jury unless a written demand for trial by jury is filed in said court by the plaintiff or his attorney or by any other party seeking affirmative relief at the time such action or proceeding is instituted, or by the defendant or his attorney on or before the day upon which he is required to appear in court in response to the proceedings against him; upon the failure of a party to demand a trial by jury, he shall be held to have waived such right. The judge, however, in his discretion upon request of either party or counsel for either party may allow a jury in any case, at any time before the commencement of any trial before him without a jury if, in his opinion, the request therefor is not made for delay only and if, in his opinion, the case is of such character as that the ends of justice will be best served by a trial by a jury. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 23) 
Sec. 5-355. - Motion for new trial. 
In all cases in said court tried by the judge thereof without a jury in which the principal sum claimed, exclusive of interest, hire, attorney's fees, and costs or the value of the property in controversy exceeds $50.00, and in all cases tried before a jury, upon announcement of judgment by the court or upon rendition of the verdict of a jury, any party or his counsel may make a written motion for a new trial within five days after judgment is entered in said case. Unless said motion for new trial is made as herein provided, the parties shall be held to have waived their right to move for a new trial except upon the grounds upon which extraordinary motions for new trials may be made. Said motion shall be heard at such dates as the court in its discretion may set for a hearing and no brief of the evidence shall be required; provided that where the case has been reported by the court reporter and where there is a difference between counsel as to what the evidence is or where in the discretion of the judge he deems it necessary to have the evidence written out, it shall be in the discretion of the court and within his power to direct that a transcript of the record be written out by the court reporter, the costs of transcribing such transcript to be taxed as costs in the case against the movant in the motion for new trial to abide final judgment in the case. The Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall have the same power to hear and grant new trials in said court within the limits of the jurisdiction of said court as does the judge of the superior court. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 25) 
Sec. 5-356. - Disposition of funds. 
Whenever the Clerk of the Civil Court of Bibb County shall have in his hands any money, funds, or credits, which shall remain in his hands unclaimed by any person, firm or corporation for a period of six months, after all litigation in connection with such money, funds or credits, has been fully and finally disposed of by the Civil Court of Bibb County and by any appellate court, which said money, funds or credits shall have come into the hands of said clerk in connection with any case or matter pending at the time, or which has been pending in said Civil Court of Bibb County, it shall be the duty of the said Clerk of the Civil Court of Bibb County to notify the person, firm or corporation, whose property the records of said Civil Court of Bibb County indicates said money, funds or credits to be, by registered letter addressed to the said person, firm or corporation at the best obtainable address of the fact that such money, funds or credit are in his hands, and that unless the same are claimed within ten days, he will dispose of the same as hereinafter provided; and if after the expiration of the period of ten days from the mailing of said registered letter, the said money, funds or credit still remains in the hands of said clerk unclaimed, it shall be his duty to pay the same into the treasury of Bibb County, the same to be disposed of by the treasury, or other county authority having control of county funds, in the same manner as is hereinafter provided as to funds placed in the treasury of Bibb County and arising from the sale of unclaimed property remaining in the hands of the Sheriff of said Civil Court of Bibb County; provided, however, that the Clerk of the Civil Court of Bibb County, at the time of paying over to the treasury of Bibb County any of such money, funds or credits, shall give to the Treasurer of Bibb County, or other county authorities having control of the funds of said county, full information in writing as to the case or matter in connection with which such money came into his hands, and as to the name of the person, firm or corporation indicated by the records of the Civil Court of Bibb County to be the owner of said money, funds or credits; and provided also that the expense incurred by the clerk in complying with this section shall be deducted from the money, funds or credits in his hands. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 40) 
Sec. 5-357. - Disposition of property in hands of sheriff. 
Whenever the Sheriff of the Civil Court of Bibb County shall have in his custody any property or effects, which has come into his possession by levy or seizure by virtue of any process or papers properly placed in his hands for execution, whether the levy be made by him or his deputy, which has been in his hands for a period of six months after all litigation concerning the same has been disposed of in the Civil Court of Bibb County and on appeal from that court, and it is unclaimed by any person, firm or corporation, it shall be the duty of said sheriff to give notice by registered mail to the owner of said property, if the name of such owner can be ascertained by reasonable inquiry, at the best obtainable address of such owner, specifying in said notice the property so remaining in his hands, and warning the said owner that the same will be sold in terms of the law unless the said property is claimed within ten days from the mailing of such notice; if, after the lapse of ten days from the mailing of such notice, no claim to said property is made, said sheriff shall advertise the same for sale as unclaimed property, specifying in said advertisement the process under which the same was seized, said advertisement to be published as other advertisements of property levied upon under process of said Civil Court of Bibb County. The proceeds of said sale shall be paid by the said sheriff into the treasury of Bibb County; provided, however, said sheriff at the time of paying over the said proceeds shall give to the Treasurer of Bibb County, or other county authorities, having charge of the funds of said county, full information in writing as to the process under which the said property was seized, and as to the nature of the property which was sold. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 41) 
Sec. 5-358. - Duty of treasurer as to funds paid. 
The Treasurer of Bibb County, or other county authorities having charge of the funds of said county, shall keep any funds paid over to him, either by the Clerk of the Civil Court of Bibb County under section 5-356, or by the Sheriff of said Civil Court of Bibb County under section 5-357, in a separate account for a period of 12 months after the same is received. Should any person, firm or corporation claim the said fund within said period of 12 months, such claimant may file an affidavit of ownership with the Treasurer of Bibb County, or other county authorities having charge of the funds of said county, and may give bond in double the amount of the money claimed, with good security to be approved by the said treasurer, or other county authorities having control of the said fund, which said bond shall be conditioned to answer any demand thereon that may be proved and established in any court of this state within a period of two years from the date of said bonds, and shall be payable to the county authority having charge of said fund. Upon the making and filing of said affidavit and bond, said fund shall be delivered to the claimant. If no claim be filed to said money within a period of 12 months from the time the same is paid into the treasury of Bibb County, the same shall be taken out of the special account and be put in the general funds of Bibb County and become the property of Bibb County. In case conflicting claims are made to any of said money, it shall be the duty of the Treasurer of Bibb County, or other county authorities having charge of said fund, to require the claimants to litigate their claims in the Civil Court of Bibb County, and to hold the said fund and pay out the same according to the final results of such litigation; provided, however, all such litigation must be instituted within a period of 12 months from the time said money is paid into the treasury of Bibb County; provided, also, that the jurisdiction to hear and determine said claim is hereby expressly conferred upon the Civil Court of Bibb County regardless of the amount involved, and regardless of the residence of the parties, and the final order of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall specify which of said claimants is entitled to the funds, or whether either or any one of them has established his right thereto. In case the result of said litigation should be that neither of said claimants is entitled to the fund, the Treasurer of Bibb County, or other county authorities having control of said fund, shall continue to hold the same as unclaimed money and dispose of the same as hereinbefore provided. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 42) 
Secs. 5-359—5-375. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Juries 

Sec. 5-376. - Jury trials. 
All jury trials in said court shall be by a jury of six and said jury of six shall be stricken from a panel of 12 traverse jurors drawn and summoned under the provisions of this article, the Judge of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall cause to be made up not exceeding three juries; that is, 18 jurors at each term and all cases and jury issues to such term of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be tried by one of these juries or by a jury stricken from 12 jurors, plaintiff and defendant each being entitled to three peremptory challenges. In the event said panel shall be reduced below 18 from any cause, the judge of said court shall have the power to fill it out by causing talesmen to be summoned instanter; provided, however, that it shall be in the power of the judge of said court to cause to be drawn a sufficient number of jurors in his discretion to transact the business of the court. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 22) 
Sec. 5-377. - Jury list. 
It shall be the duty of the Clerk of said Civil Court of Bibb County to prepare and file in his office from the list of the traverse jury of the Superior Court of Bibb County as provided from time to time for such superior court a list of the traverse jurors appearing thereon who are residents of Bibb County. From said list so prepared, traverse jurors in said Civil Court of Bibb County shall be drawn in the following manner: The Clerk of said Civil Court of Bibb County shall write upon separate tickets the names of such traverse jurors and shall number the same and place them in a box prepared for that purpose. From it shall be drawn as many traverse jurors as are necessary in the opinion of the judge of said court, to conduct the business of said court for the term for which they are drawn. All laws with reference to the drawing, selecting and summoning of traverse jurors in the superior court shall apply to said Civil Court of Bibb County under the limitations provided by the terms of this article. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 20) 
Sec. 5-378. - Jurors. 
All laws with reference to the qualifications, empaneling, challenging and compensation of jurors now of force or such as may hereinafter be enacted in this state shall apply to and be observed in said Civil Court of Bibb County, except where in conflict with the terms of this act. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 21) 
Secs. 5-379—5-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - JUDGMENTS 

Sec. 5-401. - Rank of judgments. 
All judgments obtained in said court shall be liens upon all property belonging to the defendant or defendants to the same extent and upon the same terms as judgments of the superior courts of this state. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 34) 
Sec. 5-402. - Arrest of judgment. 
When a judgment has been rendered in the Civil Court of Bibb County, either party may move in arrest thereof, for any defect not amendable which appears on the face of the record or pleading within 20 days from the rendition of such judgment. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 35) 
Sec. 5-403. - Sales. 
All sales of personal property levied upon in the County of Bibb under process from said Civil Court of Bibb County shall take place before the court house door during the legal hours of sale, at public outcry, on the Friday next following ten days' advertisement by notice posted before the court house door, describing the property to be sold, the place and hour of sale, the name and residence of the owner of the property and the style of the case in which the execution issued, such sales to be conducted by the sheriff of said court or his deputy; provided, that sales of perishable property and sales on the premises may be made as provided by law; and provided further, that in all the cases where real estate is levied upon under a process from said court, the subsequent proceedings shall conform to the laws governing the sale of real estate. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 174), page 2552, § 37) 
CHAPTER 6. - EDUCATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-26. - Appointment of superintendent. 
The superintendent of schools for the Bibb County School System shall be appointed by the board [of education], and he shall serve at the pleasure of the board. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 912), page 2835, § 1(2F)) 
Editor's note— The 1968 act added the above section as § 2F of 1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388. 
Secs. 6-27—6-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF EDUCATION 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 6-41. - Established. 
There shall be established in and for the County of Bibb a permanent board of education, to be styled the Board of Public Education for Bibb County, which shall be charged with the direction and control of the education of the children in the Bibb County school district between the ages of three and 21 years and which shall be entirely distinct from and independent of the Georgia State Board of Education. The board of education shall furnish to the state school superintendent all statistics and information relative to the schools and children of the county which may be required of it by the superintendent. 
(1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 1(1)) 
Sec. 6-42. - Status and general powers. 
The Board of Public Education for Bibb County shall be and is created a body politic and corporate for the purposes provided in this article and as such shall have full power and authority to establish and, from time to time, to modify a system of education for children between the ages of three and 21 years in the County of Bibb and to carry out and superintend the same; to select, appoint, suspend, and remove a superintendent, administrators, teachers, and all other employees under the system; to provide schoolhouses; to make bylaws for their own government and rules and regulations for the government of the superintendent, administrators, teachers, employees, and schools under their control; to establish schools in their discretion, and to prescribe the studies to be pursued in the same; provided, however, that it shall not introduce into any school established by the board any books of a sectarian character or exclude the Bible from any of the schools; and provided, further, that the schools shall be so established as to extend impartially the same benefits to all children and to the different sections of the County of Bibb with due regard being given to differences in population; to fill vacancies in the board in whatever manner caused; to purchase, take, acquire, receive, hold, and enjoy, for the purposes of this article, moneys and real and personal estate by bargain and sale, gift, grant, contract, devise, or bequest; to sue and be sued, and to have and use a common seal, and generally shall be clothed with all the rights, powers, and privileges incident to corporations and necessary or convenient for carrying out the purposes of its creation. 
(1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388, § 2; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 2) 
Sec. 6-43. - Members. 
The Board of Public Education for Bibb County shall consist of ten members. The positions on the board shall be numbered as posts 1 through 10, respectively. Posts 1 through 8 on the board shall be elective positions on the board and shall be filled as provided in this article. Post No. 9 shall be filled by a councilman or the mayor of the City of Macon to be selected by the City Council of Macon. Post No. 10 shall be filled by a Bibb County Commissioner to be selected by the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 912), page 2835, § 1(2A); 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 747), page 3926, § 1; 1971 (Ex. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 5), page 2136, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 4) 
Editor's note— The 1968 act added the above section as § 2A of 1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388. 
Sec. 6-44. - Election of members. 
(a)  In the 1992 general election candidates shall be elected to fill posts 1 through 6. Candidates elected to the board [of education] in the election shall take office on January 1 following their election and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. In the 1994 general election candidates shall be elected to posts 7 and 8. Candidates elected to the posts shall take office on January 1 following their election and serve for terms of office of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors to the elected members of the board shall be elected in the general election conducted immediately prior to the expiration of the term of office for which they offer as candidates, shall take office on January 1 following their election, and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Members of the board to serve in posts 9 and 10 shall be appointed by the respective appointing body, and such members shall serve on the board at the pleasure of each respective appointive body and only so long as they are members of the respective appointive body or serve as the mayor of the City of Macon, as the case may be. 
(b)  Vacancies occurring on the board other than in posts 9 and 10 shall be filled by the remaining board members' electing a qualified person to serve out the unexpired term of office in which the vacancies shall occur. All appointments to fill such vacancies shall be subject to the approval of the Bibb County grand jury in session at the time of the appointment. Vacancies which occur in posts 9 and 10 shall be filled by the respective appointing authorities' selecting a successor. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 912), page 2835, § 1(2B); 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 747), page 3926, § 2; 1971 (Ex. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 5), page 2136, § 2; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 5) 
Editor's note— The 1968 act added the above section as 2B of 1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388. 
Sec. 6-45. - Eligibility of candidates. 
In order to be eligible to offer for election to the board [of education] for posts 1 through 6, a candidate must reside within that education district which corresponds by number to the post for which he or she offers as a candidate. A candidate offering for election to posts 1 through 6 shall be elected to the board only by the electors of the Bibb County School District who reside within the education district of the candidate's residence. Candidates who offer for election to the board for posts 7 and 8 may reside anywhere within the Bibb County School District and shall be elected to the board by the electors of the school district. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 912), page 2835, § 1(2C); 1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 704), page 3999, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 747), page 3926, § 3; 1971 (Ex. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 5), page 2136, § 3; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 6) 
Editor's note— The 1968 act added the above section as § 2C of 1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388. 
Sec. 6-46. - Maximum number of terms. 
No person shall be eligible to be elected to the board [of education] if he has served three consecutive terms as an elected member of the board. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 912), page 3835, § 1(2D); 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 747), page 3926, § 4; 1971 (Ex. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 5), page 2136, § 4) 
Editor's note— The 1968 act added the above section as § 2D of 1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388. 
Sec. 6-47. - Districts. 
For the purpose of electing members of the board, the Bibb County School District shall be divided into the following education districts: 
Education District: 1 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0001 EM01 
VTD: 0002 EM02 
VTD: 0003 EM03 
VTD: 0004 EM04 
VTD: 0005 EM05 
VTD: 0006 EM06 
VTD: 0007 EM07 
VTD: 0008 EM08 
VTD: 0009 EM09 (Part) 
Tract: 0110. 
Block(s): 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 419, 420, 601, 602, 603, 604A, 604B, 605, 606, 607, 608, 609, 610, 611, 612 
Education District: 2 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0010 GODFREY 01 
VTD: 0011 GODFREY 02 
VTD: 0016 GODFREY 07 (Part) 
Tract: 0127. 
Block(s): 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 203, 204, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221B 
VTD: 0022 MACON 03 (Part) 
Tract: 0103. 
Block(s): 226, 227, 238, 239, 240 
Tract: 0104. 
Block(s): 102, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 123, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129 
VTD: 0034 VINEVILLE 01 
VTD: 0035 VINEVILLE 02 
VTD: 0036 VINEVILLE 03 
VTD: 0040 VINEVILLE 07 
VTD: 0041 VINEVILLE 08 
Education District: 3 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0013 GODFREY 04 
VTD: 0014 GODFREY 05 
VTD: 0017 GODFREY 08 (Part) 
Tract: 0131.01 
Block(s): 502A, 502B 
Tract: 0131.02 
Block(s): 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313 
VTD: 0018 GODFREY 09 
VTD: 0020 HAZARD 06 
VTD: 0032 RUTLAND 01 
VTD: 0033 RUTLAND 02 
Education District: 4 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0015 GODFREY 06 
VTD: 0017 GODFREY 08 (Part) 
Tract: 0131.02 
Block(s): 103, 104, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 122, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207 
VTD: 0019 HAZARD 05 
VTD: 0021 HAZARD 03 
VTD: 0023 HAZARD 01 (Part) 
Tract: 0132.01 
Block(s): 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 110A, 115A, 118A, 119A, 120A, 121B, 122, 201A, 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410 
VTD: 0045 WA 01 
VTD: 0046 WA 02 
VTD: 0047 HAZARD 02 
VTD: 0048 HAZARD 04 
Education District: 5 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0012 GODFREY 03 
VTD: 0016 GODFREY 07 (Part) 
Tract: 0126. 
Block(s): 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 124, 201, 202, 203, 205, 211, 212, 213, 214, 228, 501, 502, 503, 504, 505, 506, 507, 508, 509, 510, 511, 512, 513, 514, 515, 516, 517, 518, 519, 520, 521, 522, 523 
VTD: 0022 MACON 03 (Part) 
Tract: 0104. 
Block(s): 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 418, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442, 443, 444, 445, 446, 447, 448 
Tract: 0123. 
Block(s): 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122 
VTD: 0023 HAZARD 01 (Part) 
Tract: 0132.01 
Block(s): 101A, 102, 103, 109, 121A, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307 
VTD: 0027 HO 04 (Part) 
Tract: 0118. 
Block(s): 402, 403, 406, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413, 414 
VTD: 0037 VINEVILLE 04 
VTD: 0038 VINEVILLE 05 
VTD: 0042 VINEVILLE 09 
VTD: 0043 MACON 02 
VTD: 0044 MACON 01 
Education District: 6 
BIBB COUNTY 
VTD: 0009 EM09 (Part) 
Tract: 0110. 
Block(s): 301A, 301B, 301C, 302, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314 
VTD: 0024 HO 01 
VTD: 0025 HO 02 
VTD: 0026 HO 03 
VTD: 0027 HO 04 (Part) 
Tract: 0118. 
Block(s): 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 401, 404, 405, 407, 408, 418, 501, 502, 503, 504, 505, 506, 507, 508, 509, 510, 511, 512, 513, 514, 515, 516 
VTD: 0028 HO 05 
VTD: 0029 HO 06 
VTD: 0030 HO 07 
VTD: 0031 HO 08 
VTD: 0039 VINEVILLE 06 
For purposes of this section: 
(1)  The terms `Tract,' `Block,' and `VTD' shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; 
(2)  The term `Precinct' is synonymous with the term `voting precinct' and means a geographical area designated by O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, art. 7 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-260 et seq.) or O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.), within which all electors vote at one polling place; 
(3)  Precinct names and designations following VTD designations are included for convenience only; and in the event the description of any education district contains a conflict between the geographical boundaries of any VTD and the boundaries of the following named precinct, the geographical boundary of the VTD as shown on the census maps for the United States Decennial Census of 1990 for the State of Georgia shall control; 
(4)  Any part of Bibb County which is not included in any education district described in this section shall be included within that education district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1990 for the State of Georgia; and 
(5)  Any part of Bibb County which is described in this section as being included in a particular education district shall nevertheless not be included within such education district if such part is not contiguous to such education district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that education district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States Decennial Census of 1990 for the State of Georgia. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 912), page 2835, § 1(2E); 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 747), page 3926, § 5; 1971 (Ex. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 5), page 2136, § 5; 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1185), page 4625, § 1; 1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 375), page 4251, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 7) 
Editor's note— The 1968 act added the above section as § 2E of 1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388. 
Sec. 6-48. - Compensation of members. 
The Board of Commissioners of Bibb County is authorized to fix the compensation and to provide for the reimbursement of expenses for the elected members of the board [of education] holding posts 1 through 8. Such compensation and expenses shall be paid from the funds of the board of education. 
(1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 839), page 3809, § 1(5A); 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 11) 
Editor's note— The 1986 act added the above section as § 5A of 1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388. 
Sec. 6-49. - Taxes. 
(a)  The board [of education] shall be entitled to and shall receive for the purposes of this article the pro rata share for Bibb County of all taxes now paid to the state and set apart for educational purposes and all appropriations for such purposes and the pro rata share for Bibb County of all endowments, devises, gifts, and bequests made or hereafter to be made to the state or state board of education and of any and all educational incomes and funds not belonging to and due to the board of regents now in the treasury of the state or hereafter to be deposited. 
(b)  The board shall further have the power to assess such tax upon the taxable property of Bibb County as it may think necessary to support the system of schools which it may establish, which tax, when approved by the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County, shall be levied by the board of commissioners and collected like other taxes of the county. The board of commissioners shall approve or disapprove of the tax before the first Monday in June of each year. 
(1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388, § 3; 1876 Ga. Laws (Act No. 106), page 314, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 8) 
Secs. 6-50—6-75. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - General and Miscellaneous Powers and Duties 

Sec. 6-76. - Treasurer. 
The board [of education] shall have power to elect a treasurer and require of such officer such bond as they may deem necessary. The treasurer of the board shall be entitled to and shall receive from the tax collector of Bibb County the tax assessed, levied, and collected to support the system of schools which the board may establish, as well as all moneys belonging to the board which may be paid by the state board of education, the state school superintendent, or by the treasurer of the State of Georgia or which may become the property of the board from any source whatsoever and to control and disburse the same under the direction of the board. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 3(2.1)) 
Editor's note— The 1992 act added the above section as § 2.1 of 1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388. 
Sec. 6-77. - Rules and bylaws. 
Said board [of education] is hereby authorized and directed to compile in pamphlet or booklet form the rules, regulations and bylaws governing the procedures and operation of said board. A copy of such pamphlet or booklet shall be made available to the principal of each school in the Bibb County System. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 912), page 2835, § 1(2H)) 
Editor's note— The 1968 act added the above section as § 2H of 1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388. 
Sec. 6-78. - Budget. 
The board [of education] is authorized and directed to submit to the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County a copy of the final school budget which is prepared pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 20, ch. 2, art. 6, pt. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 20-2-160 et seq.) as the same is now or may hereafter be amended. The copy of the final school budget shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County within one week after its adoption by the school board each year. 
(1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 912), page 2835, § 2(3A); 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 9) 
Editor's note— The 1968 act added the above section as § 3A of 1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388. 
Sec. 6-79. - Expenditures. 
The board of education is authorized to expend educational funds available to it for the purpose of acquiring, improving, and selling real or personal property in connection with its secondary and postsecondary vocational educational curricula or program. 
(1872 Ga. Laws (Act No. 260), page 388, § 5; 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1426), page 5049, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 702), page 5264, § 11) 
CHAPTER 7. - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Adoption of pension plan; life insurance. 
The County of Bibb, through its governing authority, may without further authority than that provided hereby, may [sic], in its discretion, adopt, revise, amend, and modify pension, disability and retirement plans for all or any persons elected or appointed, whether or not a county or state officer whose salary, wage or compensation is paid wholly or in part by the county, including appointees of the Judges of the Superior Court of Bibb County and appointees of other elected or appointed officials; and such plans may allow credit for services performed prior to the enactment of such plan or plans and may provide payments to dependents of such persons killed in the performance of duty. As a part of such plans, said governing authority may provide for insurance premiums for group life insurance as well as for group hospital, medical and surgical care or any combination thereof. Said governing authority is further authorized hereby to include such other terms and conditions in such plans as it shall deem to be in the public interest, and to support the same, shall be authorized to levy a tax to finance any part or all of such plans. 
(1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 69), page 881, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. XI, § 1, ¶ VI was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-122, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws, page 5144. 
Sec. 7-2. - Ad valorem tax authorized. 
The governing authority of Bibb County may, in its discretion and without further authority than provided herein and by ratification hereof, pay and levy an ad valorem tax for paying, in whole or in part, and in such proportions as such governing authority may from time to time determine, insurance premiums for group hospital, surgical and medical care (including but not limited to major medical insurance) as well as for group life insurance (either, all or any combination of the same as said governing authority may, from time to time decide) for employees of Bibb County, "employees", as used herein, to include all persons actively employed in the full time service of the county (limited temporary service excluded) upon the effective date of this amendment and thereafter, and whose salary, wage or compensation is paid by the county and by check of the treasurer of the county whether payable directly to the recipient or to another for transmission or distribution, and whether appointed by the governing authority or by an elected or appointed official and including appointees of the Judges of the Superior Court in and for Bibb County and including elective officials of Bibb County, but excluding court bailiffs who serve on a per diem basis. 
(1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 54), page 835, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VII, § IV, ¶ I was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-121, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws page 5139. 
Secs. 7-3—7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— This article is an amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VII, § IV, ¶ I and was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-118, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws page 5122. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-26. - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used herein in connection with the Bibb County Civil Service System, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(1)  Classified service means all offices and positions of employment as county police in the service of Bibb County and serving under the direction of the Sheriff of Bibb County, and all offices and positions of employment in the service of the Sheriff of Bibb County, except those offices and positions placed in the unclassified service by this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb to place the direction and control of the County Police of Bibb County under the Sheriff of Bibb County. The county commissioners may at any time remove the County Police of Bibb County from the Civil Service System herein created. 
(2)  Board means the Bibb County Civil Service Board. 
(3)  Secretary means the Secretary of the Bibb County Civil Service Board. 
(4)  Appointing authority means the Sheriff of Bibb County or any person lawfully serving as Sheriff of Bibb County. 
(5)  County commissioners means County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb. 
(6)  Position means any office or place of employment as county police in the service of Bibb County, Georgia, and any office or place of employment of the Sheriff of Bibb County, excluding, however, from both clerical, maintenance, and custodial personnel. 
(7)  Classified employees means any employee holding a position in the classified service. 
(8)  Public hearings means an opportunity given after public notice of at least five days for any person or persons to appear and be heard on the matter involved. 
(9)  Hearing officer means an attorney appointed by the board in consultation with the secretary to serve as the hearing officer in accordance with division 3, subdivision II of this article. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 2); 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), page 4750, § 1; 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1068), page 4686, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 1) 
Sec. 7-27. - Changes in system. 
The General Assembly shall have authority to enact laws changing, altering, or abolishing the Bibb County Civil Service System herein established and to provide additions, exceptions, or exemptions to the Bibb County Civil Service System herein established. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 27)) 
Sec. 7-28. - Repeal authorized. 
(a)  It is distinctly provided that the legislature may, at any time, repeal the civil service system herein created without the necessity of further amendments to the constitution. 
(b)  It is expressly provided that the county commissioners may, at any time, provide for a county police department, independent of the sheriff's office and in so doing eliminate the county police from the provisions of the civil service system. 
(c)  It is expressly provided that the final authorization for the fixing of the salaries of employees under the civil service system is to be established by the vote of county commissioners. 
(d)  It is expressly provided that the county shall not be required to pay the premium on any bond of any employee under the civil service system in excess of that bond required by statute. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 27-A)) 
Sec. 7-29. - Created. 
A civil service system is created as follows. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(1)) 
Sec. 7-30. - Status of incumbents. 
Any person holding a permanent position in the classified service of Bibb County on the effective date of this Bibb County Civil Service System, shall continue to hold such position subject to the provisions herein and shall be deemed to be qualified for such employment and shall be entitled to receive a regular permanent appointment in accordance with the provisions herein and, provided, that he shall file with the civil service board within 90 days after the effective date hereof a written certificate which shall include a complete history of his employment record on forms which shall be prescribed by the board. 
Any person entering the service of the United States and covered by the Soldiers and Sailors Relief Act of Congress shall be conclusively presumed to have been on furlough or leave of absence during his period of service in the Armed Forces of the United States, provided the person entering service shall, within 30 days after leaving the employment in the classified service of Bibb County, make written application to the board for furlough or leave of absence during his period of service in the Armed Forces of the United States, and shall be restored to his or her former or comparable position without loss of seniority, provided: 
(1)  He does not voluntarily extend his period of training and service beyond the expiration of his term during the present emergency. 
(2)  He is still physically and mentally qualified to perform the duties of such position. 
(3)  He makes application for reemployment within six months after his honorable discharge from the Armed Forces of the United States. 
Provided further that all employees of Bibb County coming under the provisions of the classified service who have entered the service of the United States Government as specified herein and who at the time of their entrance had been regular employees of Bibb County for a period of at least six months prior to entering said service, shall be deemed as regular employees coming under the classified service as provided herein and shall be entitled to all benefits provided hereby. 
This provision shall not apply to employees who voluntarily reenlist at the expiration of the present emergency. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 7)) 
Sec. 7-31. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall willfully or corruptly violate any of the provisions herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall on conviction thereof be punished as for a misdemeanor prescribed by the laws of Georgia, and if such convicted person be in the classified service, he shall be dismissed therefrom and shall not be eligible for reemployment, reinstatement, or reappointment for a period of three years from date of such conviction. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 24)) 
Sec. 7-32. - Unclassified service and classified service. 
(a)  The unclassified service shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Any person serving as Sheriff of Bibb County. 
(2)  Any person serving as chief deputy to the Sheriff of Bibb County. 
(3)  Any person who does not receive regular compensation from county funds, directly or indirectly. 
(4)  Any person serving as a special deputy or as a temporary deputy for a period of less than 30 days. 
(5)  Any person employed on a per diem basis and whose sole duties are those of bailiff to a court. 
(6)  Clerical, maintenance, and custodial personnel. 
(7)  All courthouse security personnel, except deputy sheriffs certified by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Council provided for in tit. 35, ch. 8 (O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.). 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 5); 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), page 4750, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 3) 
Sec. 7-33. - Eligibility for participation in county pension plan. 
All members of the classified service shall be eligible for and shall participate in the Bibb County Pension Plan as the same may exist from time to time. Retirement shall be governed by the provisions of that plan. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 6); 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), page 4750, § 1) 
Sec. 7-34. - Oaths. 
The board and all employees in the classified service shall take the oath of office as prescribed by law for their respective positions. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 25)) 
Sec. 7-35. - Bonds of employees under classified service. 
(a)  Any employee under classified service who is employed in any department under the control and office of an elected officer who is or may be responsible for the acts of such employees as a deputy, may be required as a condition of his employment to give bond with good security in an amount satisfactory to the head of such department, conditioned to indemnify such officer or head against loss by reason of the conduct of such employee or deputy, or because of any error made by any employee or deputy in the performance of his or her duties as an employee or deputy. The premium of said bond shall be paid by the Treasurer of Bibb County, to the extent such bond is required by law. 
(b)  Should the amount of bond required be deemed by the board arbitrary, unreasonable or oppressive, an appeal shall lie to the superior court which shall have the authority to set the amount of such bond. 
(c)  The board shall have the right in its discretion to require bonds of employees other than those specified in the preceding sections, where the duties of such employee make a bond necessary or desirable, but this provision shall not forbid the county commission or other authority coming under county government to require any employee handling funds or performing duties of trust to post bonds. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 26)) 
Sec. 7-36. - Political activity and recommendations. 
In applying the provisions of this civil service system or in doing any of the things hereby provided, no person whosoever shall give any consideration to political or religious affiliations. No person holding a position in the classified service shall directly or indirectly solicit or receive in any manner or be concerned with soliciting or receiving any assistance, or subscriptions or contributions for any political purpose, or participate in any form of political activity whatsoever, other than to express privately his views as a citizen and to cast his vote in any election. No recommendations for any person who applies for office or position in the classified service, or for examination under the provisions of this civil service system, except as to character, and in the case of former employees as to ability, shall be considered by the board, the secretary or the appointing authority, in giving any examination, appointment, promotion, or reinstatement under the provisions of the Bibb County Civil Service System. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 21)) 
Secs. 7-37—7-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CIVIL SERVICE BOARD 

Sec. 7-51. - Created. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established the Bibb County Civil Service Board which shall consist of five members of known sympathy to the merit system who shall have been residents of Bibb County for two years or more. The initial members of the Bibb County Civil Service Board shall be appointed by a majority vote of the county commissioners at their first regular meeting following the enactment into law of this article and the initial members shall be appointed for terms as follows: One member for term ending December 31, 1962; one member for term ending December 31, 1958; one member for term ending December 31, 1960. The three members of said board serving thereon on July 1, 1977, shall continue to serve until the expiration of their respective terms of office. The two new members of said board shall be appointed no later than December 31, 1977, for initial terms as follows: One member for a term ending December 31, 1981; one member for a term ending December 31, 1983. The chairman of the Bibb County Commission shall nominate said new members and designate the above terms for which they shall serve, subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the county commissioners at their next regular meeting after said nominations are made. Thereafter all appointments for the two new positions on said board shall be made as appointments are made for the three old positions. 
Thereafter all appointments for the civil service board shall be as follows: The chairman of the Bibb County Commission shall nominate the members of the board subject to confirmation by a majority vote of the county commissioners at its next regular meeting after said nominations are made. Such nominations shall be announced by publication in the official organ of the county at least one week before said meeting of the county commissioners. All appointments shall be for a term of six years, and the members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. The members shall annually elect one of their members as chairman of the board and one member as vice-chairman. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Vacancies in the office of said civil service board created by death, resignation or otherwise shall be filled by nomination of the chairman and confirmation by the board of county commissioners after publication as provided for regular appointments herein and such appointment shall be for the unexpired term. No member of the board shall hold any other lucrative office or employment under the United States Government, the State of Georgia, or any political subdivision thereof, except the office of notary public or in the military forces. 
(b)  A member of the board may only be removed for cause after charges have been filed with the county commission. Such charges must be filed in writing and a copy furnished the member sought to be removed; the member shall be entitled to a public hearing before the county commissioners, and removal shall be accomplished only after such hearing and a majority vote of the entire board of the county commissioners. 
(c)  The members of the board shall serve without compensation, except that the county commissioners may authorize payment to members on a per diem basis for the time actually devoted to the business of the board. 
(d)  The board shall keep its office and shall hold its meetings in the Bibb County courthouse, and all of said meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall hold regular meetings at least once every three months, and as often in addition thereto as the board may provide. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of all officers having charge of public buildings of Bibb County to allow the reasonable use of space and room therein, and to heat and light for the holding of any examinations or investigations provided for herein, in all proper ways to facilitate the work of the board. It shall be the duty of the board as a body: 
(1)  After a public hearing and proper investigation during which the county commissioners, appointing authority, and the classified employees shall be afforded every opportunity to be heard, to adopt, rescind, and amend rules and regulations for the administration of this civil service system; to set up a classification plan for all positions covered by this system; together with a recommended minimum, intermediate, and maximum salary schedule for such positions which, if adopted by a majority vote of the county commissioners, it shall be the duty of the appointing authority and other employees of Bibb County to which these rules, regulations, classifications, plans, salary schedule, and any modifications thereof may relate, to assist in all proper ways in carrying them into effect. Notice of the contents of such rules, regulations, classification plan, salary schedule and any modifications thereof shall be given to the appointing authority affected thereby, and shall be reprinted for public distribution. 
(2)  To hear and determine appeals and complaints respecting the administrative work of the secretary filed with the board by any appointing authority or classified employee and such other matters as may be filed with the secretary, except that matters for which a hearing is allowed under section 7-101 shall be heard and determined by a hearing officer. 
(3)  To make such investigations as may be requested by the county commissioners where Bibb County employees are affected and to report thereon. 
(4)  To keep minutes of its own meeting and such other records as the board may deem necessary. 
(5)  To examine and approve or modify the annual report prepared by the secretary and submit such report to the county commissioners on or before July 1 of each year transmitting therewith any suggestions it may approve for the more effectual accomplishment of the purpose of this civil service system; and to supervise generally the work of the secretary in the administration of the provisions of this system. Such report shall be made available to any interested groups. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 3); 1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 2813, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 2) 
Sec. 7-52. - Secretary. 
(a)  The Personnel Director of Bibb County or such other person as shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County shall serve as secretary. 
(b)  The county commissioners shall provide adequate facilities and quarters for the board and the secretary to store records and to administer the provisions of this civil service system. 
(c)  The secretary shall take the oath of office prescribed for the county commissioners and give bond in the penal sum to be fixed by the county commissioners. 
(d)  The secretary shall hold his office during good behavior and may be removed at will by the county commissioners. 
(e)  The secretary shall receive no additional compensation for service on behalf of the board unless such shall be provided by the county commissioners. 
(f)  It shall be his duty: 
(1)  To attend meetings of the board, to act as its secretary and to record its official actions. 
(2)  To assist the board in administering the civil service system and in preparing and maintaining the rules, regulations, classification plan, and salary schedule for the proper administration and execution of this system. The rules and regulations as adopted by the board, shall govern the examination procedure, formulation of registers of eligibles, certification of persons qualified for appointments, transfers, demotions, promotions, suspensions, layoffs, reemployments, resignations, leaves of absences without pay, dismissals, and other matters pertaining to the proper administration of this civil service system. 
(3)  To establish and maintain a roster of all officers and employees in the employ of Bibb County who are covered by this system, showing for each such person the date of appointment, the title of position or positions held, the initial rate of compensation and all changes thereof, and such other data as deemed desirable and pertinent. 
(4)  To present to the board all matters filed with him for the board's consideration. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 4); 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), page 4750, § 1) 
Sec. 7-53. - Judicial decisions. 
The board, its secretary, and other personnel shall comply with the provisions of any final decree made by a court of competent jurisdiction respecting the operation of the Bibb County Police Civil Service System. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 22); 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), page 4750, § 1) 
Secs. 7-54—7-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HIRING, PROMOTIONS, DEMOTIONS AND RELATED MATTERS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 7-76. - Methods of filling vacancies. 
Vacancies in the classified service shall be filled either by regular appointment, temporary appointment, reemployment, promotion, transfer, or demotion. The secretary may advise with the appointing authority as to which of these methods should be employed in each instance, but the decision shall rest with the appointing authority, provided, that temporary appointments may be made only in accordance with the provisions herein stated. The appointing authority shall fill vacancies in the classified service by promotion as far as deemed practical. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 8)) 
Sec. 7-77. - Certification and appointment. 
Whenever a vacancy is to be filled by regular appointment, the appointing authority shall submit to the secretary a statement of the duties of the position and a request that the secretary certify the names and persons eligible for appointment to the position. The secretary shall immediately certify to the appointing authority the names of all persons on the eligible register for the position. The appointing authority shall then appoint one of the persons so certified to the position or may elect to make a temporary appointment of some other person. All regular appointments to the classified service covered herein shall be for a probationary period not exceeding 18 months. If during this probationary period, the conduct or capacity of the probationer has not been satisfactory to the appointing authority, the probationer and the board shall be notified in writing that he or she will not receive permanent appointment; otherwise, retention in the service longer than for the probationary period of any employee shall constitute permanent appointment. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 9); 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), page 4750, § 1; 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1068), page 4686, § 1) 
Sec. 7-78. - Temporary and provisional employment. 
Whenever it is impossible to certify eligible persons for appointment to a vacancy in the classified service, the appointing authority may nominate a person to the board. If such nominee is found by the board to have had experience and training which appears to qualify him for the position, he may be temporarily appointed to such vacancy but only until an appropriate eligible register can be established and appointment made therefrom provided that the secretary with the approval of the board may approve a provisional appointment to fill a technical or professional position which requires specialized knowledge or training and which cannot be filled from the eligible register. Successive temporary appointments more than six months shall not be made except with the approval of the board, and then only in the interest of good service; provided, however, that no person shall be given a temporary or provisional appointment unless that person shall be found to have at least sufficient minimum qualifications to qualify to take the examination for the position to which he is provisionally appointed. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 10)) 
Sec. 7-79. - Examinations. 
Each eligible register shall consist of a list of all persons who have shown that they possess the qualifications and have passed the tests which entitle them to be considered eligible for appointment to any position in the class for which the eligible register is to be prepared. The tests may take into consideration elements of character, education, aptitude, experience, knowledge, skill, personality, physical fitness, and other pertinent matters and may be written or oral or may be in the form of actual demonstration of fitness as the board may determine. Such tests shall be competitive, practical, free, and open to all persons who may be lawfully appointed to any position in the class with such limitations as to age, health, habits, character, and other qualifications as may be considered desirable and as are lawful and specified in the announcement of the test. The board may establish or create an examination committee or committees from qualified persons or appoint qualified persons to assist them in preparing, giving, and validating tests. Notices of time, place, and general scope of every test shall be given. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 11); 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), page 4750, § 1) 
Sec. 7-80. - Rating of applicants. 
All applicants shall be rated upon such reasonable and relevant areas as the board may from time to time determine. The names of all applicants who have passed the examination under the policies of the board as they from time to time exist shall be placed on the proper register. Such names shall remain on the eligibility roster for a period of six months commencing with the date on which the name is entered on the register. This term may be extended an additional six months in the discretion of the board for good cause shown. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 12); 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), page 4750, § 1) 
Sec. 7-81. - Filling of vacancies. 
Whenever a vacancy occurs in a position in the classified service, opportunity shall be given to persons holding lower positions in the classified service to apply for the vacancy. Such application shall be made to the board in the form of a letter accompanied by a personal resume. Thereupon, the board shall review the application and resume and certify to the appointing authority such of the applicants as the board finds qualified. In determining eligibility, the board may require applicants to take appropriate examinations. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 13); 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 715), page 4750, § 1) 
Sec. 7-82. - Reemployment. 
(a)  Whenever any employee in the classified service, who has been performing his duties in a satisfactory manner as shown by the records of the department or other agency in which he has been employed, is laid off because of lack of work or lack of funds, or has been on authorized leave of absence and is ready to report for duty when a position is open, or has resigned in good standing and with the consent of the secretary and the head of the department under whose jurisdiction he was employed, and has withdrawn his resignation without being restored to his position, the secretary shall cause the name of such employee to be placed on the reemployment list within three years thereafter when vacancies in the class occur. The order in which names shall be placed on the reemployment list for any class shall be in order according to dates of applications for reemployment. No person shall be reinstated or have his name restored to a reemployment list unless such resignation is withdrawn, within three years after it has been presented and accepted. 
All employees under the classified service who may hereafter enter the service of the United States as specified herein shall upon being honorably discharged therefrom be eligible for reemployment under the classified service as provided herein and shall be restored to their former positions, provided, however, they file application with the board within six months from date of such discharge. 
This provision shall not apply to employees who voluntarily reenlist in the service of the United States at the expiration of the present emergency. 
(b)  When a vacancy exists which the appointing authority has decided to fill by reemployment, the appointing authority shall submit to the secretary in such form as may be prescribed by the board a request that the secretary certify to him the names of persons eligible for reemployment in the class in which the vacant position is established. The secretary shall immediately certify to the appointing authority the names of persons as appropriate registers. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 14)) 
Sec. 7-83. - Transfers. 
An appointing authority may, at any time, transfer any classified employee under his jurisdiction, from one position to another in the same classification. In every such case the appointing authority shall give written notice of this action to the secretary. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 15)) 
Sec. 7-84. - Demotions. 
An appointing authority may, in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the board, demote for cause a classified employee under the appointing authority's jurisdiction from a position in one class to a position in a lower class. The appointing authority must first give the classified employee notice of the proposed action, the reason for the proposed action, an explanation of the supporting evidence, and an opportunity to be heard. Thereafter, the appointing authority may proceed with the demotion, but only after the employee and the secretary have been notified in writing of such contemplated action. When, and only when, such demotion results in a reduction in prestige, responsibility, and pay, such employee so demoted shall have the right to appeal such demotion under the provisions of subdivision II of this division. Any such appeal shall be heard and determined by a hearing officer who can then approve such demotion or reinstate the employee to his or her former position if, in his or her opinion, the demotion is not justified. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 16); 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1068), page 4686, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 4) 
Sec. 7-85. - Suspensions. 
An appointing authority may, in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the board, upon giving written notice to an employee and the secretary, suspend a classified employee for disciplinary purposes without pay for a period not to exceed 30 days in any 12-month period. The appointing authority must first give the classified employee notice of the proposed action, the reason for the proposed action, an explanation of the supporting evidence, and an opportunity to be heard. Thereafter, the appointing authority may proceed with the suspension, but only after the employee and the secretary have been notified in writing of such contemplated action. Any employee so suspended shall have the right to appeal the suspension under the provisions of subdivision II of this division. A hearing officer shall hear and determine the appeal and may approve the suspension or modify the suspension if, in his or her opinion, the suspension is not justified. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 17); 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1068), page 4686, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 5) 
Sec. 7-86. - Layoff and leave of absence without pay. 
An appointing authority may lay off a classified employee whenever he or she deems it requisite due to unusual conditions or shortage or stoppage of work or funds. In every case of this kind, the appointing authority shall, before the effective date thereof, give written notice of this contemplated action to the employee involved and to the secretary. Any person who has been appointed to a position in the classified service, or who shall have attained civil service status under the provisions of this article, other than a temporary or provisional appointee, and who has been laid off for the reasons stated in this part shall have his or her name placed on an appropriate reemployment register. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 18); 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 6) 
Sec. 7-87. - Removal. 
Any appointing authority may discharge a classified employee for cause. The appointing authority must first give the classified employee notice of the proposed action, the reason for the proposed action, an explanation of the supporting evidence, and an opportunity to be heard. Thereafter, the appointing authority may proceed with the discharge, but only after providing the employee to be discharged and the secretary written notice of the discharge and a detailed explanation of the reasons for the discharge before the effective date of the discharge. Willful violation of the rules and regulations established by the appointing authority for employees under his or her direction, conduct unbecoming to an officer, and disobedience to the lawful order of a superior officer shall each be considered just cause for discharge. Such action of the appointing authority shall be final, except the hearing officer may reinstate a classified employee so discharged in case it appears after proper hearing that the discharge was made for political or religious reasons or otherwise not justified. The hearing officer, after proper investigation of the circumstances surrounding the discharge and the fairness thereof, may approve the transfer or reemployment of the employee involved to the same position or to a lower position as the hearing officer may direct; provided, however, that the hearing officer within 30 calendar days from any action discharging, demoting, or suspending any classified employee may, on his or her own motion or on the motion of any party, reopen the case and vacate, modify, or revise his or her former order so as to lessen, but not so as to increase, the penalty imposed; but at the end of such 30 day period, the hearing officer shall not have the authority to reopen such case for any cause. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 19); 1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1068), page 4686, § 1; 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 7) 
Sec. 7-88. - Dismissal for violation. 
Any person in the classified service violating any provisions of this civil service system may be dismissed from the classified service but shall be entitled to a written copy of the charges and an opportunity to a fair hearing before the board prior to said dismissal. 
(1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682, § 1(pt. 23)) 
Secs. 7-89—7-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Suspension, Demotion or Discharge Hearings 

Sec. 7-101. - Matters for which a hearing is allowed. 
(a)  An employee in the classified service is entitled to request a hearing before a hearing officer when the employee has been the subject of disciplinary action resulting in the employee's suspension, demotion, or discharge. The issues that may be heard and determined by the hearing officer are: 
(1)  Whether the employee is guilty of the charges that are the basis for the disciplinary action; and 
(2)  Whether the disciplinary action imposed by an appointing authority is appropriate. 
(b)  An employee in the classified service is not entitled to request a hearing for reasons which include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Issues which are pending before or have been concluded by other administrative or judicial bodies; 
(2)  Work assignments which do not result in a demotion as defined in section 7-84; 
(3)  Budget allocations or changes in organizational structure, including decisions concerning the persons or number of persons assigned to particular jobs or units; 
(4)  The content or rating of a performance appraisal; 
(5)  The appointing authority's decision to select or not to select an individual to fill a position through appointment, promotion, or transfer; 
(6)  Any matter which is not within the jurisdiction or control of the appointing authority; or 
(7)  Internal security practices established by the appointing authority. 
(1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1068), page 4686, § 1(pt. 19A); 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 8) 
Editor's note— The 1994 act added the above section as pt. 19A of 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682. 
Sec. 7-102. - Request for hearing. 
(a)  Time-of-filing. An employee seeking a hearing must file a request for hearing with the secretary within ten working days of the adverse action taken against the employee. 
(b)  Contents of request. The request for hearing shall contain a statement describing what is being appealed and the request shall be on a form provided by the secretary. 
(c)  Referral to hearing officer. Within five working days after receipt of the request for hearing, the secretary will refer the request for hearing to a hearing officer who will determine if the case is appealable and properly filed. If the request for hearing has been properly filed, the hearing officer will notify the employee of the date, time, and place of the appeal hearing which shall be no later than 15 working days after receipt of the request for hearing by the secretary, except that for good cause the hearing officer may continue a hearing for up to an additional 30 days. The hearing officer will also notify the appointing authority and his or her attorney of the date, time, and place of the appeal hearing. The hearing will be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 7-103. 
(1994 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1064), page 4099, § 1(pt. 19B); 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 9) 
Editor's note— The 1994 act added the above section as pt. 19B of 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682. 
Sec. 7-103. - Hearings. 
(a)  Conduct of hearings. Hearings shall be conducted before a hearing officer who shall carry out the hearing and all prehearing and posthearing procedures in accordance with this part. The hearing officer shall: 
(1)  Administer oaths and affirmations; 
(2)  Regulate the course of the hearing; 
(3)  Set the time and place for any prehearing conferences and continued hearings; 
(4)  Fix the time for filing written arguments; 
(5)  Dispose of any motions made by the parties; 
(6)  Provide, where he or she deems appropriate under the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the taking of testimony by deposition, interrogatories, or other written statements; 
(7)  Reprimand or exclude from the hearing any person for any indecorous or improper conduct committed in his or her presence; 
(8)  Make informal disposition of any case by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, or default, if appropriate and not otherwise precluded by law; 
(9)  Require the attendance of witnesses. Employees of the Bibb County Sheriff's Department appearing as witnesses shall be released from their duty without loss of pay or time and without effect on their service rating. An employee who is so designated as a witness by either the appointing authority or the employee who sought the hearing may be disciplined for failure to appear at the hearing. No person shall directly or indirectly use or threaten to use any official authority or other influence which would tend to discourage a person from testifying; and 
(10)  Arrange a prehearing conference for the purpose of reviewing the matter being appealed and establishing stipulations and agreements to expedite the hearing. 
(b)  Hearings procedure. In the hearing of a matter, proceedings shall be informal but orderly. The following procedures shall prevail: 
(1)  The hearing officer shall open the hearing by explaining the procedure to be followed in the hearing. At the direction of the hearing officer, any or all witnesses may be sequestered; 
(2)  The hearing officer shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications as contained in the employee request for hearing form; 
(3)  The stipulations as to any facts not in dispute shall be entered into the record; 
(4)  Each party shall be given the opportunity to make a brief opening statement identifying the issues and stating what is to be proven; 
(5)  All witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation; 
(6)  Each party may conduct such examination of the witnesses as shall be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. This includes the right to cross-examine witnesses adverse to any party's position. In addition, the hearing officer may examine the witnesses; 
(7)  Official notice may be taken of facts generally recognized by the public. In addition, official notice may be taken of technical facts within any specialized knowledge of the hearing officer. Parties shall be notified either before or during the hearing of the material officially noted, and they shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; 
(8)  The board shall provide at its expense a certified court reporter who will take down the testimony at the hearing. In the event that the hearing officer requests that the hearing be transcribed, such transcription will be at the expense of the board. In the event that either of the parties requests that the hearing be transcribed, such transcription cost shall be at the expense of the party so requesting the transcript; 
(9)  An employee may represent himself or herself at the hearing or he or she may retain the services of an attorney to represent the employee at the hearing. In the event that the employee does retain the services of an attorney to represent him or her, the board will reimburse the employee for said employee's attorney's fees and expenses in an amount not greater than $500.00; 
(10)  Before closing the hearing, the hearing officer shall allow both parties, or their respective attorneys, the opportunity to make brief oral or written closing arguments; 
(11)  The hearing officer shall decide the case and shall, within 15 working days from receipt of the transcript of the hearing, issue a written decision with findings of fact and reasons for his or her decision; provided, however, that for good cause, the hearing officer may extend the time for rendering a decision for an additional 15 working days. The hearing officer's decision shall be immediately transmitted to all parties and their counsel. The hearing officer's decision may be appealed to the Superior Court of Bibb County by petition for certiorari; and 
(12)  The hearing shall be open to the public as required by law. However, the hearing may be closed at the request of the employee. Likewise, any documentary and other evidence shall be available for public inspection as required by law. 
(c)  Evidentiary rules for hearings. With respect to all hearings before the hearing officer, the following rules regarding evidence shall govern: 
(1)  Formal, legal rules of evidence shall not be strictly applied. Evidence may be admitted if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. The hearing officer shall follow the Georgia Rules of Evidence regarding privileges recognized by state law; 
(2)  Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. Objections to evidentiary offers shall be made and ruled upon by the hearing officer; 
(3)  When a hearing will be expedited and the interest of the parties will not be prejudiced thereby, any part of the evidence may be received in written form, including but not limited to the use of depositions, interrogatories, affidavits, or written statements; 
(4)  The burden of proof shall be on the person requesting the hearing. That person shall have the right to open and conclude; 
(5)  Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies. However, upon request and at the discretion of the hearing officer, parties shall be given the opportunity to compare the copy with the original document; and 
(6)  The hearing officer's decision shall be supported by substantial evidence. Substantial evidence is that degree of relevant evidence that a reasonable mind, considering the record as a whole, might accept as adequate to support a conclusion that the matter asserted is true. 
(1977 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 10) 
Editor's note— The 1994 act added the above section as pt. 19C of 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682. 
Sec. 7-104. - Appointment and compensation of hearing officers. 
The board, in consultation with the secretary, shall select an independent, impartial person who has been a member of the State Bar of Georgia for at least ten years to serve as hearing officer in matters for which a hearing is allowed under section 7-101. 
(1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 239), page 4099, § 11) 
Editor's note— The 1997 act added the above section as pt. 19D of 1955 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), page 682. 
CHAPTER 8. - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Street construction and maintenance—General assembly authorized to grant authority to board of commissioners. 
The General Assembly is hereby authorized to grant the governing authority of Bibb County with the power to provide for the construction and maintenance of streets, roads, bridges, sidewalks, curbings, gutters, and related installations, both within and without the corporate limits of any municipality in said county. The General Assembly is hereby authorized to provide by law the manner in which the cost of such construction and maintenance shall be borne, including all matters relating to taxation and assessment for such purposes. The General Assembly shall also be authorized to relieve any municipality within said county from the obligation of any part or all of such construction and maintenance. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 227), page 1112, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VII, § IV, ¶ I was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-120, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws page 5135. 
Sec. 8-2. - Same—Authority over streets within municipalities. 
In pursuance of the authority granted under Article VII, Section IV, Paragraph I of the Constitution as it relates to Bibb County, Bibb County is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with any municipality within the limits of Bibb County for the construction and maintenance of any public streets, roads, bridges, sidewalks, curbings, gutters, and related facilities located within the limits of the County of Bibb. Said agreements shall provide the manner in which the costs of such construction and maintenance shall be borne and shall provide for a method whereby each party to such agreements may relieve themselves of any part or portion of the obligations contained within said agreements. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 861), page 2831, § 1) 
Secs. 8-3—8-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ROADS IN SUBDIVIDED AREAS 

Sec. 8-26. - Rules, standards. 
The County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb are hereby authorized to prescribe, administer and enforce reasonable rules, regulations, conditions and standards for the planning, construction, drainage, surfacing and maintenance of roads, including bridges and culverts, within subdivided properties in Bibb County and in the discretion of said board to require or not to require, in the name of Bibb County, contract commitments and guaranties, including cash deposit or surety company bond, for compliance with such rules, regulations, conditions and standards, provided, however, that the rules, regulations, conditions and standards prescribed shall not exceed, in stringency or severity, the Georgia State Highway Department Standard Specifications of Roads and Bridges, then in current use and for the type of work approved for such subdivision. The aforesaid board of commissioners are empowered to make and, upon request, shall make precommitments, for and in behalf of Bibb County, for the acceptance of such works, as public works for future public maintenance, when and if in compliance with such rules, regulations, conditions and standards. When any such precommitment is made, inspection service of the work to which the request relates shall be provided by and at the expense of Bibb County to assist in compliance with such rules, regulations, conditions and standards. 
(1953 (Nov.-Dec. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 778), page 2850, § 1) 
Sec. 8-27. - Alterations in roads. 
The County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb are likewise empowered, and to the same measure and extent as aforesaid with respect to the works above described in section 8-26, to provide rules, regulations, standards and conditions for alteration to, work or installations upon, over or under excavations in or under the aforesaid works, including alterations, work, installations or excavations by or at the instance of utility companies or any other person, firm or corporation, provided, that the rules, regulations, conditions and standards shall not exceed in stringency or severity those required with respect to public roads of Bibb County. 
(1953 (Nov.-Dec. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 778), page 2850, § 2) 
Sec. 8-28. - Failure to comply. 
In the event any person, firm or corporation to whom such rules, regulations and standards are applicable, fails or refuses to comply therewith, the County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb are hereby authorized in the name of Bibb County, and in behalf of such person, firm or corporation so failing or refusing to comply, to cause the work or works affected to be constructed or reconstructed so as to comply with such rules, regulations, conditions and standards, utilizing county forces for such work or contracting the work to others. The cost of the construction or reconstruction incident to noncompliance shall be charged against the violator, constitute a lien against all the property of the violator of every kind and character and wherever situate, and may be collected in the name of Bibb County either by suit or in the same manner as ad valorem taxes owing to Bibb County are collected. 
(1953 (Nov.-Dec. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 778), page 2850, § 3) 
Sec. 8-29. - Violations. 
Any violator of such rules, regulations or standards shall be prosecuted in the State Court of Bibb County and, upon conviction, punished as for a misdemeanor under the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to that court. 
(1953 (Nov.-Dec. Sess.) Ga. Laws (Act No. 778), page 2850, § 4) 
CHAPTER 9. - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 9-1—9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-26. - Authorized; capitation tax; road duty; defaulters; exception. 
The county board of commissioners shall, each year, at the time they assess the county taxes for other purposes, assess an ad valorem tax not exceeding one-fourth of one percent upon all the taxable property of the county, as a road tax, for the purpose of building and maintaining the public roads of the county. Said board of commissioners shall also, at the same time and for the same purposes, assess as a commutation road tax for the calendar year next following the year of its assessment, a capitation tax to be paid in lieu of road work, not to exceed $3.00, upon each and every person in the county subject under the law to county road duty. The full performance of road duty each year as required by law, either in person or by proxy, shall operate as a release and exemption from the payment of said commutation tax. All road defaulters of the county or persons who, being subject to county road duty and duly summoned to work, either personally or by publication, or by mail, fail or refuse to obey such summons and to work either in person or by proxy, under the direction and order of the road commissioners of the county the full number of days required by law, not to exceed six in each calendar year, shall be liable and subject to the payment of said commutation road tax. The list of such road defaulters shall be ascertained and made out each year by the tax collector from the reports required by law to be made to him by the road commissioners of the several districts of the county, which reports shall be filed with him by September 1 of each year and shall show the names of all persons in the several districts of the county subject to road duty, and also the names of all those who are defaulters, and liable under the provisions of this act for said commutation road tax. Said commutation road tax shall be due and payable at the same time and collected by the tax collector in the same manner and subject to the same laws and remedies in case of failure to pay as other county taxes; provided, that none of the provisions of this section for the assessment and collection of said commutation road tax shall be of force against the residents of the City of Macon in said county. 
(1873 Ga. Laws (Act No. CXCIX), page 219, § XIV; 1903 Ga. Laws (Act No. 331), page 321, § 1; 1916 Ga. Laws (Act No. 318), page 363, § 1) 
Sec. 9-27. - Local constitutional amendment regarding homestead—Defined. 
The term `homestead', as such term is used for purposes of determining eligibility for homestead exemption from local county, city and school taxes in Bibb County, shall include, but not be limited to, a claimant holding under an occupancy agreement as a stockholder of a nonprofit cooperative ownership housing corporation, which holds property, either as owner or under a 99-year lease. (1978 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 117), page 2360, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1976) art. VII, § I, ¶ IV was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-112, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws, page 5094. 
Sec. 9-28. - Same—Exemptions. 
Any other provisions of this constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, each resident of Bibb County is hereby granted an exemption from all Bibb County and Bibb County School District ad valorem taxes in the amount hereinafter provided of the value of the homestead owned and occupied by said resident as a homestead within Bibb County. For calendar year 1981, such homestead exemption shall be $5,000.00. For calendar year 1982, the exemption shall be $6,000.00. For calendar year 1983 and thereafter, the exemption shall be $7,000.00. For the purpose of Bibb County and Bibb County School District ad valorem taxes, the homestead exemption granted herein shall be in lieu of the basic homestead exemption provided for the homestead of each resident of Georgia, and the provisions of this constitution and of law relating to such basic homestead exemption shall apply to the homestead exemption granted herein, except for the amount thereof. The homestead exemption granted herein for residents of Bibb County shall be in addition to and cumulative of the homestead exemption granted to certain persons 65 years of age or older as provided in the seventh unnumbered paragraph herein and in addition to and cumulative of the homestead exemption granted to certain residents of county school districts who are 62 years of age or older as provided in the fifteenth unnumbered paragraph herein. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 191), page 2133, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1983) art. VII, § I, ¶ IV was continued in force and effect by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-55. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. 
Sec. 9-29. - Local constitutional amendment exempting certain agricultural products. 
In order to encourage and enhance overall economic development, increase employment, promote agribusiness, and to provide incentives for the location of new and expanding manufacturing and processing facilities, harvested agricultural products which have a planting-to-harvest cycle of 12 months or less, which are customarily cured and aged for a period in excess of one year after harvesting, and before manufacturing, and which are held in Bibb County for manufacturing or processing purposes, shall be exempt from all ad valorem taxation. Such products shall not be exempt from state ad valorem taxation. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 145), page 1706, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. VII, § I, ¶ IV was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. AA-86-123, adopted August 5, 1986. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. Such ordinance can be found in 1988 Ga. Laws, page 5149. 
Sec. 9-30. - Local constitutional amendment regarding joint tax collection. 
Notwithstanding any provision of law or of this constitution to the contrary, the respective governing authorities of the City of Macon and the County of Bibb may, solely by their joint resolution, consolidate, merge and combine the offices, officers and functions of the city and of the county relating to the time, manner and method for the return, collection, property assessment, notice of property assessment, hearing, appeal, arbitration or review of property assessment, lien, priority of lien and collection of ad valorem taxes levied by the City of Macon and County of Bibb and State of Georgia, and respecting any and all other matters relating or incident to the same, to specify and provide for the time, method and manner of performing any and all such matters and functions, and, without limitation of the foregoing generality, including the retention, release, or combination of present offices and officers, positions and employees, the election or selection of officers and employees to perform such consolidated and combined tax functions, the compensation and tenure of office and employment of such officers and employees, their classification as officers or employees of either the city or county or both for purposes of compensation coverage and retirement, pension and old-age benefits, the designation of the place or places for the performance of the services and duties connected with or incident to the consolidated and combined tax function between the city and county, and all other related or incident matters; provided, further, however, that the Tax Commissioner of the County of Bibb, as elected from time to time pursuant to law applicable to such office, shall be in charge of such combined and consolidated tax office and function, subject, however, to such limitations upon his authority and power as may be imposed by said joint resolution, and such tax commissioner shall, except as to matters relating to ad valorem taxation, additionally perform the duties of his office as tax commissioner as required by law applicable to that office; provided, further, that in the performance of any and all of the matters herein authorized and relating to ad valorem taxation, due process of law shall be afforded and the right of any person to homestead exemptions as provided by law and as related to ad valorem taxes due to the State of Georgia and County of Bibb shall not be affected hereby or hereunder; provided, further, that the powers herein delegated may be exercised from time to time and either together, separately or in any combination of the same. Provided, however, that such action may be changed, superseded, or revoked by legislative action which Act shall be binding on the City and County until subsequently changed by the General Assembly; and provided further nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any change in the ad valorem tax millage limitation prescribed by any legislative Act. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 215), page 1067, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above amendment to Ga. Const. (1945) art. XI, § I, ¶ VI was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1380), page 5533. See Ga. Const. (1983) art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. 
Sec. 9-31. - Ad valorem property tax administration. 
Pursuant to the authority granted the General Assembly pursuant to Article XI, Section I, Paragraph VI of the Constitution of 1945, as amended by section 9-30 of this compilation, to change, supersede, or revoke the provisions of said paragraph as amended by section 9-30 of this compilation the General Assembly hereby expressly declares that the said paragraph, as amended by section 9-30 of this compilation is hereby changed, superseded, and revoked to the extent necessary to apply to Bibb County and to the joint Bibb County-City of Macon Tax Commissioner the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-311, relating to review of assessments by county boards of equalization, as such section may now or hereafter be amended. With respect to the application of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-311 to Bibb County, the terms "county board of tax assessors," "local board of tax assessors," and "board of tax assessors" shall be construed to mean the office or officer in Bibb County exercising the duties or functions of a county board of tax assessors as provided by law. 
(1978 Ga. Laws (Act No. 971), page 3738, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 218), page 3752, § 1) 
Secs. 9-32—9-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAX COMMISSIONER 

Sec. 9-51. - Tax receiver and collector office consolidated. 
The offices of Tax Receiver and Tax Collector of Bibb County, Georgia, are hereby consolidated so that there shall no longer exist any independent office of tax receiver or tax collector in said county, but the officer performing the duties of said two offices when so consolidated shall be known as the County Tax Commissioner of Bibb County, Georgia. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), page 754, § 1) 
Sec. 9-52. - Office created. 
The office of County Tax Commissioner of Bibb County, Georgia, is hereby created in lieu of said abolished or consolidated offices, and the rights, duties, and liabilities of said County Tax Commissioner of Bibb County, Georgia, shall be the same as the rights, duties, and liabilities of the tax receiver and tax collector of said county so far as the same may be applicable, except that all fees, commissioners, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances, and all other perquisites of whatever kind (including, specifically, fees received from the state), whether accrued on the effective date of this division or accruing thereafter, that would be paid to or collected by either the Tax Receiver or Tax Collector of Bibb County, were it not for the provisions of this division, shall be collected by the county tax commissioner herein provided for, for the sole use of Bibb County, and shall be held as public moneys belonging to Bibb County, accounted for and paid over to said county on or before the tenth day of each month for the preceding month, at which time a detailed, itemized statement shall be made by the officer under oath showing such collections and the sources from which collected, and the county treasurer or other custodian or depository of county funds shall keep a separate account showing the sources from which said funds were derived and paid and received. 
With this exception, all laws now of force relating to tax receivers and tax collectors are hereby made applicable to said county tax commissioner so far as consistent with the provisions of this division. 
It is expressly enacted that the county tax commissioner hereby created shall never take any benefit by way of compensation under act approved March 24, 1939, and contained on pages 370, 371, and 372 of the published Acts of 1939, but all of the commissions accruing to the office of tax collector under the terms of said act shall be collected by the county tax commissioner herein provided for as public moneys belonging to Bibb County whether said commissions accrued before or after the effective date of this act. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), page 754, § 2) 
Sec. 9-53. - Collection of tax. 
All taxes that are due and payable at the time the provisions of this division become effective and all tax fi. fas. theretofore issued by the Tax Collector of Bibb County, Georgia, shall have full force and effect, and be collectible by the county tax commissioner aforesaid. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), page 754, § 3) 
Sec. 9-54. - Election. 
The first election of County Tax Commissioner of Bibb County shall be held at the November general election in 1942, and under the same rules, regulations, and laws governing the election for county officers, except that the tax commissioner so elected shall enter upon the duties of his office on January 1, 1943, and serve for a term of two years, and until his successor is elected and qualifies. Succeeding tax commissioners shall be elected at the general election for county officers in the year 1944, and quadrennially thereafter, under the same rules, regulations, and laws governing the election for county officers; shall take office on January 1, next succeeding his election; and shall serve for a term of four years, and until his successor is elected and qualifies. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), page 754, § 4) 
Sec. 9-55. - Election tie. 
The provisions of the Code of Georgia of 1933, Title 34-2601-2607 [now repealed] shall attend such elections and, in case of ties, a new election or elections shall be called by the judge of the probate court within periods of not less than 30 days, until one person has received a plurality of votes. 
In all such elections the judge of the probate court shall determine who has received a plurality of the votes cast, and certify the same to the governor of the state, who shall issue a commission to the officer so elected. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), page 754, § 4) 
Sec. 9-56. - Vacancy, how filled. 
In case of a vacancy in said office after a county tax commissioner is first elected hereunder, such vacancy shall be filled in the following manner: If the vacancy occurs within one year before the expiration of the term of such county tax commissioner, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the judge of the probate court. In case the vacancy occurs at a time when there remains more than one year of an unexpired term, then a special election shall be called by the judge of the probate court within 45 days for the purpose of filling said vacancy, and pending such election the vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the judge of the probate court. Any officer appointed or elected to said office shall comply with the provisions of this division as to the giving of bond and taking the oath of office, and shall perform all of the duties of said office while he occupies the same as required of one elected for the full term of office. Any special election provided herein shall be held upon the same rules, regulations and laws governing special elections to fill vacancies in county offices. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), page 754, § 5) 
Sec. 9-57. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office said county tax commissioner shall take and subscribe an oath, including the oath now required of a tax receiver and the oath required of a tax collector in this state, and shall also give bond and security insofar as state taxes are concerned under the same terms and conditions and in the same manner and in the same amount as are now or may hereafter be required of either the tax receiver or tax collector, and as to county funds shall give bond in such amount as may from time to time be required by the County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb or such officer as may at the time have charge of its fiscal affairs. The bond for county funds shall be in such manner and form as shall be approved by the county board of commissioners of said county or other fiscal agent or officer. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), page 754, § 6) 
Sec. 9-58. - Compensation. 
The County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb in conjunction with the grand jury of said county are hereby authorized to fix the compensation of the county tax commissioner as herein provided for, except that, for the year 1943, it shall be fixed by the county board of commissioners alone. Immediately upon the effective date of this division, the county board of commissioners shall fix the compensation of said county tax commissioner for the year 1943, and shall also fix the number of assistants and compensation of the same, which when so fixed, shall be paid to the county tax commissioner on a monthly basis, and the county tax commissioner shall thereupon immediately pay to his assistants the salaries previously fixed for them by the county board of commissioner. For the year 1944 and all subsequent years the salary of said county tax commissioner, the number of his assistants and salaries for his assistants, shall be fixed in the following manner. 
At least 90 days before January 1 in each year (beginning with January, 1944), the county tax commissioner aforesaid shall furnish to the county board of commissioners or other county authority having jurisdiction over its fiscal affairs a statement as to the number of assistants or deputies required by said county tax commissioner together with his recommendation as to the salaries of such assistants, and thereupon the said county board of commissioners or other authority having charge of its fiscal affairs shall fix for the year succeeding the salaries of said county tax commissioner the number of assistants and the salaries of said assistants. It is hereby expressly provided that the number of assistants for such county tax commissioner shall be fixed and determined by the authority above prescribed, subject to the approval of the grand jury as herein provided, but it shall be within the power and authority of said county tax commissioner after the beginning of his term of office to designate and name the person or persons who shall be such assistants and to remove them at his will and pleasure. Provided, however, that before the action of the county board of commissioners or other fiscal agent of said county in fixing said salaries and number of assistants shall become effective the same shall be submitted to the grand jury then sitting or in the event no grand jury is in session at the time of fixing said salaries, the next grand jury convening thereafter. 
It shall be the duty of said county board of commissioners or other county authority to submit the schedule of salaries as soon as possible after the said schedule shall have been determined. The first order of business of the grand jury to which this division applies, after the submission by the county board of commissioners or other county authority of the salary schedule shall be the consideration of the said schedule. The grand jury shall have the power to disapprove the said schedule by two-thirds vote of all the members thereof, but unless the said grand jury disapproves the said schedule by the two-thirds vote, the said schedule shall remain as fixed by the said county board of commissioners, or other county authority. In the event that the grand jury fails to act upon the said schedule within ten days after the submission thereof, then it shall remain as fixed by the county board of commissioners or other county authority. In the event the grand jury disapproves the schedule of salaries submitted to it by a two-thirds vote as aforesaid, then the foreman of said grand jury shall appoint a committee from the said grand jury consisting of as many members as there are members of the said board of county commissioners or other county authority, which committee shall meet in joint conference with the said county board of commissioners or other county authority for the purpose of harmonizing their contentions and determining upon a proper schedule of salaries, and the schedule of salaries approved by a majority of said joint conference committee shall be final. Provided that, except for the year 1943, the salary of said county tax commissioner and of all of his deputies or assistants and the expense of his office shall not, in the aggregate, exceed for any one year 60 percent of the fees, costs, commissions, etc., accruing to his office and actually collected by him and paid into the county treasury during the preceding year. All commissions for purposes of this limitation shall be figures under the laws of this state relating thereto as applied to the Tax Collector and Tax Receiver of Bibb County immediately prior to 1939. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), page 754, § 7) 
Sec. 9-59. - Tax levy. 
The county board of commissioners of said county or other fiscal agent thereof be and is hereby authorized to levy a tax sufficient to pay said salaries as they accrue as well as any necessary expense of the operation of said office where such expense has been approved by said county board of commissioners. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), page 754, § 8) 
Sec. 9-60. - Compensation. 
When the salary of said county tax commissioner and his assistants has been fixed in the manner herein provided; the same, with the payment of the salaries of the assistants to said county tax commissioner as herein provided and the approved expense of his office as herein provided, shall constitute the sole and only compensation of the said county tax commissioner for the performance of all of the duties of his office, whether under existing laws or laws hereafter enacted. 
(1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), page 754, § 9) 
PART II - RELATED LAWS [OF MACON COUNTY][5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Part II contains local constitutional amendments, joint resolutions between the City of Macon and Bibb County, and state laws of local application that apply to the city but are not incorporated in the Charter. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Any material in brackets has been added to clarify the meaning of the text. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used. At the end of each section appears a reference to the basic act and amendatory acts, if any. Section numbers, subsection letters and numbers and catchlines have been added to facilitate use of this compilation and are the same as those in the 1979 Code. Formal citations should be to the original act, and not to this compilation. 

CHAPTER 3. - MACON WATER AUTHORITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— As 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 665) page 4991 totally revised 1966 Ga. Laws (Act No. 238), page 2737, history notes in this chapter are to the 1992 act and the parenthetical reference following the section number is the section of the 1966 act as designated in the 1992 act. Prior to amendment by the 1992 act, the 1966 act had been amended by the following acts: 

 

Sec. 3.1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Macon Water Authority Act". 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665), page 4991, § 1) 
Sec. 3.2. - Macon Water Authority created. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the Macon Water Authority, which shall be deemed to be a public corporation and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority or the trustee acting under any trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by its officers, agents, or employees. 
(b)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, the authority shall consist of seven members, five of whom shall be elected as provided in this section. Of the remaining two members of the authority, one shall be a member of the governing authority of the City of Macon to be appointed by the governing authority of the City of Macon and one shall be a member of the governing authority of Bibb County to be appointed by the governing authority of Bibb County. 
(2)  For the purpose of electing members of the authority, Bibb County and parts of Jones County are divided into five electoral districts as follows: 
(A)  Districts 1 through 4 shall be and correspond to those numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: MWAp5 Plan Type: Local User: Linda Administrator: Macon City. 
(B)  District 5 shall consist of all of Bibb County and all those parts of Jones County included in District 1. 
(3)  When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Bibb County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Bibb County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(4)  One member of the authority shall be elected to represent each electoral district. Each member shall reside within the district he or she represents. 
(c)  (1)  In the 1992 general election, candidates shall be elected from Districts 2 and 3. In the 1996 general election candidates shall be elected from Districts 1, 4, and 5. Candidates elected from such districts shall take office on the first day of January following their election and serve for a term of office of six years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors to the elected members of the authority shall be elected in the general election conducted immediately prior to the expiration of the term of office for which they offer as candidates, shall take office on the first day of January following their election, and shall serve for terms of office of six years and until the election and qualification of their successors. Members of the authority from the City of Macon and Bibb County shall be appointed by the respective appointing body, and such members shall serve on the authority at the pleasure of each appointing body and only so long as they are members of the respective appointing body. 
(2)  The members of the authority in office on the effective date of this Act shall continue in office until the expiration of the terms for which they are serving on the effective date of this Act. 
(d)  Any person eligible to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia in Bibb and Jones counties shall be deemed qualified to hold the office of elected member of the authority; provided, however, that no person shall be eligible to hold office, unless at the time of his or her election, he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years; provided, further, that he or she shall not remove his or her residence from his or her district during his or her term of office on pain of forfeiture thereof. 
(e)  All elections for members of the authority shall be conducted by the Macon-Bibb county Board of Elections in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Election Code,' as the same now exists or may hereafter exist. 
(f)  Should any vacancy occur among the elective members of the authority with respect to a term having more than 120 days to run, the remaining members of the authority shall forthwith notify the judge of the probate court who shall appoint a qualified person to serve until the next general election, at which time a successor shall be elected for the unexpired term. The appointee of the judge of the probate court shall serve until a successor shall have been elected and shall qualify. Any person so elected at such special election shall hold office for the unexpired term for which he or she was elected. If a vacancy occurs within 120 days from the expiration of the term of the elected member causing the vacancy, no such election shall be held, but the remaining or surviving members of the authority shall constitute the authority until the next election; provided, however, that appointments shall be made in any event and regardless of the time that the vacancy commences if the vacancy of a member causes more than one vacancy to exist on the authority. 
(g)  Immediately after election, all members of the authority shall give bond for the faithful performance of their duties in the sum of $10,000.00, payable to the Governor of the State of Georgia and approved by the judge of the Probate Court of Bibb County. 
(h)  The salary for each elected member of the authority shall be $5,400.00 per annum, payable monthly at the rate of $450.00. All members of the authority, elected and appointed, may be reimbursed for the actual expenses necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(i)  The authority shall have full power to organize, adopt rules for its government, and generally to direct the affairs of the authority. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the power of the authority to exercise all of the rights and powers of and perform all of the duties and obligations of the authority. 
(j)  The chairman of the authority shall be the member elected to represent District 5. 
(k)  A majority of the members in office shall constitute a quorum. The authority shall have perpetual existence; provided, however, that nothing contained in this Act shall preclude the General Assembly of Georgia from amending this Act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665), page 4991, § 2; 1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 296), page 4832, § 1; 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 706), page 5363) 
Editor's note— The plan referenced in subsection (b)(2) of this section reads as follows: 
Plan Name: MWAp5 Plan Type: Local User: Linda Administrator: Macon City 
Redistricting Plan Components Report 
District 001 
Bibb County 
Tract: 101 
BG: 1 
Tract: 102 
BG: 1 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 
Tract: 103 
BG: 1 
1000 
Tract: 105 
BG: 1 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 
BG: 2 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 
BG: 3 
3000 3016 3017 
Tract: 106 
BG: 1 
BG: 2 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2017 2018 
BG: 3 
Tract: 107 
Tract: 108 
BG: 1 
BG: 2 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 2997 2998 
Tract: 110 
BG: 1 
BG: 2 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2999 
BG: 3 
BG: 4 
BG: 5 
Tract: 111 
Tract: 112 
Tract: 113 
Tract: 114 
Tract: 115 
BG: 1 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 
Tract: 117.01 
Tract: 117.02 
Tract: 129 
Tract: 130 
BG: 1 
BG: 2 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 2046 2047 2048 2049 2050 2051 2052 2053 2054 2055 2056 2057 2058 2059 2060 2061 2062 2063 2064 2065 2066 2067 2068 2069 2070 2071 2072 2073 2074 2075 2076 2077 2078 2079 2080 2081 2082 2083 2084 2085 2086 2087 2088 2089 2090 2091 2092 2093 2094 2095 2096 2138 2139 2142 2143 2144 2145 2146 2147 2150 2151 2152 2153 2154 2156 2157 2158 2160 2162 2163 2164 2165 2166 2167 2168 2169 2170 2171 2172 2173 2174 2175 2176 2177 2178 2179 2180 2181 2182 2183 2184 2185 2186 2187 2188 2189 2190 2191 2192 2193 2194 2195 2196 2197 2198 2199 2200 2201 2202 2203 2204 2205 2206 2207 2208 2209 2210 2211 2212 2213 2215 2216 2217 2219 2220 2221 2222 2223 2224 2225 2234 2235 2236 2990 2991 2992 2993 2994 2995 2996 2997 2998 2999 
Tract: 133.01 
Tract: 133.02 
Tract: 135.01 
BG: 1 
1007 
BG: 4 
4000 4001 4012 4013 4014 4015 4016 4017 4018 4996 4998 
BG: 5 
Tract: 135.02 
Jones County 
Tract: 301.01 
BG: 1 
1006 
Tract: 301.02 
BG: 3 
3019 3020 
BG: 9 
9015 9016 9017 9018 9021 9022 9023 9024 9025 9026 9027 9036 9037 9043 9044 9046 
District 002 
Bibb County 
Tract: 101 
BG: 2 
BG: 3 
Tract: 102 
BG: 1 
1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 
BG: 2 
BG: 3 
3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3015 3016 3017 3018 
Tract: 103 
BG: 1 
1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 
BG: 2 
Tract: 104 
Tract: 105 
BG: 1 
1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 
BG: 2 
2011 2012 2013 
BG: 3 
3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 
Tract: 106 
BG: 2 
2007 2008 2014 2015 2016 
Tract: 108 
BG: 2 
2009 
Tract: 115 
BG: 1 
1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 
BG: 2 
Tract: 122 
BG: 1 
1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 
Tract: 123 
BG: 1 
BG: 2 
BG: 3 
3000 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019 3020 3021 3022 3023 3024 3025 3026 3027 3028 3029 3030 3031 3032 3033 3034 3035 3036 3037 3038 3039 3040 3041 
Tract: 124 
BG: 1 
1007 
Tract: 125 
BG: 1 
BG: 2 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2010 2011 2012 
BG: 3 
Tract: 126 
Tract: 127 
Tract: 128 
Tract: 130 
BG: 2 
2097 2098 2099 2100 2101 2102 2103 2104 2105 2106 2107 2108 2109 2110 2111 2112 2113 2114 2115 2116 2117 2118 2119 2120 2121 2122 2123 2124 2125 2126 2127 2128 2129 2130 2131 2132 2133 2134 2135 2136 2137 2140 2141 2148 2149 2155 2159 2161 2214 2218 2226 2227 2228 2229 2230 2231 2232 2233 
Tract: 131.01 
BG: 1 
1000 1001 
BG: 5 
5000 5001 5002 5003 5005 5006 5007 5008 5036 5037 
Tract: 131.02 
BG: 1 
BG: 2 
BG: 3 
Tract: 135.01 
BG: 1 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1999 
BG: 2 
BG: 3 
BG: 4 
4002 4003 4004 4005 4006 4007 4008 4009 4010 4011 4997 4999 
District 003 
Bibb County 
Tract: 102 
BG: 3 
3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 
Tract: 108 
BG: 2 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2999 
Tract: 110 
BG: 2 
2018 2019 2020 2021 2998 
Tract: 118 
Tract: 119 
Tract: 120 
Tract: 121 
Tract: 122 
BG: 1 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 
BG: 2 
Tract: 123 
BG: 3 
3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 
Tract: 124 
BG: 1 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 
BG: 2 
Tract: 132.01 
BG: 1 
1000 
Tract: 134.01 
BG: 1 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1037 1998 1999 
BG: 2 
BG: 3 
Tract: 134.02 
Tract: 136.01 
BG: 3 
3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3034 3035 3036 
District 004 
Bibb County 
Tract: 124 
BG: 3 
BG: 4 
BG: 5 
Tract: 125 
BG: 2 
2009 
Tract: 131.01 
BG: 1 
1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 
BG: 2 
BG: 3 
BG: 4 
BG: 5 
5004 5009 5010 5011 5012 5013 5014 5015 5016 5017 5018 5019 5020 5021 5022 5023 5024 5025 5026 5027 5028 5029 5030 5031 5032 5033 5034 5035 5038 5039 5040 5041 5042 5043 5044 5045 
Tract: 131.02 
BG: 4 
Tract: 132.01 
BG: 1 
1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 1999 
BG: 2 
BG: 3 
BG: 4 
Tract: 132.02 
Tract: 134.01 
BG: 1 
1036 
BG: 4 
Tract: 136.01 
BG: 1 
BG: 2 
BG: 3 
3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019 3020 3021 3022 3023 3024 3025 3026 3027 3028 3029 3030 3031 3032 3033 3994 3995 3996 3997 3998 3999 
BG: 4 
Tract: 136.02 
(4)  One member of the authority shall be elected to represent each electoral district. Each member shall reside within the district he or she represents. 
(c)  (1)  In the 1992 general election, candidates shall be elected from Districts 2 and 3. In the 1996 general election candidates shall be elected from Districts 1, 4, and 5. Candidates elected from such districts shall take office on the first day of January following their election and serve for a term of office of six years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Thereafter, successors to the elected members of the authority shall be elected in the general election conducted immediately prior to the expiration of the term of office for which they offer as candidates, shall take office on the first day of January following their election, and shall serve for terms of office of six years and until the election and qualification of their successors. Members of the authority from the City of Macon and Bibb County shall be appointed by the respective appointing body, and such members shall serve on the authority at the pleasure of each appointing body and only so long as they are members of the respective appointing body. 
(2)  The members of the authority in office on the effective date of this Act shall continue in office until the expiration of the terms for which they are serving on the effective date of this Act. 
(d)  Any person eligible to vote for members of the General Assembly of Georgia in Bibb and Jones counties shall be deemed qualified to hold the office of elected member of the authority; provided, however, that no person shall be eligible to hold office, unless at the time of his or her election, he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years; provided, further, that he or she shall not remove his or her residence from his or her district during his or her term of office on pain of forfeiture thereof. 
(e)  All elections for members of the authority shall be conducted by the Macon-Bibb County Board of Elections in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as the same now exists or may hereafter exist. 
(f)  Should any vacancy occur among the elective members of the authority with respect to a term having more than 120 days to run, the remaining members of the authority shall forthwith notify the judge of the probate court who shall appoint a qualified person to serve until the next general election, at which time a successor shall be elected for the unexpired term. The appointee of the judge of the probate court shall serve until a successor shall have been elected and shall qualify. Any person so elected at such special election shall hold office for the unexpired term for which he or she was elected. If a vacancy occurs within 120 days from the expiration of the term of the elected member causing the vacancy, no such election shall be held, but the remaining or surviving members of the authority shall constitute the authority until the next election; provided, however, that appointments shall be made in any event and regardless of the time that the vacancy commences if the vacancy of a member causes more than one vacancy to exist on the authority 
(g)  Immediately after election, all members of the authority shall give bond for the faithful performance of their duties in the sum of $10,000.00, payable to the Governor of the State of Georgia and approved by the judge of the Probate Court of Bibb County. 
(h)  The salary for each elected member of the authority shall be $5,400.00 per annum, payable monthly at the rate of $450.00. All members of the authority, elected and appointed, may be reimbursed for the actual expenses necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(i)  The authority shall have full power to organize, adopt rules for its government, and generally to direct the affairs of the authority No vacancy on the authority shall impair the power of the authority to exercise all of the rights and powers of and perform all of the duties and obligations of the authority. 
(j)  The chairman of the authority shall be the member elected to represent District 5. 
(k)  A majority of the members in office shall constitute a quorum. The authority shall have perpetual existence; provided, however, that nothing contained in this Act shall preclude the General Assembly of Georgia from amending this Act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665), page 4991, § 2; 1999 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 296), page 4832, § 1) 
Sec. 3.3. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act, the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, and operating adequate water supply, treatment, and distribution facilities and sewerage collection, treatment, and distribution facilities; making such facilities and the services thereof available to public and private consumers and users located in Bibb County and its environs, including municipalities inside and outside the county and to adjoining counties; extending and improving such facilities; acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, with the right to contract for the use of or to lease or sell any or all of such facilities, including real property, to any persons, firms, or corporations, whether public or private, if in the sole judgment of the authority such use, lease, or sale supports the general purposes of the authority; and, doing all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient, and desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such type of undertakings. 
The authority shall also have the purpose of assisting the City of Macon, Bibb County, and the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority with respect to industrial development as set forth in paragraph (19.1) of Section 5 of this Act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665), page 4991, § 3; 1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 296), page 4832, § 1) 
Sec. 3.4. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act [chapter], the term: 
(1)  Authority shall mean the Macon Water Authority created by Section 2 of this Act. 
(2)  Cost of the project shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one year after completion of construction, the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this Act, the construction of any project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(3)  Project shall mean and include the acquisition and construction of systems, plants, works, instrumentalities, and properties: (A) used or useful in connection with the obtaining of a water supply and the conservation, treatment, distribution, and sale of water for public and private uses; or (B) used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewage and like waste water; together with all parts of any such system, plant, work, instrumentality, and property and all appurtenances thereto, including lands, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, approaches, dams, reservoirs, generating stations, sewage disposal plants, intercepting sewers, trunk, connecting, and other sewers and water mains, filtration works, pumping stations, and equipment. 
"Project" shall also include all things used in connection with the performance of any of the contracts with respect to industrial development as authorized in paragraph (19.1) of Section 5 of this Act. 
(4)  Revenue bonds and bonds shall mean revenue bonds authorized to be issued pursuant to this Act. 
(5)  Self-liquidating shall mean that the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all properties used, leased, and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
(6)  Services, facilities, and commodities furnished shall mean and include, but shall not be limited to, the cost of repairing damages to the property and effects of customers of the authority resulting from water and sewer breaks or backups occurring within the authority's water and sewer systems up to a maximum of $1,000.00 per occurrence, without regard to liability or fault. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665), page 4991, § 4; 1996 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 579), page 3619, § 1; 1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 296), page 4832, § 2) 
Sec. 3.5. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority. The authority shall be under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act, and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned; provided, however, that the power of eminent domain shall not be exercised outside the limits of Bibb County; 
(4)  To enter into an agreement with Bibb County or the City of Macon with respect to acquiring a source of water supply, providing sewerage service, preparing engineering data, plans, and specifications for a water and sewerage system, extending water mains, apportioning the costs of constructing, extending, and maintaining a water or sewerage system, or both, providing for the testing and inspection of facilities constructed, providing for rates to be charged for water and sewerage services furnished to users of the system, providing for the reading of meters and keeping of pertinent records, apportioning or designating the responsibility for any functions normally maintained by a water and sewerage system, providing for the ownership of the various facilities constructed or acquired, and providing for such other matters or contingencies as might be necessary or desirable in order to secure for Macon and Bibb County a satisfactory and reliable water and sewerage system at the most reasonable cost possible; 
(5)  To appoint, select, and employ such officers, agents, and employees as shall be necessary in the judgment of the authority to accomplish the purposes of the authority, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys; to fix their respective compensation; and, to provide for pension and retirement plans for these officers, agents, and employees; provided, however, that any contract for the design of a sewerage system shall contain a provision insuring proper supervision and inspection of the installation of the system, either by agreeing with the design engineer to supervise and inspect the installation or by agreeing that the supervision and inspection shall be performed by another engineer not associated with any contractor or subcontractor responsible for installing the system. The authority may require bond of any person handling funds of the authority; 
(6)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which the authority causes to be erected or acquired. Any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable. Without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations and counties and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of water or sewerage service and facilities, or both, by the authority to such municipal corporations and counties to the authority for a term not exceeding 50 years. As to any political subdivision, department, institution, or agency of this state which shall enter into an agreement under the authority granted in this paragraph or in paragraph (4) of this section, the obligation to perform and fulfill such agreement shall constitute a general obligation of such entity for which its full faith and credit shall be pledged; 
(7)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects, as defined in paragraph (5) of Section 4 of this Act, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof; 
(8)  To make loans with and accept grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(9)  To make loans with and accept grants of money, materials, or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision may impose; 
(10)  To borrow money for any of the authority's corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(11)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to make short term loans and to approve, execute, deliver, or accept appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness; provided, however, that no such power is in conflict with the Constitution or general laws of this state; 
(12)  The authority and any trustee acting under any trust indenture are specifically authorized from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange, or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real and personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the authority was created, except as such right and power might be limited as provided in Section 20 of this Act; 
(13)  Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the authority may exercise any of its powers or provide any of its services inside the boundaries of any local government within Bibb County and, when authorized by contract with the governing authority thereof, within the limits of another municipality or county; 
(14)  The authority shall further have full and plenary power and duty to make and enforce rules and regulations for the management and operation of the water and sewerage systems which now exist and as hereafter added to, extended, or improved by any project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act; to prescribe, fix, and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished; and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this Act to finance in whole or in part the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of the water and sewerage systems; and to pledge to the punctual payment of the bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto; and to classify and differentiate such rates, fees, tolls, or charges in any reasonable manner, including, but not limited to, consumers inside the corporate limits of the City of Macon and those outside such corporate limits, as to small, intermediate and large consumers and industrial, commercial, and residential consumers and, with respect to sewer rates, according to the amount of suspended solids and the biological oxygen demand of sewerage users. Additionally, and not in limitation of the foregoing, the authority, in fixing water or sewerage rates, or both, shall be fully authorized and empowered to comply with any state or federal Acts and any lawful regulations adopted pursuant to any such Act. As a limitation of the power of the authority, however, if at any time there are issued and outstanding revenue bonds for the payment of which the revenues of the authority are pledged, the authority shall make no decrease in rates for water and sewer service which will in any way impair the obligations contained in the revenue bonds; 
(15)  The authority shall further have the power to acquire insurance for its property, its authority members, and its officers and employees, including but not limited to fire, wind, storm, extended coverage insurance, and vehicular liability insurance; all other types of liability insurance; casualty insurance, fidelity insurance, comprehensive insurance, public officials liability insurance, general public liability insurance covering all hazards, group life insurance, group accident insurance, group health insurance, group hospitalization insurance, group medical insurance, or any combination thereof; together with any and all other types of insurance on its property, officers, authority members, and employees as the authority in its judgment and discretion deems meet and proper in the conduct of its business; and on such terms and conditions and in such amounts as the authority deems appropriate in its judgment and discretion; and with the payment of premiums and charges therefor, together with any other costs incident thereto, to be paid in whole or in part by the authority and out of the general funds of the authority as the authority may determine; 
(16)  The authority is further authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations providing for the suspension of service to delinquent customers. The authority, through its executive director, or such other employees as the authority designates, shall have the right and power to issue executions for any past due charges, which executions shall be a lien upon and against the land and other properties of the assessed party which lien shall be of equal priority, rank, and dignity having the same attributes, rights, and powers as to collection and foreclosure thereof as an execution for unpaid ad valorem taxes of the State of Georgia or the County of Bibb; provided, however, that no such lien shall exist as to third parties until execution therefor shall have been issued by the authority and placed upon the general execution docket of the Superior Court of Bibb County. In the event that sewerage service is discontinued pursuant to this section, the appropriate health authorities shall be immediately notified; 
(17)  The authority shall continue to be liable for and obligated to fulfill, pay, extinguish, and discharge all obligations, debts, and liabilities of the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Macon existing at the time of the transfer, conveyance, and delivery of the properties and assets of the board of water commissioners to the authority, including, but not limited to, any and all outstanding and unpaid revenue certificates and revenue bonds heretofore issued by the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Macon, Georgia, and identified as follows: Water and Sewer Revenue Anticipation Certificates, Series 1955; Water and Sewerage Revenue Bonds, Series 1961; Water and Sewerage Revenue Bonds, Series 1970; Water and Sewerage Revenue Bonds, Series 1971; 
(18)  The authority shall further have the right and power to purchase, install, construct, repair, and replace fire hydrants on public property, together with all needful and necessary accessories and adjuncts thereto, in connection with existing or new water lines or mains of the authority and to defray and pay for any part or all of the cost and expense thereof, labor, material, and otherwise, utilizing any available funds of the authority therefor; 
(19)  The authority is authorized to: 
(A)  Qualify, apply for, and obtain a license or permit, known as a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (N.P.D.E.S.) permit, or monetary grants for the collection, treatment, and discharge of waste waters pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq.), and Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Water Quality Control Act,' as amended, and the respective regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(B)  By regulations provide for the adoption, promulgation, administration, setting of standards and provisions for, regulating, enforcing, amending, monitoring, and compelling compliance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of a pretreatment program pertaining to the pretreatment of industrial waste-water effluent that is to be delivered into the authority's sewerage system and is to be treated by the waste-water treatment facilities of such authority, which pretreatment program shall include and comply with all requirements and provisions applicable thereto as set forth in both the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.), and Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Georgia Water Quality Control Act,' as amended, and the respective regulations thereto; and additional restrictions that are required in order to allow the authority to comply with their N.P.D.E.S. permit; provided, however, that any regulations issued subsequent to the initial regulations issued pursuant to the authority in this Act or any amendment to such initial regulation shall not go into effect until notice thereof has been advertised in the official organ of Bibb County at least twice, not later than 15 days prior to the effective date thereof, and until an opportunity for interested parties to be heard thereon has been provided at least five days before such effective date; 
(C)  Make application to the Superior Court of Bibb County, Georgia, for injunctive relief against any person who has engaged in or is about to engage in any act or practice which constitutes or will constitute a violation of any provision of such pretreatment regulations by seeking an order enjoining and restraining such act or practice. Upon a showing by the authority that such person has engaged in or is about to engage in any such act or practice, a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or other order shall be granted without the necessity of showing a lack of adequate remedy at law; 
(D)  To provide that any person, firm, or corporation that fails to comply with any of the pretreatment standards or requirements set forth in such pretreatment regulations shall be liable to civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 per day for each day during which such noncompliance continues. The executive director of the authority, or such other employee the authority designates, after a hearing shall determine whether or not any such person is in noncompliance of any such standard or requirement and may, upon a proper finding, issue his order imposing such civil penalties as provided in this Act. Any person so penalized is entitled to judicial review. In this connection, all hearings and proceedings for judicial review shall be in accordance with Code Section 50-13-19 of the O.C.G.A. and venue shall be in the Superior Court of Bibb County. All penalties recovered by the executive director shall be paid into the general treasury of the authority and to the credit of its general fund; 
(E)  In any instance of an emergency, where there is a violation of a regulation of the pretreatment program of the authority or where a condition exists which presently causes or where the continuance of which causes (i) a present danger to the life or health of persons or (ii) is permanently and seriously damaging water or waste-water treatment equipment or facilities, the executive director, or such employee as the authority designates, is authorized to immediately terminate water or sewer service, or both, as is necessary to stop and eliminate such danger or damage; and 
(F)  Upon the issuance of any order assessing a civil penalty and after the expiration of 30 days following the date of any such order, with no appeal taken as provided in Code Section 50-13-19 of the O.C.G.A., the authority, through and by its executive director, or such other employee as the authority designates, shall have the right and power to issue executions on any such order assessing a civil penalty, and, in the amount thereof, such execution shall be a lien upon and against the land and other properties of the assessed party which lien shall be of equal priority, rank, and dignity having the same attributes, rights, and powers as to collection and foreclosure thereof as an execution for unpaid ad valorem taxes of the State of Georgia or the County of Bibb; 
(19.1)  (A)  To enter into a contract or contracts with Bibb County, the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority, or both, with respect to acquiring and developing industrial sites and facilities, including, without limitation, the construction or renovation of buildings and facilities for lease or sale to industrial or other companies providing employment within Bibb County. The power granted by this paragraph (19.1) shall not extend to any activities used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment, reuse, or disposal of municipal solid waste as defined in paragraph (18) of Code Section 12-8-22. The authority may utilize its revenues from its water and sewer operations for the performance of such contracts; provided, however, such contracts shall not require nor permit the expenditure of authority funds in excess of $704,000.00 per annum nor an aggregate of more than $17,600,000.00 over the life of the contract; 
(B)  To create a revolving fund for the funding of the contracts authorized in subparagraph (A) or in anticipation of such contracts. Any funds paid into such fund by the authority shall be subject to the limitation provided in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph and funds deposited therein shall be utilized solely for the purposes authorized by said subparagraph (A). Any funds received by the authority from any contract authorized in said subparagraph (A) not required to be utilized in the performance of such contract or contracts shall be deposited into such revolving fund so as to maintain the availability of funds for additional or new contracts of the same type or nature. Funds recovered from any such project and deposited into the revolving fund shall not be counted for the limitation purposes provided in said subparagraph (A); 
(C)  No contract authorized by this paragraph (19.1) shall extend for a period longer than 50 years; 
(D)  No contract will be entered into pursuant to the authority of this paragraph (19.1) which would impair the payment of any obligations on revenue bonds issued by or on behalf of the authority; 
(E)  To pledge the payment of any funds authorized by this paragraph (19.1) to be used for any of the purposes set forth in this paragraph (19.1) to the repayment of any revenue bonds issued by the authority, the City of Macon, Bibb County, or the Development Authority of Bibb County for the purpose of raising funds to carry out the provisions of any contract or contracts entered into under the authority of this paragraph (19.1); and 
(F)  To use reasonable amounts of the funds authorized in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph to obtain options on property or properties sought to be acquired for the purposes set out in that subparagraph; and 
(20)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665), page 4991, § 5; 1999 Ga. Laws (Act No. 296), page 4832, § 3) 
Sec. 3.6. - Petition for eight-inch water line. 
(a)  Upon the filing with the authority of a written petition signed by the owners of more than 50 percent of the lineal footage of land abutting a particular public, dedicated, and publicly utilized roadway, or portion thereof, in Bibb County, Georgia, requesting the authority to lay and construct therein an eight-inch water line to provide potable water to such property, setting forth factual data with respect thereto which the authority shall prescribe by resolution or ordinance, the authority with respect to the requested project shall have the right, power, and authority to: 
(1)  Verify the correctness of the factual data in the petition and ascertain the entire costs of the project which shall include all costs and expenses of material, labor, supervision, engineering, management, legal, overhead, and all other costs and expenses needful and necessary to the completion of the project; 
(2)  After advertisement and public hearing, as hereafter set out, assess two-thirds of the entire costs of said project to and against the respective landowners and their land, their pro rata cost of the project being based on their ownership of the lineal footage abutting the roadway, or portion thereof, involved; 
(3)  Ascertain the pro rata share of the respective landowners according to their ownership of lineal footage abutting the roadway, or portion thereof, involved which shall be calculated and determined as follows: deduct from the entire costs one-third thereof which shall be borne by the authority; the remaining two-thirds of the entire costs shall be divided by the total of the lineal footage of land abutting the roadway, or portion thereof, on both sides of such roadway and the quotient shall be the dollar amount per lineal frontage foot; such amount per lineal frontage foot multiplied by the total lineal footage of the land of each respective landowner abutting the roadway, or portion thereof, shall be the 'pro rata share' of such landowner; 
(4)  Publish in The Macon Telegraph once a week during each of two calendar weeks a notice setting forth all the factual data of the project; setting a time, date, and place for a public hearing to be had which shall not be sooner than four days following the last date of the publication; setting forth that two-thirds of the entire costs are to be assessed against the landowners, as aforesaid, and that such assessments shall be due within 90 days following completion of the project and upon default of payment shall bear interest at the legal rate and that execution therefor will issue against the defaulting landowner and his involved land which will constitute a lien thereon having equal priority, rank, and dignity and having the same attributes, rights, and powers as to collection and foreclosure thereof as an execution for unpaid State of Georgia and County of Bibb ad valorem taxes; and 
(5)  Following the public hearing, the authority shall, within 30 days thereof, accept or reject the petition and, if accepted, shall proceed promptly with work on the project. 
(b)  The authority shall have the right and power by resolution or ordinance to assess two-thirds of the entire costs and expenses of an accepted project upon and against the respective owners and their land abutting the roadway based on their pro rata share as set forth in paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Assessments shall be due and payable, without interest, within 90 days following the date of notice thereof to the landowner by United States first-class mail from the authority that such assessment is due; and, if the assessment is not paid within the 90 day period, the same shall bear interest at the legal rate. 
(d)  The authority shall have the right and power by ordinance or resolution to issue executions on any assessment that is in default, the same to be issued by the executive director, or such other officer as the authority designates, and such execution shall be a lien upon and against the involved land of the defaulting landowner and shall be of equal priority, rank, and dignity and having the same attributes, rights, and powers as to collection and foreclosure thereof as an execution for unpaid State of Georgia and County of Bibb ad valorem taxes. 
(e)  As to any execution issued by the authority, the landowner therein involved shall have the right to file an affidavit of illegality, denying that the whole or any part of the amount for which the execution issued is due and stating what amount is admitted to be due, if any, which amounts so admitted to be due shall be paid and collected before the affidavit is received and the affidavit shall be received for the balance; provided, however, that all such affidavits shall set out in detail the reasons why the affiant claims the amount is not due and when such affidavit is received by the authority the same shall be returned to the Superior Court of Bibb County, there to be tried and the issue shall be determined as in cases of affidavits of illegality to ad valorem tax executions, subject to all the pains and penalties provided for in other cases of illegality for delay as provided by law. 
(f)  The authority is authorized to adopt by ordinance or resolution any and all reasonable rules and regulations implementing and effectuating the foregoing rights and powers so as to fairly and equitably apply and enforce such rights and powers. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 6) 
Sec. 3.7. - Financing projects. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created in this Act, shall have power and is authorized at one time, or from time to time, to borrow money for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost, as defined in this Act, of any one or more projects and to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for that purpose. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this section for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not to exceed the maximum limit prescribed in Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Revenue Bond Law,' as now or hereafter amended, shall be payable semiannually, and shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 7) 
Sec. 3.8. - Revenue bonds; form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 8) 
Sec. 3.9. - Revenue bonds; signatures; seal. 
All such bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman of the authority and the attesting manual or facsimile signature of the secretary of the authority, and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto. The signature of one of such officers shall be placed manually on each bond. Any coupons attached thereto shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman or the secretary of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of such person and any bond may bear the facsimile signature of and may be manually signed, sealed, and attested to on behalf of the authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he or she had remained in office until such delivery. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 9) 
Sec. 3.10. - Revenue bonds; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to negotiable instruments. Such bonds are declared to be issued for essential public and governmental purposes, and the bonds, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 10) 
Sec. 3.11. - Revenue bonds; sale; price. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interests of the authority. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 11) 
Sec. 3.12. - Revenue bonds; proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit which, unless otherwise provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund provided for in this Act to be used for paying the principal of and the interest on such bonds. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 12) 
Sec. 3.13. - Revenue bonds; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 13) 
Sec. 3.14. - Revenue bonds; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 14) 
Sec. 3.15. - Revenue bonds; conditions precedent to issue; object of issue. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolutions may be passed at any regular, special, or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of the quorum as provided in this Act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 15) 
Sec. 3.16. - Revenue bonds; credit not pledged; special power of contract. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the City of Macon or of Bibb County or a pledge of the faith and credit of the city or the county, but the bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this Act, and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section; provided, however, that the City of Macon and Bibb County are authorized to contract with each other and with the authority for any of the undertakings authorized in this Act. Such city and county may in connection therewith, jointly or severally, use any funds from any lawful source or from the proceeds of the issue and sale of bonds for such purpose. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 16) 
Sec. 3.17. - Revenue bonds; trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank inside or outside the state having the power of a trust company. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, charges, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys; and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority who are satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor; and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or any other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of private corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bond-holder. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 17) 
Sec. 3.18. - Revenue bonds; To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in any trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such bonds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 18) 
Sec. 3.19. - Revenue bonds; sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, charges, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, tolls, charges, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund, which sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of: (1) the interest on such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal, interest, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as provided in this section. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in any trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in any trust indenture, surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds, and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 19) 
Sec. 3.20. - Revenue bonds; remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights provided for in this Act may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by any trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted under this Act or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 20) 
Sec. 3.21. - Revenue bonds; refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 21) 
Sec. 3.22. - Revenue bonds; jurisdiction and venue. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Bibb County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in such court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions; provided, however, that the venue of any action against the authority shall be in the superior court of the county in which the power of the authority is exercised or services are provided by the authority if the act giving rise to such action is committed within such county. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 22) 
Sec. 3.23. - Revenue bonds; validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the 'Revenue Bond Law,' as now or hereafter amended. The petition for validation shall also make defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority to furnish or receive the services and facilities of the water and sewerage system for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated, and the judgment of validation, shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds against the authority issuing the same and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality contracting with the Macon Water Authority. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 23) 
Sec. 3.24. - Revenue bonds; interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of the authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to abrogate or in any way impair the obligations of any revenue bonds issued as of the effective date of this Act which have water revenues or sewer revenues derived from either the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Macon or the Macon-Bibb County Water and Sewerage Authority pledged as their security. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 24) 
Sec. 3.25. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as proceeds of short-term loans, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 25) 
Sec. 3.26. - Audits. 
The books of the authority shall be audited annually by a competent certified public accountant, and an operating statement and a balance sheet showing the affairs of the authority shall be published annually in the official organ of Bibb County. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 26) 
Sec. 3.27. - Tax exempt status of the authority. 
The properties of the authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the State of Georgia and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city, county, or the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 27) 
Sec. 3.28. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 28) 
Sec. 3.29. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act, being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 29) 
Sec. 3.30. - Power cumulative. 
This Act does not in any way take from Bibb County or the City of Macon or any other municipality located in Bibb County or in any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain water, sanitary sewerage, and water pollution control facilities, or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law"; but the powers granted by this Act to the authority shall be in addition to and cumulative of all other powers now or hereafter given to any municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 665, page 4991, § 31) 
CHAPTER 4. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 4.1. - Creation. 
Pursuant to the powers granted to the city and county under and by virtue of the "Hospital Authorities Law" (1964 Ga. Laws, page 499, et seq. as amended) [O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72], the city and county do hereby establish and create a hospital authority to be known as the Macon-Bibb County Hospital Authority. 
(Joint Res. of 8-68) 
Sec. 4.2. - Board of trustees; terms. 
The authority shall be administered by a board of trustees consisting of seven (7) members who shall serve for terms of three (3) years each. To comply with the requirement that trustees serve for staggered terms, the city shall initially appoint one (1) trustee to serve for a term of one (1) year, one (1) trustee to serve for a term of two (2) years and one (1) trustee to serve for a term of three (3) years. The county shall initially appoint four (4) trustees, one (1) to serve for a term of one (1) year, one (1) to serve for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) to serve for a term of three (3) years. The successors of all of the initial appointees shall serve for three (3) year terms. 
(Joint Res. of 8-68) 
Sec. 4.3. - Subsequent nominations and appointments. 
If for any reason there should be a vacancy in the board of trustees during the term initially established hereby, the governing body which made the initial appointment shall make nominations for the unexpired term as provided by law. Upon the expirations of the respective initial terms, the governing body which made the initial appointment shall as provided by law, nominate three (3) successors for the three (3) year term which ensues, with the board of trustees having power to select the person to fill the succeeding three (3) year term from among the nominees; provided, however, that it is declared to be the policy of the city and county not to nominate to succeed himself any trustee who shall have served four (4) consecutive three (3) year terms; and provided, further, that when the city shall no longer have outstanding any general obligation bonds which were issued for improvements to the Macon Hospital, the county shall make all nominations for successor trustees. 
(Joint Res. of 8-68; Joint Res. 91-0082, 7-2-91) 
Sec. 4.4. - Powers and duties. 
The Macon-Bibb County Hospital Authority, acting through its trustees, shall have all of the rights, powers, privileges, and immunities and duties as are set out in the hospital authorities act as the same now exists or may hereafter exist, and the authority shall continue from the first day of September, 1968, until dissolved as provided by law. 
(Joint Res. of 8-68) 
Sec. 4.5. - Macon-Bibb County Citizens Hospital Advisory Committee. 
(a)  There is hereby established and created a citizens hospital advisory committee, to be known as the Macon-Bibb County Citizens Hospital Advisory Committee. 
(b)  The committee shall be composed of 15 members. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall appoint eight (8) members to serve on said committee, three (3) for terms of one (1) year each beginning January 1, 1972, and three (3) for terms of two (2) years each beginning January 1, 1972, and two (2) for terms of three (3) years each beginning January 1, 1972. 
(d)  The county board of commissioners shall appoint seven (7) members to serve on said committee, two (2) for terms of one (1) year beginning January 1, 1972, two (2) for terms of two (2) years each beginning January 1, 1972, and three (3) for terms of three (3) years each beginning January 1, 1972. 
(e)  The governing body which appoints those members of the advisory committee, appointed under the provisions of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section, shall appoint the successors to those members at the expiration of their respective terms of membership on the committee, to serve for terms of three (3) years each. 
(f)  Vacancies among the members of the committee, occurring otherwise than by expiration of term, shall be filled by the appointing governing body for the unexpired term in which the vacancy occurs. When the City of Macon shall no longer have outstanding any general obligation bonds which were issued for improvements to the Macon Hospital, the County Board of Commissioners of Bibb County shall make all appointments of members of the committee. 
(g)  Members of the committee must be at least 21 years of age and must be legal residents of the City of Macon or County of Bibb. Members of the committee shall serve without remuneration. 
(h)  The primary purposes for which the committee is established are to assist and cooperate with the trustees of the hospital authority, in their efforts to provide the best possible public hospital care and facilities and to act as a liaison between the trustees of the hospital authority and the general public in the interest of greatest efficiency and utmost public support. In carrying out these basic objectives, the members of the committee shall consult periodically with the trustees of the hospital authority, concerning hospital problems and affairs, and shall transmit in writing to said trustees the suggestions and recommendations of the members of the committee and those received by the committee from the general public for operation of the Macon Hospital. In addition, the members of the committee shall, when requested by said trustees, give their active support and assistance to the accomplishment of plans and projects adopted by said trustees for improvement of the Macon Hospital. 
(i)  Promptly after the initial appointment of the members of the committee, the committee shall meet and organize by electing one of its members chairman, electing such other officers and adopting such rules, regulations and bylaws as the committee may deem needful, necessary or desirable. 
(j)  The committee may be dissolved by resolution of the governing body or governing bodies having the authority to appoint members of the committee at the time it may be decided to dissolve the committee. 
(Joint Res. of 8-68) 
CHAPTER 5. - MIDDLE GEORGIA COLISEUM AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Coliseum, auditorium and stadiums, § 2-573 et seq. 

Sec. 5.1. - Declaration of purpose. 
It is hereby declared that there exists in middle Georgia a need for an authority to function without profit in developing and promoting for the public good in this state the cultural growth, public welfare, education, and recreation of the people of this state. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 1) 
Sec. 5.2. - Created. 
There is hereby created a public body corporate and politic to be known as the Middle Georgia Coliseum Authority, which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality and a subordinate public corporation of the State of Georgia. Any funds realized by said authority shall be expended for the development and promotion in this state of the cultural growth, public welfare, education, and recreation of the people of this state including the erection and construction of a building or buildings which shall and hereby are declared to be public buildings to be used for amusement purposes or educational purposes or a combination of the two, and for fairs, expositions, or exhibitions in connection therewith, and the purchase of lands, easements, rights in lands, and franchises for the construction of such facility or facilities and for use in connection therewith. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 2) 
Sec. 5.3. - Initial membership. 
The authority shall consist of the following five members whose terms of office as members of the authority shall expire on the dates shown following their names: 

 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 3(1)) 
Sec. 5.4. - Vacancies. 
Vacancies on the authority by reason of expiration of term or otherwise shall be filled by the authority itself, and the authority may act to fill vacancies caused by the expiration of term before the vacancy occurs. Following the initial appointments to the authority hereby made, all appointments to the authority shall be for terms of five years, except that the appointment of any person selected to fill an unexpired term shall be only for the remainder of such term. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 3(2)) 
Sec. 5.5. - Duties. 
The members of the authority shall organize and enter upon the performance of their duties immediately after the effective date of this act [chapter]. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 3(3)) 
Sec. 5.6. - Chairman. 
The authority shall elect one of its members as chairman and another as vice-chairman, and shall elect a secretary-treasurer, who may but need not necessarily be a member of the authority. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 3(4)) 
Sec. 5.7. - Quorum. 
Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, and no vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority at every meeting, and in every instance a majority vote shall authorize any legal act of the authority, including all things necessary to authorize and issue revenue bonds. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 3(5)) 
Sec. 5.8. - Lack of quorum. 
If at any time, by reason of common disaster, or by reason of the failure of the members of the authority hereby appointed to accept their appointment, or for any other reason, there shall not be sufficient members of the authority willing and able to meet and constitute a quorum, any resident of the State of Georgia may file in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Bibb County, Georgia, a petition directed to the Superior Court of Bibb County against the authority setting forth that there are not sufficient members of the authority willing and able to meet and constitute a quorum, and setting forth the reason or reasons therefor and showing the necessity of having a sufficient number of members of the authority appointed in order that a quorum may be available, and shall obtain from the judge of the said court an order requiring the authority to show cause at such time and place either in term or chambers within twenty days of the filing of the petition, as the judge may direct, why the said judge should not appoint sufficient members to the authority to enable the authority to obtain a quorum. In the event there is no officer or agent of the authority upon whom service may be made, and the court shall so find, the cause shall proceed to be heard ex-parte. At the time designated for the hearing of said cause the judge of said court shall proceed to hear and determine all questions of law and of fact in said cause and shall render judgment thereon, and, in the event said judgment shall find that a necessity exists for the making of such appointment or appointments, such judge shall then make such appointment or appointments either for the remainder of an unexpired term or terms or for such new term or terms as may not have been filled, and shall include such appointment or appointments in said judgment, and, if the petitioning party or parties shall be dissatisfied with said judgment the petitioning party or parties may except thereto within twenty days from the date of the judgment, and said judgment shall be reviewable as are other final judgments of the court. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 3(6)) 
Sec. 5.9. - Compensation; employees. 
The members of the authority shall not be entitled to compensation for their services, but shall be entitled to and shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses properly incurred in the performance of their duties. Each member of the authority shall hold office until his successor shall have been appointed and qualified. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government and may retain, employ, and engage professional and technical supervisors, assistants, and experts and other agents and employees, temporary or permanent, as it may require. The members of the authority shall be accountable in all respects as trustees, and the authority shall keep suitable books and records of all its obligations, contracts, transactions, and undertakings, and of all income and receipts of every nature and all expenditures of every kind. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 3(7)) 
Sec. 5.10. - Property status. 
It is hereby found, determined, and declared that the creation of the authority and the carrying out of its corporate purposes is in all respects for the benefit of the people of this state, and that the authority is an institution of purely public charity, and all property of said authority is hereby declared and shall in all respects be considered to be public property and title to such property shall be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public, and the use of such property pursuant to the terms of this act [chapter] shall be and is hereby declared to be for public and governmental purposes, that is, for the promotion of the public general welfare in matters of cultural development, education, pleasure, and recreation of the public at large, in an effort to better the general condition of society, or that considerable part of society residing in middle Georgia, which promotion is hereby declared to be a public beneficence for the good of humanity and for the general improvement and happiness of society, and all the property, income, obligations, and interest on the obligations of the authority and the transfer thereof shall be and hereby are declared to be nontaxable for any and all purposes. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 4) 
Sec. 5.11. - Powers. 
The authority shall have powers: 
(1)  To adopt and alter a corporate seal. 
(2)  To acquire by gift or by purchase on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper or by exercise of the right of eminent domain in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, lands, easements, or rights in lands, or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes and to use, rent, or lease the same or make contracts with respect to the use thereof, or to dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority and the purposes thereof. Title to such property, however, shall be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public. 
(3)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, loans, appropriations, and donations of money or materials or property of any kind, including loans and grants from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality thereof shall impose, and to administer trusts, and to sell, lease, transfer, convey, appropriate, pledge, mortgage, or encumber all of its property and assets. 
(4)  To borrow money and issue notes or revenue bonds payable from the earnings of the projects of the authority, execute trust agreements or indentures and sell, convey, mortgage, pledge, encumber, and assign any and all of its funds, assets, property, and income as security for such notes or revenue bonds, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof, and provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default either in payment of principal of or interest on such obligations or under any term of or condition pursuant to which such obligations were issued. 
(5)  To contract with the State of Georgia and agencies thereof, cities, counties, and other political subdivisions thereof, and with private persons and corporations in such manner as the legitimate and necessary purposes of this act [chapter] shall authorize or require including contracts for construction and leasing of its projects. 
(6)  To construct, reconstruct, acquire, own, alter, repair, maintain, add to, extend, improve, operate, and manage projects including the erection of a building or buildings which shall and hereby are declared to be public buildings to be used for amusement purposes or educational purposes or a combination of the two, and for fairs, expositions, or exhibitions in connection therewith, and the purchase of lands, easements, rights in lands, and franchises for the construction of such facility or facilities and for use in connection therewith, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of the sale of revenue bonds of the authority, and the title to such property to be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public. 
(7)  To issue from time to time revenue bonds not to exceed an aggregate principal amount of $28 million during the life of the authority to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, addition to, or extension of such projects. All revenue bonds issued pursuant to the provisions of this act [chapter] shall be fully negotiable instruments and shall have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments law of Georgia. 
(8)  To issue revenue bonds to call, refund, or refinance in whole or in part all outstanding revenue bonds secured by the anticipated revenue of such project and to include in the cost of the issuance of such bonds any call premium that may be required for the redemption and refunding of such outstanding bonds. 
(9)  To do any and all things necessary or proper for the accomplishment of the objectives of this act [chapter] and any amendments hereof and to exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this state. 
(10)  To invest any accumulation of its funds and any sinking funds or reserves in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested and to purchase its own bonds at a price of not more than the principal thereof and accrued interest. All bonds so purchased shall be cancelled. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 5; 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 114), page 2807, § 1; 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 97), page 4006, § 1) 
Sec. 5.12. - Conveyances to Authority. 
Any political subdivision of this state, by proper resolution of its governing body, shall be authorized to convey to said authority public property owned by such political subdivision in consideration of the use of the authority's organization and method of financing and funding and in consideration of the undertaking of the authority to issue its revenue bonds for the purpose of providing funds which shall be used by the authority for constructing, reconstructing, altering, repairing, adding to, extending, or improving on such property such projects and facilities as said authority is authorized and empowered to undertake by virtue of the provisions of said act, as amended; provided, however, that said authority shall not have the power to alienate or encumber its title to any such property so conveyed, except that the authority shall have the power to reconvey such property to such political subdivision upon retirement of the bonds issued for the purpose of financing the improvements to be constructed or made on such property. 
(1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 114), page 2807, § 2) 
Sec. 5.13. - Bonds. 
In addition to the foregoing powers and subject to any limitations herein contained the authority shall have all the powers of municipalities under the provisions of the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), as amended, codified in Georgia Code Annotated, Chapter 87-8, including, but not limited to, the authority to expend from any funds available or to obligate itself to expend such sums as may be necessary for the survey, study, financing, construction, and completion of any such project. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 6) 
Sec. 5.14. - Conveyances to city. 
When each and all of the bonds, interest coupons, and obligations of every nature whatsoever, for the payment of which the revenues of any given project or projects have been placed in whole or in part, have been paid in full or an amount sufficient for the payment of all such bonds or obligations and the interest thereon to the maturity thereof shall have been set aside in trust for the benefit of the holders of such bonds or obligations, the authority shall have the power and right to convey to the City of Macon, Georgia, such project or projects and all legal right, title, and interest therein and, upon the completion of such conveyance in such manner that the authority shall no longer hold any right, title, or interest in any such project or projects, the legal existence and functions of the authority shall terminate. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 7) 
Sec. 5.15. - Status of bonds. 
Revenue bonds issued under provisions of this act [chapter] shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or a pledge of the faith and credit of the State of Georgia or of any city, county, or other political subdivision of the same, but such bonds shall be payable from the rentals, revenues, and funds of the authority as provided in the resolutions or trust agreements or indentures authorizing or securing the issuance and payment of such bonds and the issuance of such bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the state or any city, county, or political subdivision thereof to levy or pledge any form of taxation whatever for the payment thereof. No holder of any such bond or receiver or trustee in connection therewith shall have the right to enforce the payment thereof against any property of the state or of any city or county thereof nor shall any such bond constitute a charge, lien, or encumbrance, legal or equitable, upon any such property. All such bonds shall contain on their face a recital setting forth substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 8) 
Sec. 5.16. - Bonds are securities. 
The bonds herein authorized are hereby made securities in which all public officers and bodies of this state and all municipalities and all municipal subdivisions, all insurance companies and associations, and other persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks, and savings associations, including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations, investment companies, and other persons carrying on a banking business, and all other persons whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state may properly and legally invest funds including capital in their control or belonging to them. The bonds are also hereby made securities which may be deposited with and shall be received by all public officers and bodies of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions for any purpose for which the deposit of the bonds or other obligations of this state is now or may hereafter be authorized. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 9) 
Sec. 5.17. - Contracts. 
Said authority may contract with any city, town, municipality, or county of this state for the payment of such rents, fees, and charges for the use by such subdivisions or the residents thereof of the project or projects and facilities of the authority, and any such city, town, municipality or county shall have and hereby is given the right and power to make such contract and the rentals contracted to be paid by the lessees or tenants to the authority under such contract or contracts entered into pursuant to the provisions of this act [chapter] shall constitute general obligations of the city, town, municipality, or county for the payment of which the full faith and credit of such city, town, municipality, or county shall be and the same hereby is pledged to provide the funds required to fulfill all obligations arising under any such contract; and any such city, town, municipality, or county which shall have entered into such a contract pursuant to the provisions of this act [chapter] shall annually in each and every fiscal year during the term of such contract include in a general revenue or appropriation measure, within any millage limitations of its power of taxation and whether or not any other items are included, sums sufficient to satisfy the payments required to be made in each year by such contract until all payments required under such contract have been paid in full, and such contract payments shall constitute a first charge on all the revenues of such city, town, municipality, or county from whatever source derived, and such revenues shall be and hereby are unconditionally obligated to the payment of such sums. In the event for any reason any such provision or appropriation is not made, then the fiscal officers of such city, town, municipality, or county are hereby authorized and directed to set up as an appropriation on their accounts in each fiscal year the amounts required to pay the obligations called for under any such contract. The amount of the appropriation in each fiscal year to meet the obligations of such contract as authorized and required hereby shall be due and payable and shall be expended for the purpose of paying and meeting the obligations provided under the terms and conditions of such contract, and such appropriation shall have the same legal status as if the contracting city, town, municipality, or county had included the amount of the appropriation in its general revenue or appropriation measure, and such fiscal officers shall make such payment to the authority if for any reason such appropriation is not otherwise made; and any such city, town, municipality, or county may obligate itself and its successors to use only such structure, building, or facilities constituting such project and none other. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 10) 
Editor's note— The Georgia Supreme Court, in Stephenson v. State of Georgia, 219 Ga. 652, 135 S.E.2d 381 (1964), invalidated the provision in section 10 giving a first claim for rent due on all revenues of the city from whatever source derived. 
Sec. 5.18. - Revenue bonds. 
The authority shall have the power and is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any one or combination of its projects not to exceed an aggregate principal amount of $28 million during the life of the authority. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from and may be secured by a pledge of rents, fees, charges, and other revenues of all or any part of the project or projects financed in whole or in part with the proceeds of such bonds or with the proceeds of bonds called and refunded or to be called and refunded by such issue. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest, shall mature, and shall be payable as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority within the terms of the `Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), as amended, codified in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., and the bonds may be made redeemable before maturity at the option of the authority at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in its resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. The authority granted for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds by this section is cumulative only and shall not be construed to abridge the rights of the authority as otherwise provided in this act [chapter], and specifically shall not abridge the power of said authority to borrow money and issue notes as distinguished from revenue bonds as provided in paragraph (4) of Section 5 of this act [chapter] and as otherwise provided by law. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 11; 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 114), page 2807, § 3; 1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 97), page 4006, § 2) 
Sec. 5.19. - Rentals, fees and charges. 
(a)  For the purpose of earning sufficient revenue to make possible the financing of the construction of the project or projects of the authority with revenue bonds, the authority is authorized and empowered to collect rents, fees, and charges on each project which it shall cause to be constructed. Such rentals, fees, or charges to be paid for the use of such project or projects shall be so fixed and adjusted as to provide a fund sufficient with other revenue, if any, of such project or projects or of said authority: 
(1)  To pay the cost of operating, maintaining, and repairing the project or projects, including reserves for insurance and extraordinary repairs and other reserves required by the resolution or trust agreement or indenture pertaining to such bonds and the issuance thereof unless such cost shall be otherwise provided for; 
(2)  To pay the principal of and interest on said revenue bonds as the same shall become due, including premium, if any, the proceeds of which shall have been or will be used to pay the cost of such project or projects; 
(3)  To comply with any sinking fund requirement contained in the resolution or trust agreement or indenture pertaining to the issuance of and security for such bonds; 
(4)  To perform fully all provisions of such resolution and trust agreement or indenture relating to the issuance of or security for such bonds to the payment of which such rental is pledged; 
(5)  To accumulate any excess income which may be required by the purchasers of such bonds or may be dictated by the requirements of such resolution or trust agreement or indenture or of achieving ready marketability of and low interest rates on such bonds; 
(6)  To pay any expenses in connection with such bond issue or such project or projects including but not limited to trustees', counsel, and fiscal fees. 
(b)  Such rental shall be payable at such intervals as may be agreed upon and set forth in the rental contract or lease providing therefor and any such contract or lease may provide for the commencement of rental payments to the authority prior to the completion of the undertaking by the authority of any such project, and it may provide for the payment of rental during such times as such project or projects may be partially or wholly untenantable; 
(c)  Such rental contract or lease may obligate the tenants or lessees to operate, maintain, and keep in good repair, including complete reconstruction, if necessary, the rented or leased premises and projects regardless of the cause of the necessity of such maintenance, repair, or reconstruction. If such projects be included in any rental contract or lease then the operation, maintenance, repair, and reconstruction, if necessary, may be performed by the cities, towns, municipalities, or counties which may be the tenants or lessees under such rental contract or lease; 
(d)  Such rental contract or lease may obligate the tenants or lessees to indemnify and save harmless the authority from any and all damage to persons and property occurring on or by reason of the leased property or improvements thereon and to undertake, at the expense of the tenants or lessees, the defense of any action brought against the authority by reason of injury or damages to persons or property occurring on or by reason of the leased premises. 
(e)  In the event of any failure or refusal on the part of the tenants or lessees to perform punctually any covenant or obligation contained in any such rental contract or lease, the authority may enforce performance by any legal or equitable process against the tenants or lessees, and consent is hereby given for the institution of any such action. 
(f)  The authority shall be permitted to assign any rental to it pursuant to such rental contract or lease to a trustee or paying agent as may be required by the terms of the resolution or trust agreement or indenture relating to the issuance of and security for such bonds. 
(g)  The use and disposition of the authority's revenue shall be subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or of the trust agreement or indenture, if any, securing the same. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 12) 
Sec. 5.20. - Disposition of earnings. 
The revenues, rents, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects and any and all revenues, rents, and earnings received by the authority regardless of whether or not such revenues, rents, and earnings were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued may be pledged by the authority to payment of principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as may be provided in any resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds or in any trust instrument pertaining to such bonds, and such funds so pledged, from whatever source received, may include funds received from one or more or all sources and may be set aside into sinking funds at regular intervals for which provision may be made in any such resolution or trust instrument, or sinking funds may be pledged to and charged with the payment of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall become due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall mature, (3) the necessary charges of any trustee or paying agent for paying such principal and interest, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired upon call or purchase, and the use and disposition of any sinking fund may be subject to such regulation as may be provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument securing the payment of the same. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 13) 
Sec. 5.21. - Form of bonds. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bonds as to principal alone and also as to both principal and interest. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 14) 
Sec. 5.22. - Trust agreement or indenture. 
In the discretion of the authority any issue of revenue bonds may be secured by a trust agreement or indenture made by the authority with a corporate trustee which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the State of Georgia. Such trust agreement or indenture may pledge or assign rents, fees, charges, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust agreement or indenture may contain provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bond holders, including the right of appointment of a receiver upon default of the payment of any principal or interest obligation and the right of any receiver or trustee to enforce collection of any rents, fees, charges, or revenues for the use of the project or projects necessary to pay all costs of operation or reserves provided for, the principal and interest on all bonds in the issue, all costs of collection, and all other costs reasonably necessary to accomplish the collection of such sums in the event of any default of the authority. Such resolution or trust agreement or indenture may include covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition and construction of the project and to the custody, safeguarding, and application of all funds and covenants providing for the operation and maintenance of the project or projects and may contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. Such trust agreement or indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bond holders and of the trustee and may restrict the actual right of the bond holders as is customary in securing bonds and debentures of corporations. Such trust agreement or indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bond holders. All expenses paid in carrying out such trust may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such trust. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 15) 
Sec. 5.23. - Jurisdiction of actions. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this act [chapter] brought in the courts of the State of Georgia, shall be brought in the Superior Court of Bibb County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of the bonds issued under the provisions of this act [chapter] shall be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such acts. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 16) 
Sec. 5.24. - Bond validation. 
(a)  All bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in the Bibb County Superior Court in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), as amended, codified in Georgia Code Annotated, Chapter 87-8. The petition for validation shall be brought against said authority and, in the event the payments to be made by any city, town, municipality, or county under a contract entered into between the authority and such political subdivision are pledged as security for the payment of the revenue bonds sought to be validated, such political subdivision or subdivisions shall also be made parties defendant, and the defendants shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be adjudicated to be in all respects valid and binding upon such subdivision or subdivisions. It shall be incumbent upon such subdivision or subdivisions to defend against adjudication of the validity and binding effect of such contract or contracts or be forever bound thereby. Notice of such proceedings shall be included in the notice of the validation hearing required to be issued and published by the clerk of the Superior Court of Bibb County in which court such validation proceeding shall be initiated. Any resident of the State of Georgia may intervene in the validation proceedings at or before the time set for the validation hearing and may assert any ground of objection to the validity and binding effect of such bonds and the security therefor and of such contract or contracts on his own behalf and on behalf of all citizens and residents of the State of Georgia. In the event no bill of exceptions shall be filed within twenty days from the date of the judgment of validation or, if filed and the judgment shall be affirmed by the proper appellate court of this state, the judgment of the Bibb County Superior Court so confirming and validating the validity and binding effect of such contract or contracts and of such bonds and the security therefor shall be forever conclusive upon the issue of the validity and binding effect of such contracts and bonds and the security therefor and upon the issue of the validity and constitutionality of this and any other act pertaining to such contracts and bonds and the security therefor against the authority issuing the same and against the parties to such contracts and against all residents of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Any action or proceeding to contest the validity or binding effect of any such revenue bonds or resolution or trust instrument pertinent thereto or any contracts made for the purpose of providing the payment of such bond as aforesaid must be commenced and filed prior to the conclusion of the validation hearing notice of which shall have been given as provided by law. After the expiration of such period of limitation no right of action or defense founded upon the invalidity of such bonds, resolution, trust instrument, or contracts shall be asserted nor shall the validity and binding effect of such bonds, resolution, trust instrument, or contracts be opened to question or attack in any court upon any ground whatever, except in an action or proceeding commenced and filed prior to the conclusion of such validation hearing. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 17) 
Sec. 5.25. - Intent. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds. The provisions of this act [chapter] shall be for the benefit of the State, the authority, and every holder of the authority's bonds and, upon and after the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this act [chapter], shall constitute an irrevocable contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 18) 
Sec. 5.26. - Earnings deemed trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this act [chapter], whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds or as revenues, rents, fees, charges, or other earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this act [chapter], and the bond holders paying or entitled to receive the benefits of such funds shall have a lien on all such funds until applied as provided for in any such resolution, trust agreement, or indenture of the authority. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 19) 
Sec. 5.27. - Liberal construction. 
This act [chapter], being for the welfare of the state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 20) 
Sec. 5.28. - Provisions regarded as supplemental. 
The provisions of this act [chapter] shall be regarded as supplementary and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as being in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1963 Ga. Laws (Act No. 86), page 2250, § 21) 
CHAPTER 6. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY INDUSTRIAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 6.1. - Authority created. 
There is hereby created a public body corporate and politic in the County of Bibb to be known as the "Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority," which shall be an instrumentality of the City of Macon and of the County of Bibb, and which is sometimes hereinafter referred to as "the authority." 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No 647), page 2323, § 1) 
Sec. 6.2. - Members; terms; quorum. 
(a)  The authority shall consist of six (6) members as follows: the mayor of the City of Macon (or the chief executive officer of said city if hereafter otherwise titled), the chairman of the county board of commissioners for the County of Bibb (or the chief executive officer of the governing authority of said county if hereafter otherwise titled), the president of the Macon Area Development Commission, Inc., a member to be appointed by the mayor or aforesaid chief executive officer of the City of Macon and approved by a majority of the members of the city council of Macon, and a member to be appointed by the chairman or aforesaid chief executive officer of the County of Bibb and approved by a majority of the members of the governing authority of the County of Bibb. Beginning July 1, 1985, the chairman or aforesaid chief executive officer of the governing authority of the County of Bibb shall appoint one (1) additional member with the approval of a majority of the members of the governing authority of the County of Bibb for a term of office of five (5) years. At the expiration of the initial term of office of the additional member appointed to assume office on July 1, 1985, the mayor or aforesaid chief executive officer of the City of Macon, with the approval of a majority of the members of the council of the City of Macon, shall appoint a successor to said additional member. Thereafter, the appointment of said additional member shall rotate between the governing authority of the City of Macon and the governing authority of the County of Bibb. In the event the Macon Area Development Commission, Inc., should be dissolved or should cease to function effectively (to be determined in the sole discretion of the other three (3) specifically named members) a member, to serve in lieu of said president, shall be selected by the other three (3) specifically named members. 
(b)  The terms of office of the designated members and their successors in and through official office shall coincide with their respective terms as heads of the organizations described. The terms of the other members, (three (3) or four (4) in number as the contingency hereinbefore provided may or may not occur), shall be five (5) years, with vacancies in such offices to be filled for the remaining term of office in the same manner and means as herein provided for the appointment of the member succeeded. 
(c)  A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum but only a majority of the members of the authority may act for the authority in any matter. No vacancy or vacancies shall impair the power of the authority to act, provided that four (4) members are in accord with such action. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 2; 1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 42), page 3600, § 1) 
Sec. 6.3. - Income, interest, etc., tax free. 
The property, income, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, income, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the County of Bibb or of the City of Macon. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 3) 
Sec. 6.4. - Powers. 
The powers of the authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
(1)  Of public authorities provided by the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (Ga. Code Chapter 87-8) [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.,] as it has been or may hereafter be amended, and where the same are additional to or complementary of and not inconsistent with the powers herein expressly enumerated; 
(2)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, loans, appropriations and donations and to administer trusts, and to sell, lease, transfer, convey, appropriate, pledge, mortgage or encumber any and all of its properties and assets; 
(3)  To borrow money, to issue notes, bonds and revenue certificates, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor; 
(4)  To contract with the State of Georgia, agencies thereof, political subdivisions of the State of Georgia, and agencies thereof, and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
(5)  To have and exercise any and all of the usual powers of private and public corporation except such as are inconsistent with this act [chapter], including the power to adopt and alter a corporate seal and to adopt and amend bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
(6)  To encourage, induce, assist, promote and develop the location and expansion of industrial and commercial facilities throughout the territorial limits of the County of Bibb so as to relieve, insofar as possible, abnormal unemployment within its boundaries, and to otherwise support and expand the economy thereof; 
(7)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(8)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
(9)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish or to complement the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 4) 
Sec. 6.5. - Limitation. 
The authority shall not be authorized to, nor shall any act thereof, create any debt, obligation or liability against the State of Georgia or City of Macon or County of Bibb. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 5) 
Sec. 6.6. - Compensation. 
The members of the authority shall receive no compensation for their services to the authority. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 6) 
Sec. 6.7. - Bonds. 
In order to finance any undertaking within the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds bearing rate or rates of interest and maturing at the years and amounts determined by the authority and the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761) [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.] as amended, Ga. Code Anno. Supp. Chapter 87-8, as if said obligations had been originally authorized to be issued thereunder; provided, however, that any property, real or personal, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the authority. The authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this amendment to provide security for any bonds issued as provided herein, and such trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or under any term or condition under which such bonds are issued. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to create a right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of Bibb County or of the City of Macon to pay any such bonds or the interest thereon nor to enforce payment thereof against any property of Bibb County or of the City of Macon. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 7) 
Sec. 6.8. - Same; in escrow. 
The authority may authorize additional bonds, and for its purposes, to be placed in escrow and to be negotiated from time to time as proceeds for such purpose may become necessary. Bonds so placed in escrow shall, when sold and delivered, have such standing with the bonds of the same issue as may be provided in the authorizing proceedings. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 8) 
Sec. 6.9. - Entertainment. 
No moneys derived by the authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 9) 
Sec. 6.10. - Rules. 
The governing authorities of the City of Macon and of the County of Bibb are jointly authorized, and from time to time, to prescribe rules, regulations and conditions, not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, for the functioning of the authority. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 10) 
Sec. 6.11. - Purposes. 
This act [chapter] is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare industry and trade within Bibb County and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this law and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally constructed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 11) 
Sec. 6.12. - Intent. 
All laws and constitutional provisions now or hereafter existent and in aid of or complimentary hereto or of the powers herein expressed are expressly adopted and incorporated herein. It is expressly provided and enacted that this act [chapter] does not supersede or otherwise limit the powers of either the City of Macon or of the County of Bibb that may now or hereafter be provided by law and which relate to the same or similar subjects provided herein. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 647), page 2323, § 14) 
Sec. 6.13. - Local powers; creation confirmed (constitutional amendment). 
Provided, however, that the governing authorities of the County of Bibb and of the City of Macon, either and both, are by this self-executing amendment, authorized and permitted, directly, or through the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority, to appropriate properties, moneys and services, any or all, so as to encourage, induce, assist and promote the location and expansion of industrial and commercial facilities throughout the territorial limits of the County of Bibb, but conditioned, however, upon none of said appropriations being used or pledged for entertainment purposes and, further conditioned, that such appropriations not increase ad valorem tax millage limitations now or hereafter otherwise imposed by law; provided, further, that an act of the General Assembly of Georgia entitled `An act to create a public body corporate and politic, as an instrumentality of the County of Bibb and City of Macon, and to be known as the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority; to provide for its purposes, scope, powers, revenues and limitations, and for the designation of its governing commission; to provide for the tax exemption of its properties, income, obligations and interest thereon; to provide for separability of the several provisions of this act; and for other purposes,' which was enacted at the January-February, 1962 session of the General Assembly of Georgia is ratified and confirmed as of the dates of both its passage and approval; and, provided further that, insofar as this amendment relates to the aforesaid act creating the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority, the effectiveness of this amendment shall be retroactive to such dates as may be required to assure said act of full force, effect and validity. 
(1962 Ga. Laws (Act No. 168), page 885, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above section is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1945), art. VII, § V, ¶ I. Such amendment was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1145), page 4685, (city) Ord. No. O-84-0010 adopted 3-6-85 (published at 1985 Ga. Laws page 5274) and by county resolution adopted 5-15-84 (published at 1985 Ga. Laws page 5168). See Ga. Const. art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. 
CHAPTER 7. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY BOARD OF ELECTIONS 

Sec. 7.1. - Creation of board of elections. 
There is hereby created a governmental agency which shall be known as the Macon-Bibb County Board of Elections which shall have jurisdiction over the registration of voters and the conduct of primaries and elections for the County of Bibb and the City of Macon in accordance with this act [chapter]. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 1) 
Sec. 7.2. - Members of board. 
Such board shall be composed of five (5) members, each of whom shall be an elector and a resident of the county and who shall be appointed in the following manner: 
(a)  Two (2) members shall be chosen by the county executive committee of the political party which at the last preceding regular general election held for the election of all members of the General Assembly elected the largest number of members of the General Assembly. Such members so chosen shall be certified by the chairman of the county executive committee of such political party to the governing authority of Bibb County, and such appointment shall be entered upon the minutes of the governing authority. One (1) member chosen by the said county executive committee shall be a resident of the City of Macon, Georgia at the time of his selection and at the time of his appointment by the governing authority of Bibb County. 
(b)  Two (2) members shall be appointed in like fashion by the county executive committee of the political party which, at such election, elected the next largest number of members of the General Assembly. Such appointees shall be certified by a chairman of the county executive committee of that political party to the governing authority of said county and such certification shall be entered upon the minutes of the governing authority. One (1) member chosen by the said county executive committee shall be a resident of the City of Macon, Georgia at the time of his selection and at the time of his appointment by the governing authority of Bibb County. 
(c)  The fifth member of the board shall be appointed jointly by the governing authority of the City of Macon and Bibb County from a list of one or more nominees submitted by a majority of the other four members of the board. The fifth member so selected shall be deemed to be a member at large. In the event a majority of the four members of the board is unable to nominate one or more persons to the governing authority of the City of Macon and Bibb County within the time hereinafter specified for appointments, then, and in such event, the governing authority of said city and county shall be authorized to make the appointment. Any appointment made under the provisions of this paragraph shall also be entered upon the minutes of the governing authorities. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 2) 
Sec. 7.3. - Qualifications. 
No person who holds elective public office shall be eligible to serve as a member of any such board of elections during the term of such elective office and the position of any member of the board shall be deemed vacant upon such member qualifying as a candidate for elective public office. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 3) 
Sec. 7.4. - Initial appointments. 
Initial appointments hereunder shall be made by the respective appointing authorities no later than 60 days after this act [chapter] shall become effective. In the event of a vacancy on the board with respect to a member appointed by one of the political parties as hereinabove provided, such political party shall appoint a successor within 60 days after the date such vacancy is created, such successor to be appointed in like manner as the person whose position is vacant for his unexpired term. In the event such political party fails to make an initial appointment hereunder within 60 days after this act shall become effective or within 60 days after a vacancy occurs then and in such event, the position shall be filled by the governing body of Bibb County. In the event of a vacancy on the board with respect to the member at large, the remaining members of the board shall submit the names of one or more nominees to fill the unexpired term, such nomination to be made within 60 days after the vacancy occurs. The governing authority of the City of Macon and Bibb County shall select and appoint the successor member at large from the nominee or nominees whose names are submitted by a majority of the remaining members of the board. In the event of the failure of the board to submit the names of such nominee or nominees within 60 days after the vacancy occurs, then and in such event, the governing authorities of the city and county may fill the vacancy on their own motion. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 4) 
Sec. 7.5. - Terms; vacancies. 
Initial appointees hereunder shall take office upon appointment and shall serve until March 31, 1971 and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The successors of the initial appointees shall serve for two (2) year terms beginning on April 1 in odd numbered years and shall continue in office for such terms and until their successors are chosen and qualified. Each member shall be eligible to succeed himself, shall have the right to resign at any time by giving notice to the body which appointed him, and to the governing authorities of the City of Macon and Bibb County, if the city and county were not the appointing authorities. Each member shall be subject to removal from the board at any time in the same manner and by the same authority provided for removal of registrars under the provisions of Georgia Laws, 1974, page 26, et seq., informally codified as Section 34-603 Georgia Code Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-211]. Upon removal of a member as provided by law, a vacancy shall be deemed to exist and shall be filled for the unexpired term as hereinabove provided. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 5) 
Sec. 7.6. - Oath. 
Before entering upon his duties, each member of the board shall take substantially the same oath of office as is presently required by law for registrars and shall have the same privilege from arrest as provided in Georgia Laws, 1974, Ex. Sess., p. 26, et seq., informally codified as Sections 34-606 and 34-607, Georgia Code Annotated [O.C.G.A. §§ 21-2-214, 21-2-215]. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 6) 
Sec. 7.7. - Poll workers. 
The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, training and removal of poll workers, and such workers shall be appointed insofar as practicable from the lists provided the board by the county executive committee of each political party. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 7) 
Sec. 7.8. - Powers and duties of board. 
The board of elections shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  It shall succeed to and exercise all of the duties granted to and incumbent upon the ordinary [probate judge] of Bibb County under the provisions of Title 34 of the Georgia Code of 1933, as now or hereafter amended and particularly by an act entitled "The Georgia Election Code" [O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.,] approved June 24, 1974 (1964 Ga. Laws Ex. Sess., page 26) of whatever kind and character and any other provision of law with respect thereto. 
(b)  It shall succeed to and exercise all of the duties and powers granted to and incumbent on the chief registrar and the county registrars of Bibb County under the provision of the foregoing Act, and any other provision of law with respect to their duties and powers. 
(c)  It shall succeed to and have all of the powers and duties granted to and incumbent upon the ordinary [probate judge] under the provisions of law with respect to primaries. 
(d)  It shall succeed and have all of the powers and duties granted to and incumbent on the mayor of the City of Macon, the mayor and council of the City of Macon, the city registrar, and all other officers, employees and agencies with respect to the registration of voters and the conduct of all city primaries and elections under the provisions of the Charter of the City of Macon, as amended, as well as those powers, duties and functions, relating to the registration of voters and the conduct or primaries and elections now vested in municipal officers and agencies under the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. (1968 Ga. Laws, page 885 [O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.]) 
(e)  The board shall be authorized and empowered to organize itself, elect its officers, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt by-laws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 8) 
Sec. 7.9. - Rules of board. 
To accomplish the foregoing, the board of elections shall formulate, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations consistent with law and the rules and regulations of the state executive committee of each political party governing the conduct of primaries to the end that, insofar as practicable, all primaries shall be uniformly conducted by the county executive committee for each political party and poll workers shall be properly trained and voters adequately informed and instructed. Nothing in this act [chapter] shall be construed to require joint primaries or to require the governing authority of Bibb County or any other public agency to bear any expense conducting primaries not otherwise required or permitted by law. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 9) 
Sec. 7.10. - Transfer of powers. 
Upon the effective date of this act [chapter], the board shall organize, and the ordinary [probate judge] and the chief registrar and county registrars together with appropriate officials of the City of Macon shall be relieved of all powers and duties to which the board succeeds by virtue of the provisions of this act [chapter] and they shall deliver to the board upon request of its chairman custody of all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records and facilities of every kind pertaining to such powers and duties. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 10) 
Sec. 7.11. - Elections supervisor. 
The governing authority of Bibb County, upon the recommendation of the board of elections, shall appoint a person whose title shall be "elections supervisor" who shall be the chief administrative officer of the board and who shall have such duties and functions as may be prescribed by the board. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 11) 
Sec. 7.12. - Compensation. 
Compensation for members of the board of elections, elections supervisor, clerical assistants, and other employees of the board shall be such as may be fixed from time to time by the governing authority of Bibb County. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 12) 
Sec. 7.13. - Offices, etc. 
The governing authority of the county shall provide the board with such proper and suitable offices and with such clerical assistants and other employees as the governing authority shall deem appropriate. The elections supervisor, and other employees functioning under his supervision shall be deemed to be employees of Bibb County. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 13) 
Sec. 7.14. - Budget. 
Annually, or at other convenient intervals as may be determined by the board of elections, the board of elections shall determine the actual cost of its operations, including the payment of employees, the purchase of supplies, the holding of primaries and elections, the reasonable value of goods, services, or office space furnished in kind, and shall certify the total cost as so determined to the governing authority of the City of Macon and the County of Bibb. Such certification shall include such reasonable itemizations as will enable the respective governing authorities to review and examine the certification of costs. Upon receipt of such certification so made by the board of elections, the City of Macon shall pay to Bibb County 50 percent thereof as reimbursement to the county for the city's share of the operations of the Board of Elections. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 14) 
Sec. 7.15. - Financial limitations. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of section 7.14, the City of Macon shall pay all actual costs of holding any given primary or election conducted solely for the City of Macon and, likewise, the County of Bibb shall pay all actual costs of holding any given primary or election conducted solely for Bibb County. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to require the governing authority of the City of Macon or the governing authority of Bibb County or any other public agency to bear any expense of conducting primaries not otherwise required or permitted by law. 
(1969 Ga. Laws (Act No. 415), page 3331, § 15) 
CHAPTER 8. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY URBAN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 8.1. - Creation of authority. 
There is hereby created a public body corporate and politic in the County of Bibb to be known as the "Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority." Said authority hereinafter shall be referred to as the "authority" and said authority shall have the powers, rights, duties and obligations set forth herein and as otherwise provided by law. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 1) 
Sec. 8.2. - Definitions. 
As used in this act [chapter], the following words and terms shall have the meanings set forth hereinbelow: 
(a)  Authority means the authority created by this act [chapter]. 
(b)  City means the City of Macon, Georgia. 
(c)  County means Bibb County, Georgia. 
(d)  Member means a member of the authority established by this act [chapter]. 
(e)  Advisory committee means the committee established hereinbelow to act as an advisory committee to the authority in matters relating to the revitalization and redevelopment of the Macon downtown area. 
(f)  Project means any undertaking of the authority in connection with the redevelopment or revitalization of urban, central city or downtown areas within Bibb County. 
(g)  Project areas means those urban, central city or downtown areas within Bibb County selected by the authority for redevelopment, revitalization or improvement pursuant to the procedures set forth in this law. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 2) 
Sec. 8.3. - Composition and organization of authority. 
(1)  The authority shall consist of seven (7) members. The original members of said authority shall be the following residents of the City of Macon or Bibb County, Georgia, whose terms of office as members of the authority shall expire on the dates shown following their names: 

 
(2)  Vacancies in the membership of the authority by reason of expiration of term shall be filled in the following manner: the vacancy first occurring shall be filled by appointment of a qualified resident of Bibb County by the board of commissioners of Bibb County and the vacancies next occurring shall be filled by appointment of a qualified resident of Bibb County by the board of commissioners of Bibb County and the vacancies next occurring shall be filled by appointment of a qualified resident of the City of Macon by the mayor and council of the City of Macon and said vacancies, as the same shall occur, shall thereafter be filled alternately by said board of county commissioners and said mayor and council; provided, however, that a member of the authority shall continue to serve until his successor has been duly appointed; and, provided further, that in the event of vacancy for any other reason than the expiration of term, the remaining members of the authority shall continue to be vested with all of the powers, rights, duties and obligations set forth herein or otherwise provided by law. When two (2) vacancies occur by reason of the expiration of a term at the same time, the city governing authority shall fill one (1) vacancy and the county governing authority shall fill the other such vacancy. Vacancies caused by any reason other than expiration of term shall be filled by appointment of the governing body originally making the appointment where a vacancy exists; provided, however, such vacancies which occur as to the terms of the original members set forth above shall be filled by the remaining members of the authority. 
(3)  Upon appointment of members as provided hereinabove, a member shall serve for a period of four (4) years if appointed at the expiration of a term or in the event of a vacancy in the membership for other causes the appointment of said member shall be for the unexpired term. 
(4)  Each member of the authority shall have attained the age of twenty-five (25) years and shall have been a resident of the county for at least two (2) years prior to his appointment. No officer or employee of the county or city shall be eligible for appointment to the authority. If at any time during his term a member shall cease to be a resident of the county or city or shall become an officer or employee of the county or city, he shall cease to be a member of the authority. No person may serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms as a member of the authority. No action taken by the authority shall be void by reason of the disqualification of a member until the disqualification shall be brought to the attention of the other members of the authority in writing, and one (1) month has expired since the receipt of said notice and the action sought to be void was taken after said one month period. 
(5)  The members of the authority shall not be entitled to compensation, pension or other retirement benefits on account of service on the authority but shall be entitled to receive traveling expenses and other actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(6)  The authority shall elect a chairman, vice-president and secretary, each of whom shall serve for one (1) year or until his successor is chosen. The authority shall adopt and promulgate rules governing its procedures and shall hold regular meetings no less often than once each month. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairman or any three (3) members of the authority. A majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of meeting and transacting business. Each member of the authority shall have one (1) vote. 
(7)  Upon the effective date of this act [chapter], the members of the authority shall organize and enter upon the performance of their duties. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 3) 
Sec. 8.4. - Purposes of authority. 
It is hereby determined, declared and established that the creation of the authority and the implementation of the corporate purposes set forth in this law is [are] in all respects for the benefit of the people of this state and that the authority is an institution of purely public charity and it is further declared that the revitalization and redevelopment of the urban, central city and downtown areas of Bibb County (project areas) is a proper public purpose of promoting and expanding, for the public good and welfare, the public facilities of said areas including the construction of streets, roadways, parks, malls, transportation systems, vehicular parking facilities and any and all other necessary and desirable appurtenances to the revitalization and modernization of said project areas; and it is further declared that the expenditure of public funds for such purposes by said authority is and shall be in the public interest. 
It is further found, determined, and declared that all property of said authority is hereby declared and shall in all respects be considered public property and title to such property shall be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public, and the use of such property pursuant to the terms of this act [chapter] shall be and is hereby declared to be for public and governmental purposes, that is, for the promotion of the general public welfare in matters of cultural development, education, pleasure, convenience and recreation of the public at large, in an effort to better the general condition of society, or that considerable part of society residing in Middle Georgia, which promotion is hereby declared to be a public beneficence for the good of humanity and for the general improvement and happiness of society, and all the property, income, obligations, and interest on the obligations of the authority and the transfer thereof shall be and hereby are declared to be nontaxable for any and all purposes. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 4) 
Sec. 8.5. - Powers of the authority. 
The authority shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions set forth in this law including, but not limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(a)  To sue and be sued; 
(b)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal; 
(c)  To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary to exercise the power of the authority. Such contracts may be made with one (1) or more municipal corporations in the county, or may be made with the county and a single municipal corporation or multiple municipal corporations of the county. The county and all such municipalities are hereby authorized to enter into contracts with the authority. The authority may also contract with private legal entities or persons. 
(d)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and devises of any property and to administer trusts; 
(e)  To acquire by purchase, gift or construction any real or personal property desired to be acquired as a part of any project or for the purpose of improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovating or remodeling any project or part thereof already acquired, or for the purpose of demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof; 
(f)  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage or dispose of, or grant options for any such purposes, any real or personal property or interest therein; 
(g)  To mortgage, convey, pledge or assign any properties, revenues, income, tolls, charges or fees owned or received by the authority; 
(h)  To issue revenue obligations for the purpose of providing funds for carrying out the purpose of the authority; 
(i)  To appoint officers and retain agents, engineers, attorneys, fiscal agents, accountants and employees and to provide their compensation and duties; 
(j)  To acquire or damage property through the exercise of the right of eminent domain for public purposes; and to acquire by purchase, gift or lease any property owned by the city or county which has been acquired or damaged through the exercise of the right of eminent domain by the city or county; provided that said authority shall acquire such properties or damage such properties through the exercise of such power of eminent domain only in a manner prescribed by law for the exercise of such power by counties and municipalities in the state and only upon payment of just and fair compensation as required by the constitution and laws of this state; provided further that the authority shall not acquire or damage property through the exercise of the right of eminent domain unless the authority is granted prior written approval for such actions by the governing authorities of the city and the county for property located in the county within the corporate limits of the city, or the county for property located in the county, but not in the city, or by the Georgia Public Service Commission for property owned by a public utility; 
(k)  To construct, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the authority, and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms or corporations, or any other contribution, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use; 
(l)  To issue revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to or improving such project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the Authority theretofore issued. Such revenue bonds shall bear interest at the rate or rates and shall mature in the years and amounts as may be determined by the Authority and shall otherwise be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the "Revenue Bond Law" of the State of Georgia as heretofore or hereafter amended. As security for the payment of any revenue bonds so authorized, any property, real or personal, of an Authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered and any such Authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture containing any provisions not in conflict with law for the security of such bonds, which trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the Authority upon default of such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or upon default in the performance of any term or condition contained in such agreement or indenture. The State of Georgia, in behalf of the State and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision and taxing district therein, hereby waives any right it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the Authority so mortgaged or encumbered and any such mortgage or encumbrance may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof. 
(m)  To make or cause to be made studies and analyses of economic changes taking place in the downtown areas of Bibb County and of the impact of metropolitan growth upon those areas; 
(n)  To prepare a plan or plans for the development and redevelopment of such downtown areas (such plan or plans shall be coordinated with governmental planning boards and agencies but the authority shall have the ultimate responsibility for preparation of such plan or plans); 
(o)  To implement any general plan of development in the urban, central or downtown areas which have been approved by the county and the municipality in which said development is located, by: 
(1)  Coordinating development and redevelopment in a manner consistent with the plan; 
(2)  Encouraging private development and redevelopment in a manner consistent with the plan; 
(3)  From time to time proposing such revisions in the plan as appear to the authority to be appropriate and in the best interest of the city, consistent with the purposes of this law; 
(4)  Constructing, acquiring, repairing, and operating any public development or project covered by the plan, or coordinating any of the foregoing among other governmental agencies; 
(5)  In coordination with said planning boards, or agencies, develop long-range plans designed to hold the deterioration of property values in the urban, central city and downtown areas, and encourage property owners to implement the plans to the fullest extent possible; 
(6)  To acquire in the best interest of the public, for public purposes only, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper and to own, convey and otherwise dispose of and to lease as lessor and lessee, any land and any other property, real and personal, and any rights and interests therein which it may determine to be reasonably necessary in furtherance of its other powers under this article, and to grant and acquire licenses, easements and options with respect thereto; 
(7)  To improve land, construct, reconstruct, equip, improve, maintain and repair parking facilities, parks, plazas, malls, walkways and other public facilities and any necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto within project areas; 
(8)  To fix, charge and collect fees, rents and charges for the use of any project, any part thereof, and any facilities furnished thereby, and of any property under its control, and to pledge such revenue to the payment of revenue bonds issued by it; 
(p)  To have and exercise any and all of the usual powers of private and public corporation except such as are inconsistent with this act [chapter], including the power to adopt and amend bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
(q)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
(r)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
(s)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish or to complement the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 5; 1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1327), page 3950, § 1; 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 730) page 4872, § 1) 
Sec. 8.6. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this act [chapter] shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 6) 
Sec. 8.7. - Advisory committee. 
The City of Macon and Bibb County by joint resolution may establish an advisory committee to the authority. Said committee shall be composed of from 10 to 20 citizens of Bibb County and said committee shall be charged with the responsibility to make recommendations to the authority in connection with the redevelopment of project areas. It shall be the responsibility of the city and county to advise the authority of the composition of the committee and to notify the authority of changes in membership from time to time; terms of members of the committee resting in the discretion of the city and county. The authority shall notify all members of the advisory committee of the date, time and place of each meeting of the authority and the members of the committee are authorized to attend such meetings. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 7) 
Sec. 8.8. - Public funds. 
The City of Macon and the County of Bibb, either and both, are authorized and permitted to provide public funds to the authority for the purposes of the authority set forth in this law, provided, however, that the debts of the authority shall not constitute debts of the state nor of any city, town, municipality or county thereof. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 8) 
Sec. 8.9. - Liberal construction of act. 
The act [chapter] being for the welfare of the state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to affect the purposes hereof. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 3093, § 9) 
Sec. 8.10. - Constitutional authorization (constitutional amendment). 
Provided, however, that the governing authorities of the County of Bibb and of the City of Macon, either and both, are by this self-executing amendment, authorized and permitted, directly, or through the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, to appropriate properties, monies and services, any or all, for the purposes of acquiring, constructing, improving, altering, repairing or maintaining properties within Bibb County, Georgia, so as to develop and redevelop for the public good urban, central city and downtown areas located within Bibb County and in a manner that said powers may be exercised directly by the County of Bibb, the City of Macon or the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority created by an Act of the General Assembly at the 1974 Session thereof and provided further that said Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority shall be authorized to exercise the powers of eminent domain subject to the limitations set forth in said act creating said authority and provided further that an act of the General Assembly of Georgia entitled `An act to create the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority; to establish said authority as a public body corporate and politic; to authorize the authority to exercise certain powers including the right and authority to acquire, construct, improve, alter, repair and maintain properties within Bibb County, Georgia, for the purpose of providing improvements for the public good of urban, central city and downtown areas located within Bibb County, Georgia; to provide for the exercise of the power of eminent domain by said authority and to establish the procedures by which such powers shall be exercised; to impose duties on the authority; to designate the members of the authority; to authorize the City of Macon and Bibb County to execute leases and contracts with said authority in furtherance of the purposes and responsibilities of the authority; to authorize the authority to incur debt by promissory notes or the issuance of revenue bonds of the authority and to provide for the collection of revenues, rents and earnings by the authority for the amortization and payment of such revenue bonds or other debts incurred by said authority and the pledging of said revenues or other funds for such purposes; to authorize the execution of contracts, trust instruments, deeds to secure debt and the encumbrancing of the authority's property to secure the payment of bonds, debts or other evidence of indebtedness; to provide rights for the holders of bonds or other debts of the authority; to provide that the debts of the authority shall not constitute debts of the state nor of any city, town, municipality or county thereof; to make such bonds legal investments and exempt the same and the income therefrom and interest thereon and all property of the authority from taxation; to authorize the issuance of refunding bonds; to provide for validation of bonds of the authority and the security therefor; to provide for the severability of the provisions of this act; to repeal all laws and parts of laws in conflict herewith; and for other purposes,' which was enacted at the Session of the General Assembly of Georgia commencing in January, 1974, is ratified and confirmed as of the dates of both its passage and approval; and provided further that, insofar as this amendment relates to the said act creating said Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, the effectiveness of this amendment shall be retroactive to such dates as may be required to assure said act of full force, effect and validity. 
(1974 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1130), page 1754, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above section is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1945), art. VII, § V, ¶ I. Such amendment was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. O-84-0009 adopted 3-6-85 (published at 1985 Ga. Laws page 5269) and 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1152), page 4698. See Ga. Const. art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. 
Sec. 8.11. - Bonds; leases to city or county (constitutional amendment). 
The Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority is further authorized to issue bonds for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating, extending, repairing and improving land, buildings and facilities for use by the County of Bibb and the City of Macon, either or both, for their governmental, proprietary or administrative functions. Said Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, the County of Bibb and the City of Macon are authorized to enter into contracts and leases pertaining to the use of such facilities for terms not exceeding 50 years, obligating the County of Bibb and the City of Macon to pay such sums as may be agreed upon for the use of such facilities. The County of Bibb and the City of Macon are authorized to levy taxes in order to provide funds to make the payments required under any such contract or lease, and to expend money derived from taxation or other available sources and pledge same as provided in any such contract or lease with the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority. Bonds issued and contracts or leases entered into by the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority shall not be deemed to constitute debts of the County of Bibb or the City of Macon within the meaning of Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. This amendment is self-enacting and does not require any enabling legislation for it to become effective. However, the general assembly may amend the provisions of the act creating the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority (Ga. L. 1974, p. 3093, et seq.) to make it more perfectly reflect the purposes, terms and provisions hereof, to further define the purposes of the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, to further define, prescribe and enlarge the powers and duties of said authority (and of the County of Bibb and the City of Macon as same relate to the authority and its undertakings) and the exercise thereof, to further regulate the management and conduct of said authority, and to otherwise amend said act in any manner not inconsistent with the provisions of this amendment as the general assembly deems appropriate, and all amendments to said act heretofore enacted by the general assembly are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(1976 Ga. Laws (Act No. 190), page 1827, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above section is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1945), art. VII, § V, ¶ I. Such amendment was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. O-84-0009 adopted 3-6-85 (published at 1985 Ga. Laws page 5269) and 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1152), page 4698. See Ga. Const. art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. 
Sec. 8.12. - [Additional powers. (Constitutional amendment] 
In addition to those powers granted to the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority by Act of the General Assembly at the 1974 Session thereof (Ga. L. 1974, p. 3093, et seq.), and amendments to the Constitution of the State of Georgia (Ga. L. 1974, p. 1754, et seq. and Ga. L. 1976, p. 1827, et seq.), said Authority is further authorized to issue its revenue bonds, notes or other obligations for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, operating, extending, repairing and improving lands, buildings and facilities of any kind for use by any industrial, commercial, business, civic, educational, agricultural or other enterprise, public or private, upon a determination by the governing body of the Authority that such undertaking will further the development and redevelopment for the public good of urban, central city and downtown areas located within Bibb county, and, in addition to those specific powers granted to the Authority, said Authority is empowered to extend credit or make loans to any enterprise for the purpose of financing undertakings for the purposes described herein, subject to such terms as the Authority may deem necessary or desirable. Bonds, notes or other obligations issued and contracts entered into by said Authority shall not be deemed to constitute debts of the County of Bibb nor the City of Macon within the meaning of Article IX, Section VII, Paragraph 1 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. This amendment is self-enacting and shall not require any enabling legislation for it to become effective. However, the General Assembly may amend the provisions of the Act creating the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority to make it more perfectly reflect the purposes, terms and provisions hereof, to further define the purpose of the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, to further define, prescribe and enlarge the powers and duties of said Authority (and of the County of Bibb and the City of Macon as the same relate to the Authority and its undertakings) and the exercise thereof, to further regulate the management and conduct of said Authority, and to otherwise amend said Act in any manner not inconsistent with the provisions of this amendment as the General Assembly deems appropriate and all amendments to said Act heretofore enacted by the General Assembly are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 190), page 2128, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above section is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1976), art. IX, § IV, ¶ III and Ga. Const. (1976), art. IX, § VIII, ¶ I. Such amendment was continued in force and effect by Ord. No. O-84-0009 adopted 3-6-85 (published at 1985 Ga. Laws page 5269) and 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1152), page 4698. See Ga. Const. art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. 
CHAPTER 9. - TAXATION AND FINANCE 

Sec. 9.1. - Joint city-county tax collection (constitutional amendment). 
Provided, however, that notwithstanding any provision of law or of this constitution to the contrary, the respective governing authorities of the City of Macon and the County of Bibb may, solely by their joint resolution, consolidate, merge and combine the offices, officers and functions of the city and of the county relating to the time, manner and method for the return, collection, property assessment, notice of property assessment, hearing, appeal, arbitration or review of property assessment, lien, priority of lien and collection of ad valorem taxes levied by the City of Macon and County of Bibb and State of Georgia, and respecting any and all other matters relating or incident to the same, to specify and provide for the time, method and manner of performing any and all such matters and functions, and, without limitation of the foregoing generality, including the retention, release, or combination of present offices and officers, positions and employees, the election or selection of officers and employees to perform such consolidated and combined tax functions, the compensation and tenure of office and employment of such officers and employees, their classification as officers or employees of either the city or county or both for purposes of compensation coverage and retirement, pension and old-age benefits, the designation of the place or places for the performance of the services and duties connected with or incident to the consolidated and combined tax function between the city and county, and all other related or incident matters; provided, further, however, that the Tax Commissioner of the County of Bibb, as elected from time to time pursuant to law applicable to such office, shall be in charge of such combined and consolidated tax office and function, subject, however, to such limitations upon his authority and power as may be imposed by said joint resolution, and such tax commissioner shall, except as to matters relating to ad valorem taxation, additionally perform the duties of his office as tax commissioner as required by law applicable to that office; provided, further, that in the performance of any and all of the matters herein authorized and relating to ad valorem taxation, due process of law shall be afforded and the right of any person to homestead exemptions as provided by law and as related to ad valorem taxes due to the state of Georgia and County of Bibb shall not be affected hereby or hereunder; provided, further, that the powers herein delegated may be exercised from time to time and either together, separately or in any combination of the same. Provided, however, that such action may be changed, superseded, or revoked by legislative action which act shall be binding on the city and county until subsequently changed by the general assembly; and provided further nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any change in the ad valorem tax millage limitation prescribed by any legislative act. 
(1964 Ga. Laws (Act No. 215), page 1067, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above section is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1945), art. XI, § I, ¶ VI. Such amendment was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1380), page 5533. See Ga. Const. art. XI, § I, ¶ IV. 
Sec. 9.2. - [Preferential assessments (constitutional amendment)]. 
Subject to the conditions and limitations provided by local ordinance, the governing authority of the City of Macon may authorize the grant of preferential assessments for purposes of City of Macon ad valorem taxation on property which is revitalized or rehabilitated residential property. The rate of preferential assessment shall be specified by local ordinance but shall not be less than one-half the rate of assessment applicable to other residential property and shall apply only with respect to the increase in value resulting from the revitalization or rehabilitation. No preferential assessment shall be granted for a period in excess of five years, except that an individual may be granted a preferential assessment on the residence actually owned and occupied by him as a residence for a period of not more than ten years. As used in this paragraph, "revitalized" or "rehabilitated residential property" means residential property which has been revitalized or rehabilitated, or which is in the process of revitalization or rehabilitation, pursuant to a community development, redevelopment, or renewal program. For the purposes of this paragraph, an individual may be considered the owner of a residence if the individual may be lawfully granted a homestead exemption from ad valorem taxes on the residence as otherwise provided in Paragraph IV. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 171), page 2093, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above section is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1976), art. VII, § I, ¶ IV. Such amendment was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1270), page 5002. 
Sec. 9.3. - Homestead exemption from city ad valorem taxes (constitutional amendment). 
The governing authority of the City of Macon is hereby authorized to grant to each person who is 65 years of age or over an exemption from all ad valorem taxes levied by the City of Macon in an amount to be fixed by the governing authority at not more than $2,000.00 on a homestead owned and occupied by him as a residence if his net income, together with the net income of his spouse who also occupies and resides at such homestead, as net income is defined by Georgia law, from all sources, except as hereinafter provided, does not exceed $4,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year for income tax purposes. For the purposes of this paragraph, net income shall not include income received as retirement, survivor or disability benefits under the Federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability or pension system, except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual and his spouse under the Federal Social Security Act, and income from such sources in excess of such maximum amount shall be included as net income for the purposes of this paragraph. The value of the residence in excess of the above-exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. Any such owner shall not receive the benefits of such homestead exemption unless he, or his agent, files an affidavit with the governing authority of the city, giving his age and the amount of income which he and his spouse received during the last taxable year for income tax purposes, and such additional information relative to receiving the benefits of such exemption as will enable the governing authority to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. The governing authority shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. Such applications shall be processed in the same manner as other applications for homestead exemptions, and the provisions of law applicable to the processing of homestead exemptions, as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall apply thereto. Provided, that after any such owner has filed the proper affidavit, as provided above, and has been allowed the exemption provided herein, it shall not be necessary that he make application and file the said affidavit thereafter for any year and the said exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any such owner, however, to notify the governing authority in the event he becomes ineligible for any reason for the exemption provided in this paragraph. The governing authority of the City of Macon may provide for the proper administration of this exemption including penalties necessary therefor. The exemption provided for herein shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1978. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 2357) 
Editor's note— The above section is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1976), art. VII, § I, ¶ IV. Such amendment was continued in force and effect by Ga. Const. (1983), art. VII, § II, ¶ IV. 
CHAPTER 10. - PLANNING AND ZONING 

Sec. 10.1. - Planning and zoning agencies for city and county (constitutional amendment). 
And except that the City of Macon and Bibb County may, through their respective governing authorities, separately or jointly, promulgate zoning and planning laws, rules and regulations, and administer the same, and/or appoint agencies or agency for adopting zoning and planning laws, rules and regulations, and for administering the same, the governing authorities or their designated agencies being authorized to condition the application of any zoning and planning and the administration of the same according to any presently existing zoning or planning law, any that may hereafter be enacted, or according to any that may be resolved or ordained by either or both or by their designated agency or agencies. 
(1947 Ga. Laws (Act No. 234), page 1240, § 1) 
Editor's note— The above section is a local amendment to Ga. Const. (1945), art. XI, § I, ¶ VI. Such amendment was continued in force and effect by 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1314), page 5308. See Ga. Const. art. XI, §I, ¶ IV. 
CHAPTER 11. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY TRANSIT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 11.1. - Purpose of article. 
(a)  [ Necessity. ] It is hereby found, declared, and determined that the public convenience and necessity require the creation of a public authority to operate a transit system in the City of Macon and the County of Bibb for transportation of passengers both within and without the City of Macon and the County of Bibb. 
(b)  Title. Chapters 1 through 5 of this act [Sections 11.1 through 11.5 of this chapter] shall be known as the "Macon-Bibb County Transit Authority Act of 1980." 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, §§ 1.1, 1.2) 
Sec. 11.2. - Creation and organization of authority. 
(a)  Created. There is hereby created the "Macon-Bibb County Transit Authority." 
(b)  Body corporate and politic. The authority is a public corporation of the State of Georgia. The authority is not an arm or agency of the City of Macon nor of Bibb County but is a body corporate and politic created by this act [chapter] and the powers granted the authority by this act [chapter] are not restricted by limitations, constitutional or otherwise, upon the powers of the City of Macon nor of Bibb County. 
(c)  Perpetual succession. The authority has perpetual succession. 
(d)  Board; appointment; terms; quorum; members; officers: 
(1)  The governing and administrative body of the authority shall be a board consisting of four members, one of whom shall be a consumer of transit services, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, and three members, one of whom shall be a consumer of transit services, appointed by the board of commissioners of Bibb County, for a total of seven members. Members of the board appointed by the city shall be residents of the city for the entire term of their appointment and shall be at least 25 years of age. Members of the board appointed by the county shall be residents of the City of Macon or Bibb County for the entire term of their appointment and shall be at least 25 years of age. The five members of the board who are currently serving in office shall continue to serve until the expiration of their terms of office. The two new members, who shall be consumer members, shall be appointed to take office on June 1, 1995, for terms of office of five years. All members of the board shall serve for terms of office of five years. Members of the board shall be eligible for reappointment. Vacancies on the board, except by expiration of term, shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term in which the vacancy occurs. 
(2)  A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum and a majority of the board may act for the authority in any manner. 
(3)  No member of the board or employee of the authority shall have, directly or indirectly, any financial interest, profit, or benefit in any contract, work, or business of the authority nor in the sale, lease, or purchase of any property to or from the authority. 
(4)  Members of the board shall serve without remuneration but shall be entitled: 
1.  To reimbursement for actual expenses incurred on authority business, provided that such expenses have been authorized in advance of their being incurred; and 
2.  To participate in and be covered by any contract for group medical or hospitalization insurance plans otherwise provided by the authority for its director, its officers, and its employees pursuant to paragraph (5) of subsection (a) of Section 3.1. 
(5)  The board shall select one of its members as chairman and another member as vice chairman and shall also elect a secretary-treasurer, who shall not necessarily be a member of the board. Regular meetings of the board shall be held at least quarterly, the time, place, and notice of such meetings to be fixed by the board. All motions, resolutions, and all other proceedings of the authority and all documents and records in its possession shall be public records and open to public inspection, except such documents and records as shall be kept or prepared by the board for use in negotiations, actions, or proceedings to which the authority is a party. 
(6)  The chairman of the board shall be eligible to vote on all motions coming before the board. The affirmative vote of at least three (3) members of the board shall be necessary for adoption of any resolution or the passing of any motion. 
(e)  Bonds of secretary-treasurer and director. The secretary-treasurer and the director of the authority shall hold office at the pleasure of the board. Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, the secretary-treasurer and director shall each execute a bond with a corporate surety to be approved by the board. The bond of both officers shall be payable to the authority in whatever penal sum may be directed by the board, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices and the payment of all moneys received by each of them according to law and the orders of the board. The board may at any time require a new bond from either or both officers in such penal sum as may then be determined. The books and records of the authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the authority, by a certified public accountant, selected by the board. 
(f)  Funds. All funds deposited by the authority in any bank shall be placed in the name of the authority and shall be withdrawn or paid out only by check or draft on the bank, signed by the secretary-treasurer and countersigned by the chairman or vice-chairman of the board, except under the following circumstances. The board may designate any of its members or the director of the authority to sign any draft or check for the payment of all obligations of no more than $2,500.00, or for the payment of salaries or wages and for FICA, federal income tax, credit union, and insurance payroll deductions, regardless of the amount. 
(1980 Ga. Laws, (Act No. 1284), page 4313, §§ 2.1—2.6; 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1085, page 4339, §§ 1, 2; 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1124, page 4601, § 1; 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 47), page 3611, § 1) 
Sec. 11.3. - Powers of authority. 
(a)  The powers of the authority shall include, but shall not be limited to, those powers generally conferred upon authorities pursuant to law and shall also include those specifically granted by this act [chapter] which may be exercised only to accomplish the purpose for which the authority is created, namely to own and operate a transit system for the purpose of transporting persons within and without the City of Macon and the County of Bibb, and: 
(1)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and donations. 
(2)  To adopt a seal to be impressed upon its instruments and may provide for the impression of such seal by printed or lithographed facsimile thereof. Any executed instrument bearing the seal of the authority shall be prima facie evidence of its execution by the authority and that its execution was duly, regularly, and legally authorized by the authority. 
(3)  To acquire by grant, purchase, gift, devise, or lease, and to hold, use, sell, lease, or dispose of real and personal property of every kind and nature whatsoever, licenses, patents, rights, and interests necessary for the full exercise, or convenient or useful for the carrying on of any of its powers pursuant to this act [chapter]. 
(4)  To acquire, construct, complete, develop, own, operate, and maintain a transit system including power to acquire by purchase, lease, gift, or otherwise all or any part of any patents, licenses, rights, interest, engineering studies, data, or reports owned or held by any person, firm, or corporation and determined by the authority to be necessary, convenient, or useful to the authority in connection with the acquisition, construction, completion, development, operation, or maintenance of such transit system. 
(5)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys; to fix or to provide for their respective compensation; and to provide for pension and retirement plans for these officers, agents, and employees including, but not limited to, the transfer to the authority and maintenance of a pension or retirement plan identical or similar to that heretofore in existence for the officers and employees of the Macon Transit System of the City of Macon; and to provide for or contract for group life, medical, and hospitalization insurance plans for said officers and employees and, except for members of the board of the authority, to pay the costs thereof either in whole or in part. To be a self-insurer as to workers' compensation claims without being required to comply with the provisions of Code Section 34-9-121 of the O.C.G.A., which related to self-insurers and the posting of security indemnity or bonds. 
(6)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue notes or bonds therefor and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge, and assign any and all of its funds, property, or income as security therefor and to provide for the payment of the same and the rights of the holders thereof. 
(7)  To sue and to be sued in its corporate name in such actions as are permitted by law. The authority board members shall be immune from suits as to those actions for the recovery of damages; however, such immunity shall be waived as to those actions for the recovery of damages for any claim for which liability insurance protection for such claim has been provided, but only to the extent of the amount of any such liability insurance. 
(8)  To have and to exercise the usual powers of public and private corporations performing similar functions which are not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state or of the United States of America. 
(9)  To make and execute all instruments and contracts for the acquisition of existing transportation facilities, acquisition of new facilities and properties and such other matters and things as may be needful and necessary to the proper and efficient operation of the business of the authority. 
(10)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest the same in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(11)  To procure and enter into contracts for any type of insurance and indemnity against loss or damage to its property from any cause, including loss of use and occupancy, against death or injury of any person, against employers' liability, against any act of any member, officer, or employee of the board or the authority in the performance of the duties of his office or employment of any other insurable risk. 
(12)  To adopt, alter, or repeal its own bylaws, rules, and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the powers granted to it may be enjoyed as the board may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating the business of the authority. 
(13)  To have the continuing power and authority at any time and from time to time to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds pursuant to and in accordance with the Revenue Bond Law of the State of Georgia for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of acquisition, construction, alteration, and improvement of said transit system and charges incident thereto. The authority shall likewise have the power and authority to issue refunding bonds. For the purpose of evidencing the obligation of the authority to repay any money borrowed by the authority for any of the aforesaid purposes, the authority may, pursuant to resolution adopted by the board, from time to time issue and dispose of its interest-bearing revenue bonds and may also from time to time issue and dispose of its interest-bearing bonds and refund any such bonds at maturity or pursuant to redemption provisions, or at any time before maturity with the consent of the holders thereof. Said authority may issue such types of revenue bonds as may be determined by the board, including bonds on which principal and interest are payable: 
a.  Exclusively from income or revenues of the operations of the authority financed with proceeds of such bonds, or together with any proceeds and grants from any governmental agency, subdivision, instrumentality, corporation, person, or any other source; or 
b.  From income and revenues of any unpledged assets of the authority generally. Any such bonds may be secured by mortgage or deed to secure debt on any real or personal property of the authority, except as may be prohibited by law. 
(b)  Neither the members of the board nor any person executing bonds on behalf of the authority shall be personally liable thereon by reason of the issuance thereof. The bonds shall not be, and shall so state on the face thereof, a debt of the City of Macon, the County of Bibb, or the State of Georgia, and they shall not directly or indirectly or contingently be obligated to levy or pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment thereof. 
(c)  Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the provisions of the State Revenue Bond Law, hereinbefore referred to, and as the same may hereafter be amended, and when validated, the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and against the authority issuing the same. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 3.1; 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1124, page 4601, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 11.4. - Fiscal. 
(1)  [ Generally. ] All construction contracts and all contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment, and services, when the expense thereof shall exceed $5,000.00 shall be awarded to the person, firm, or corporation submitting the lowest and best bid, in accordance with the specifications and requirements as established by the board of the transit authority. The transit authority shall annually publish in the legal organ of Bibb County an advertisement setting forth the categories of supplies, equipment, and services required and the procedures for submission of bids therefor. 
(2)  Rates. The authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges for the transportation services and facilities furnished, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking of project, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, and improvement of said transit system, and to pledge the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertakings, including the revenues of improvements and betterments thereafter made. The bond redemption and interest payments shall constitute a first direct and exclusive charge and lien on all such rates, fares, tolls, and charges and other revenues and interest thereon and sinking funds created therefrom received from the use and operation of the system; and all such rates, fares, tolls, and charges and other revenues together with interest thereon shall constitute a trust fund for the security and payment of such bonds and, except as to the extent provided in any indenture with respect to the payment therefrom of expenses for other purposes including administration maintenance improvements or extensions of the system, shall not be used or pledged for any other purpose so long as such bonds or any of them are outstanding and unpaid. The authority may provide that the rates, fares, tolls, and charges established are minimum rates, fares, tolls, and charges and subject to increase or decrease in accordance only with the terms of the indenture under which the revenue bonds are issued. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, §§ 4.1, 4.2; 1982 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1085), page 4339, § 3) 
Sec. 11.5. - Tax exemption. 
The authority shall be exempt from payment of all taxes and assessments, ad valorem, sales, use, income and otherwise, imposed by the State of Georgia or by any of its subdivisions or taxing districts upon any property, real and personal, acquired or owned by the authority or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, or supervision, and upon its activities in the operation and maintenance of any such properties, and on the income derived by the authority from the operation of said transit system or otherwise. The bonds of the authority, their transfer and the income therefrom, shall always be exempted from taxation by the state or any of its subdivisions or taxing districts. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 5.1) 
Sec. 11.6. - Construction. 
This act [chapter] being necessary for the welfare of the state and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof; and the specific powers, authority, and immunities granted hereby are to be construed in illustration of and not in limitation of, the general powers, authorities, and immunities granted by the authority of this act [chapter]. 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1284), page 4313, § 7.1) 
CHAPTER 12. - MIDDLE GEORGIA SURFACE AND AIR TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 12.1. - Short title. 
This Act [chapter] shall be known and may be cited as the "Middle Georgia Surface and Air Transportation Commission Act." 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 1) 
Sec. 12.2. - Creation of commission. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the Middle Georgia Surface and Air Transportation Commission, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, bring and defend actions, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts. The commission shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)  The commission shall be composed of 61 members who shall be appointed as follows: 
(1)  Two members shall be appointed by the governing authority of each member county. One of such members shall be appointed for an initial term of one year and one for an initial term of three years. Successors to such members shall serve for terms of three years; 
(2)  One member shall be appointed by the governing authority of each member municipality for an initial term of two years. Successors to such members shall serve for terms of three years; and 
(3)  One member shall be elected at large by a majority vote of the remaining members for an initial term of two years. Successors to such member shall serve for a term of three years. 
All initial members of the commission shall be appointed within 30 days of the effective date of this Act [chapter]. All members shall be eligible for reappointment. Thirty members shall constitute a quorum. Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled by appointment by the governing body responsible for originally appointing such member or in the case of the at-large member, by vote of the remaining members. No vacancy on the commission shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the commission. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman of the commission from among the members thereof and shall also elect a secretary-treasurer who need not be a member of the commission. The commission shall also elect an executive committee which shall be composed of the chairman and vice-chairman and three additional members elected by a majority of the members of the commission. The executive committee shall have such powers and authority as shall be provided by the bylaws of the commission. Persons elected to the executive committee shall serve on such committee for a term of one year. The members of the commission shall determine their compensation for serving in such capacities. 
(d)  Any member may be removed from office for good cause affecting his ability to perform his duties as a member, for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for violating the conflict of interest provisions of this Act [chapter] by vote of 30 of the other members, but only after a public hearing at which such member is given the right to present evidence in his own behalf and only upon a finding by 30 of the other members that good cause for removal affecting the member's ability to perform his duties as a member exists, that he was guilty of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office, or that he violated the conflict of interest provisions of this Act [chapter]. Any member who fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the commission shall automatically by reason of such fact cease to be a member of the commission. However, such person shall be eligible for reappointment to the commission upon a showing of good cause for failure to attend such meetings. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 2) 
Sec. 12.3. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Act [chapter], the term: 
(1)  "Airport" means: 
(A)  Any area of land or water or any structure which is or has been used, or which the commission may plan to use, for the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft, including helicopters; and all buildings, equipment, facilities, or other property and improvements of any kind or nature located within the bounds of any such land or water area or structure; 
(B)  Facilities of any type for the accommodation of passengers, maintenance, servicing, and operation of aircraft, business offices and facilities of private businesses and governmental agencies, parking of automobiles, and all other activities which are or have been carried on or which may be necessary or convenient in conjunction with the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft; and 
(C)  All buildings, equipment, facilities, and other property and improvements of any kind or nature located outside the bounds of any such land or water area or structure which is or has been used or which the commission plans to use for the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft which are necessary for the safe operation of aircraft, including without limitation, aviation easements and other real or personal property. 
(2)  "Commission" means the Middle Georgia Surface and Air Transportation Commission created by Section 2 of this Act [chapter]. 
(3)  "Cost of the project" means the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment; financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction; cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses, costs of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expense; and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this Act [chapter], the construction of any project, and the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act [chapter] for such project. 
(4)  "Member county" means Baldwin, Bibb, Bleckley, Crawford, Dodge, Houston, Jasper, Jones, Laurens, Monroe, Montgomery, Peach, Pulaski, Telfair, Toombs, Treutlen, Twiggs, Wheeler, Wilcox, and Wilkinson counties unless the governing authority of any such county has adopted a resolution, at any time, declaring that such county shall not be a member county under this Act [chapter]. 
(5)  "Member municipality" means the Cities of Abbeville, Alamo, Cochran, Dublin, Eastman, Forsyth, Fort Valley, Gray, Hawkinsville, Irwinton, Jeffersonville, Macon, McRae, Milledgeville, Monticello, Mount Vernon, Perry, Roberts, Soperton, and Vidalia unless the governing authority of such municipality has adopted a resolution, at any time, declaring that such municipality shall not be a member municipality under this Act [chapter]. 
(6)  "Project" means and includes the leasing, acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improving, and operation of public airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft and surface transportation facilities and systems, related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings, and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all of such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance, and operation of such airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft and such surface transportation facilities and systems, deemed by the commission to be necessary, convenient, or desirable for the operation of such airports, landing fields, and surface transportation facilities and systems. 
(7)  "Revenue bonds" and "bonds" shall mean revenue bonds and certificates as defined and provided for in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," and such type of obligations may be issued by the commission as authorized under said article. In addition, such terms shall also mean obligations of the commission the issuance of which are specifically provided for in this Act [chapter]. 
(b)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the commission, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the commission therefrom will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 3) 
Sec. 12.4. - Powers. 
(a)  The commission is authorized: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the seal at pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, rights, or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or to dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the commission, the commission being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act [chapter] except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act [chapter]; and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the commission and to the owners of the property to be condemned; and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act [chapter] upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money is deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys and fix their respective compensation; 
(5)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the commission upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; 
(6)  To plan, acquire, establish, develop, construct, enlarge, improve, maintain, equip, and lease all airports which shall come under its control under the provisions of this Act [chapter] or which it may acquire or plan to acquire; to regulate, protect, and police such airports and all related activities and facilities; to enter into any contracts, leases, or other agreements, promulgate any orders, set any tolls, fees, or other charges for the use of its property or services and collect and use same as necessary to operate the airports under its control and to accomplish any purposes of this Act [chapter]; and to make any purchases or sales necessary for such purposes; provided, however, that airports owned or operated by a member county or municipality or any authority of a member county or municipality may not be acquired except with the consent of such owner or operator; 
(7)  To contract with any persons, firms, or public or private corporations to supply goods, commodities, facilities, and services to the public, employees of the commission, and employees of air carriers and other commercial interests located at any airport under its control under such terms and conditions as it may prescribe including, if desirable, exclusive rights, franchises, or concessions; 
(8)  To adopt and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the orderly, safe, efficient, and sanitary operation of airports and related facilities under its control; to provide for its own security force and peace officers with powers of arrest or to arrange for such security force or peace officers in connection with the county in which a facility is located; and to prescribe reasonable penalties for the breach of any rule or regulation. All such rules, regulations, or orders shall become effective upon approval by the commission and after publication of a notice containing a substantive statement of the rules and regulations and the penalties for violation thereof in a newspaper of general circulation of all counties in which such rules and regulations are to be applied. The notice shall state that the breach of any such rule or regulation will subject the violator to a penalty, shall state the penalty, and shall state that the full text of all rules and regulations shall be maintained in the principal office of the commission where same will be open to public inspection and perusal. All rules and regulations shall in fact be so maintained. Said rules and regulations, when promulgated as provided herein shall be judicially recognized by and enforceable in the court having jurisdiction over the offense and located in the county in which the violation occurs; 
(9)  To provide its own fire and emergency medical protection and crash and rescue services or to arrange for such services in connection with any federal, state, municipal, or county agency or any private firm in the business of providing such services; 
(10)  To make application directly or indirectly to any federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or to any other source, public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees, or other financial assistance in aid of airports under its control and to accept and use same upon such terms and conditions as are prescribed by the federal, state, county, or municipal government or agency or other source; 
(11)  To enter into agreements with the state, any subdivision thereof, or any county or municipality or the federal government or any agency thereof to use in the performance of its functions the facilities or the services of the state or such subdivision or such county or municipality or the federal government or any agency thereof in order to accomplish the purposes of this Act [chapter]; 
(12)  To enter into contracts, leases, or other agreements with federally certificated air carriers, other commercial air carriers, and other commercial users of its airports for the use of such airports under such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate and for such charges, rentals, and fees as it deems appropriate; 
(13)  To enter into such agreement with any municipality or any county presently operating airports of which the commission may subsequently assume control with respect to the manner of transfer of airport employees from any municipality or any county to the commission as the commission deems necessary and appropriate or to contract with such governmental agency for the continued services of such officers and employees on such terms as are deemed to be appropriate; 
(14)  To establish a plan of civil service for officers and employees of the commission or to provide by resolution that such officers and employees of the commission shall be covered under any state, county, or municipal civil service plan which is available to such employees under the laws of the state or any county or municipality; 
(15)  To establish a plan for retirement, disability, hospitalization, and death benefits for officers and employees of the commission or to provide by resolution that such officers and employees shall be covered under any state, county, or municipal plan available to them under the laws of the state or any county or municipality; 
(16)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects as defined in paragraph (5) of Section 3 of this Act [chapter], the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds and revenue bonds of the commission or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(17)  To accept loans and grants of money, materials, or property of any kind from the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America, the State of Georgia, or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(18)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes, to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(19)  To exercise any power which is usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions and which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; and 
(20)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act [chapter]. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act [chapter] to the contrary, the commission shall not: 
(1)  Own or maintain aircraft or perform maintenance on aircraft owned by others; 
(2)  Engage in flight instruction, flight charter, or other aircraft for hire business; or 
(3)  Perform maintenance on radios, propellers, or other aircraft accessories. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 4) 
Sec. 12.5. - Members of the commission not to be interested in contracts. 
The commission is prohibited from entering into a contract for the purchase of goods, property, or service with any member of the commission or the employer, partner, principal, agent, servant, or employee of a commission member. The commission shall not enter into any contract in which any member of the commission is financially interested, directly or indirectly. Neither the chairman nor any member of the commission nor a partner, employer, principal, agent, servant, or employee of a commission member shall enter into any contract with the commission or sell to the commission any goods, property, or service; provided, however, this section shall not apply to goods or services purchased from any public utility. Any contract made in violation of this section shall be void. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 5) 
Sec. 12.6. - Revenue bonds. 
The commission, or any authority or body which had or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the commission created by this Act [chapter], is authorized at one time or from time to time to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the commission for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as defined in this Act [chapter] of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this Act [chapter] for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding the interest allowed by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," shall be payable semiannually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the commission, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the commission, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the commission in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 6) 
Sec. 12.7. - Same; form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The commission shall determine the form of the bonds; including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the commission may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone or also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 7) 
Sec. 12.8. - Same; signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the commission and the official seal of the commission shall be fixed thereto and attested by the secretary of the commission, and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the signature or facsimile signature of the chairman of the commission. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of such person and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the commission by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 8) 
Sec. 12.9. - Same; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under this Act [chapter] shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments law of the state. Such bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 9) 
Sec. 12.10. - Same; sale; price. 
The commission may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the commission, but no such sale shall be made at a price so low as to require the payment of interest on the money received therefor at a greater rate than the interest allowed by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law," computed with relation to the absolute maturity of the bonds in accordance with standard tables of bond values, excluding, however, from such computation the amount of any premium to be paid on redemption of any bond prior to maturity. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 10) 
Sec. 12.11. - Same; proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects and, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may be issued in like manner to provide the amount of such deficit, which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund provided for in this Act [chapter] for the payment of principal and interest of such bonds. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 11) 
Sec. 12.12. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the commission, under like restrictions, may issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 12) 
Sec. 12.13. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The commission may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 13) 
Sec. 12.14. - Conditions precedent to issuance; object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act [chapter]. In the discretion of the commission, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under this Act [chapter] shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the commission by a majority of its members. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 14) 
Sec. 12.15. - Bonds; trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the commission, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the commission and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the commission. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the commission in relation to the acquisition of property; the construction of the project; the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project; and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the commission, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the commission. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the commission may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 15) 
Sec. 12.16. - Same; to whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the commission shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes for which such bonds were issued, subject to such regulations as this Act [chapter] and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 16) 
Sec. 12.17. - Same; sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the commission to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the commission as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide; and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals, as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund, which sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as provided in this Act [chapter]. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust indenture, surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds. Any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 17) 
Sec. 12.18. - Same; remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under this Act [chapter] or any coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given in this Act [chapter] may be restricted by the resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted under this Act [chapter] or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act [chapter] or by such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act [chapter] or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the commission or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 18) 
Sec. 12.19. - Same; refunding bonds. 
The commission is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue refunding bonds of the commission for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under this Act [chapter] and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities, all other details thereof, and the duties of the commission in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provision of this Act [chapter] insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 19) 
Sec. 12.20. - Same; venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under this Act [chapter] or any suit or action against the commission shall be brought in the Superior Court of Laurens County, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under this Act [chapter] shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 20) 
Sec. 12.21. - Same; validation. 
Bonds of the commission shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law." The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the commission. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds against the commission issuing the same and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality contracting with the commission. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 21) 
Sec. 12.22. - Same; interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the commission remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of the commission or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the commission to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the commission. The provisions of this Act [chapter] shall be for the benefit of the commission and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act [chapter], shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 22) 
Sec. 12.23. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act [chapter] shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of any member county or municipality or a pledge of the faith and credit of said county or municipality, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this Act [chapter]; and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate any member county or municipality to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment of such bonds; and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 23) 
Sec. 12.24. - Bonds as legal investments for trustees and as lawful deposits of securities with public officers. 
Any bonds issued by the commission under the provisions of this Act [chapter] are made securities in which public officers and bodies of this state; all municipalities; all municipal subdivisions; all insurance companies and associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business; all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks, savings associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking business; all administrators, guardians, executors, trustees, and other fiduciaries; and all other persons who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state may properly and legally invest funds including capital in their control or belonging to them. The bonds are also made securities which may be deposited with and shall be received by all public officers and bodies of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions for any purpose for which the deposit of the bonds or other obligations of this state is now or may hereafter be authorized. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 24) 
Sec. 12.25. - Property of commission deemed to be public property. 
It is declared that all property of the commission held, pursuant to the terms of this Act [chapter], whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, and of any kind or nature, and any income or revenue therefrom, is held for an essential public and governmental purpose, and all such property is deemed to be public property. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 25) 
Sec. 12.26. - Taxation of the commission. 
The property, obligations, and interest on the obligations of the commission shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations, and interest on the obligations of its member counties. The exemption from taxation herein provided shall not extend to tenants or lessees of the commission. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 26) 
Sec. 12.27. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act [chapter], whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act [chapter]. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 27) 
Sec. 12.28. - Determination of need for the commission. 
(a)  It is determined and declared that the present and projected rapid growth in commercial and private air traffic in the middle Georgia area, the need for adequate airports to serve safely and efficiently the air transportation needs of the state and the metropolitan areas of middle Georgia, the need to eliminate airport hazards, the need of raise large amounts of capital for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of present and future airports, and the need to coordinate the operation of various airports within certain metropolitan areas of the state necessitates the creation of an air and surface transportation commission for the present and future operation of air surface transportation facilities. It is further determined and declared that the establishment of such commission is necessary and essential to ensure the welfare, safety, and convenience of citizens of the entire state and to ensure the proper economic development of the entire state. 
(b)  The purposes and objectives of this Act [chapter] and the commission shall be to meet the needs and requirements recognized in subsection (a) of this section through the establishment, maintenance, and operation of unified and coordinated surface and air transportation systems in the middle Georgia region; to ensure the orderly and proper use and growth of public airports; to ensure that the maximum public benefit is attained from any public airports in existence and from any future airports; to ensure proper planning and establishment of future airports; to ensure maximum participation in national and international air transportation programs; to promote public transportation and commerce; and to provide the effective and economical use of public airports for the public welfare, safety, and convenience. The primary purpose of this commission is to address the airline passenger service needs of the region and is not to supplant or replace the need for general aviation in the region. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 28) 
Sec. 12.29. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The commission is authorized to prescribe, fix, and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this Act [chapter] to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of the public airport, landing fields, surface transportation systems, and related buildings and facilities and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 29) 
Sec. 12.30. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the commission to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act [chapter]. After the commission has selected a potential site or sites for the regional airport, notice of the site or sites so selected shall be delivered to the board of commissioners of the county wherein the site or sites are located, and the board of commissioners shall have 60 days to notify the commission of its decision to accept the airport or, in the alternative, submit the question of acceptance or rejection of the regional airport to a public referendum which shall be held within 90 days of the call. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 30) 
Sec. 12.31. - Financial statements and audit reports. 
(a)  The commission shall establish a fiscal year for its operation and, as soon after the end of each fiscal year as is feasible, the commission shall cause to be prepared and printed a report and financial statement of the commission's operations for the fiscal year just ended and of its assets and liabilities. A copy of such report shall be sent to the governing commission of each member county, and additional copies shall be made available for distribution to the general public on written requests therefor. 
(b)  The commission shall appoint in due time each year a firm of independent certified public accountants as auditors who shall examine the books, records, and accounts of the commission for the purpose of auditing and reporting upon its financial statement for such year. The report of such auditors shall be appended to such financial statement. 
(c)  Whenever the commission deems it necessary or advisable, it shall be authorized to employ a firm of qualified independent engineers to survey the condition of the commission's facilities and operations from an engineering standpoint and to make a report thereof together with its recommendations for improvement in its physical facilities and operating procedures. A copy of such report shall be sent to the governing commission of each member county and additional copies shall be made available for distribution to the general public on written request therefor. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 31) 
Sec. 12.32. - Competitive bidding on contracts. 
(a)  Except in the purchase of unique articles or articles which for any reason are unobtainable in the open market and except as provided in this Act [chapter], competitive bids shall be secured before any purchase or sale, by contract or otherwise, is made by the commission or before any contract is awarded for construction, alterations, supplies, equipment, repairs, or maintenance or for rendering any services to the commission other than professional services. The purchase shall be made from or the contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder or the sale shall be made to the highest responsible bidder. If the amount involved is $10,000.00 or more, no purchase of any unique article or other articles unobtainable in the open market shall be made unless a report detailing why such unique article or other articles are unobtainable in the open market is submitted to the chairman of the commission. 
(b)  All purchases, contracts, and sales of $10,000.00 or more shall be awarded after advertising in the official organs of the member counties at least two weeks prior to the bid opening. Bids shall be publicly opened and read aloud at a date, time, and place designated in the invitation to bid. Invitations to bid shall be sent at least one week prior to the bid opening to at least three potential bidders who are qualified technically and financially to submit bids or, in lieu thereof, the commission shall keep on file a memorandum showing that less than three potential bidders so qualified exist in the market area within which it is practicable to obtain bids. 
(c)  Written price quotations from at least three qualified and responsible vendors shall be obtained for all purchases and sales under $2,000.00 but more than $1,000.00 or, in lieu thereof, the commission shall keep on file a memorandum showing that less than three vendors so qualified exist in the market area within which it is practicable to obtain quotations, except as provided in this Act [chapter]. 
(d)  Purchases or sales under $1,000.00 may be negotiated with or without competitive bidding under sound procurement procedures as promulgated and established by the commission. 
(e)  Competitive bidding requirements may be waived if it is determined by the commission that an emergency directly and immediately affecting customer service or public health, safety, or welfare requires immediate delivery of supplies, materials, equipment, or services; provided, however, that a statement explaining the emergency shall be entered in the permanent records of the commission. 
(f)  The commission shall have the right to reject any or all bids or parts of any or all bids whenever in the opinion of the commission such rejection is necessary for the protection of the interests of the commission. In such cases, the commission shall readvertise for new bids on the same or different terms. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 32) 
Sec. 12.33. - Contractors to give bond. 
Contractors who are awarded contracts by the commission shall be required to give bond in an amount equal to the amount of the bid, with good security, for the faithful performance of the contract and to indemnify the commission for any damages occasioned by a failure to perform the same within the prescribed time. Such bond shall be approved by and filed with the commission or shall be approved by and filed with such other person as may be designated by the commission. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 33) 
Sec. 12.34. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act [chapter] shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for doing the things authorized thereby, shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as being in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 34) 
Sec. 12.35. - Liberal construction of Act [chapter]. 
This Act [chapter], being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 35) 
Sec. 12.36. - Powers of counties and municipalities. 
This Act [chapter] does not in any way take from member counties or any municipality located therein or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain public airports or landing fields or to issue revenue certificates as is provided by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law." 
(1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1177), page 5170, § 36) 
PART III - [COMPARATIVE TABLES] 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE—GEORGIA LAWS [OF BIBB COUNTY] 
 This table gives the location of Georgia Session Laws in this Related Laws Compilation. 

 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE—ORDINANCES [OF BIBB COUNTY] 
 This table gives the location with this Related Laws Compilation of Ordinances. 

 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS [OF MACON COUNTY] 
This table gives the location within the Charter and Related Laws of Georgia Laws compiled therein. Provisions found in the Charter as referenced as being in same with the abbreviation "Char." Provisions found in an appendix to the Charter are referenced as being in an appendix to same with the abbreviation "Char. App." Provisions found in the Related Laws are referenced as being in same with the abbreviation "RL." 

 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES [OF MACON COUNTY] 
This table gives the location within the Charter and Related Laws of ordinances compiled therein. Provisions found in the Charter as referenced as being in same with the abbreviation "Char." Provisions found in an appendix to the Charter are referenced as being in an appendix to same with the abbreviation "Char. App." Provisions found in the Related Laws are referenced as being in same with the abbreviation "RL." 

 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
Beginning with the 2015 republication this table gives the location within the Charter and Related Laws of Georgia Laws compiled therein. Provisions found in the Charter as referenced as being in same with the abbreviation "Char." Provisions found in an appendix to the Charter are referenced as being in an appendix to same with the abbreviation "Char. App." Provisions found in the Related Laws are referenced as being in same with the abbreviation "RL." 

 
\ CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
Beginning with Supplement No. 1, this table gives the location within the Charter and Related Laws of ordinances compiled therein. Provisions found in the Charter as referenced as being in same with the abbreviation "Char." Provisions found in an appendix to the Charter are referenced as being in an appendix to same with the abbreviation "Char. App." Provisions found in the Related Laws are referenced as being in same with the abbreviation "RL." 

 
PART III - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances, Macon-Bibb County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of Macon-Bibb County, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the commission, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Charter. The word "charter" means the Charter of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia as adopted and set forth in 2012 Ga. Laws, page 5595 and 2013 Ga. Laws pages 3501, 3942, and as amended. 
City limits. The term "city limits" means the legal boundary of the City of Macon, Georgia as they existed immediately prior to the commencement of the government of Macon-Bibb County; provided however that such term shall not be construed to include any portion of Jones County. 
Code. The word "code" means the Code of Ordinances, Macon-Bibb County, Georgia as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Commission. Whenever the words "the commission" or "Macon-Bibb County commission" are used, they shall mean the commission of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia unless the context clearly indicates reference to another commission. 
County clerk or clerk of commission. Whenever the term "county clerk" or "clerk of commission" are used it shall mean the clerk of commission as provided in the Charter. 
Days. The word "days" means calendar days unless otherwise provided, and "days" shall mean from 12:00 midnight until the following 12:00 midnight. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of Macon-Bibb County to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity when applicable under federal or state law. 
Governing body or governing authority. The term "governing body" or "governing authority" means the mayor and commission of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
Governor. The word "governor" means the Governor of Georgia. 
Keeper, proprietor. The word "keeper" or "proprietor" means and includes persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Land, real estate. The words "land" or "real estate" includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature. 
Mayor. The word "mayor" means the mayor of Macon-Bibb County. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed". 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Other officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "county clerk," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
Owner. The word "owner" applied to buildings or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other entity acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property as defined in this section. 
Plural, singular. Words importing the singular shall include the plural, and words importing the plural shall include the singular. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after respectively. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The words "public place" includes any place where the public is invited to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The word "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Right-of-way. The term "right-of-way" means land that is dedicated or otherwise legally established for public use. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official lists maintained in the office of the county clerk which contain rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the commission. 
Shall; may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature or subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The word "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" means and shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in Macon-Bibb County and shall embrace all parts of thereof constituting the designated rights-of-way. 
Tenant. The word "tenant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person who lawfully occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the present. 
Title of office. The title of any office shall be construed to include the words, "of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia". 
Writing, written. The words "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The word "year" means calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. Any history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia is hereby amended to read as follows: (Set out new provisions in full)." 
(c)  When the governing body desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the governing body desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: "Section ____________ . It is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(d)  When necessary, sections and subsections to the Code may be renumbered by the official codifier for Macon-Bibb County to fulfill the intent of the governing body but all such changes shall be immediately brought to the governing body's attention and approved in advance by the county attorney. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed may be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of Macon-Bibb County to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of Macon-Bibb County any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in the Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by sentence to work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days, any or all of these penalties in the discretion of the judge. 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(b)  Where there is apparent conflict in this Code between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
Sec. 1-9. - Macon-Bibb County property. 
All ordinances which are in force within Macon-Bibb County shall be in force and of full effect on any property of Macon-Bibb County located outside of Macon-Bibb County wherever the ordinance is applicable. 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by Macon-Bibb County personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in the catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the City of Macon or Bibb County or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City of Macon or Bibb County or any evidence of indebtedness of the City of Macon or Bibb County; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the City of Macon or Bibb County; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the City of Macon or Bibb County; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the City of Macon or Bibb County; 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(7)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(8)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat; 
(11)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein; 
(12)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades; 
nor shall such ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-12. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-13. - County seal and tagline. 
(a)  The Macon-Bibb County Commission finds that the seal and tagline of the County adopted in this Section are a symbol of authority of the County and a valuable asset of its population. The Macon-Bibb Commission desires to ensure that only appropriate uses are made of the County seal and tagline. 
(b)  The Macon-Bibb County Commission adopts the symbol depicted below as its official County seal: 

The County seal depicts a circular image with an illustration of the Fort Hawkins structure in the center of the design. In addition, the seal contains the name of the consolidated government across the top of the design in a circular motion, the year "1823" in the bottom left hand corner in honor of the year Bibb County was founded, and the year "1822" in the bottom right hand corner in honor of the year the City of Macon was founded. Furthermore, the words "Forward Together" are imbedded in a banner across the bottom portion of the seal. 
(c)  The Macon-Bibb County Commission adopts the tagline "Forward Together" as the official County tagline. 
(d)  Except as otherwise expressly provided by State or Federal law, or when done in the course of official County business, it shall be unlawful for any person or entity to use the County seal, tagline, or any emblem or logo approved for County use by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, or which is otherwise created by or for the County in connection with or to identify any official County program or activity, by affixing or otherwise depicting the County seal, tagline, or any such official emblem, or logo, or replica thereof, on any document, thing, item, or material, or in or upon any Internet website, without first having obtained written permission from the Mayor or the Mayor's designee. Any use approved by the Mayor or the Mayor's designee may be subject to any reasonable conditions imposed by the Mayor or the Mayor's designee to carry out the purposes of the authorized use. 
(e)  Any person who violates this Section and uses the County seal, tagline, or other official emblem or logo without prior approval shall be served by certified mail a written notice to cease and desist such behavior within ten (10) days from the date of receipt. Should such violation continues, a hearing shall be set before the municipal court or state court judge to hear the violations and issue penalties. Each day of any unauthorized use of the County seal, tagline, or official emblem or logo, shall constitute a separate offense. Any such violations shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars per offense ($500.00) 
(2)  Any other punishment the court shall impose. 
(f)  The County shall retain the right at all times to inspect any document, item, material, or website upon which the County seal, tagline, or other official emblem or logo is used in order to verify that the County seal, tagline, or other official emblem or logo is being used truly and correctly as represented by the authorized party and in an unaltered form. Permission to use the County seal, tagline, or other official emblem or logo shall not be assignable. 
(g)  Should any part of this ordinance or its application to any person or circumstance be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, or should any portion of this ordinance be pre-empted by state or federal law or regulation, such decision or preemption shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance or its application to other persons or circumstances. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0025, § 1, 6-16-2015 ) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Fiscal year. 
All fiscal years shall begin on July first (1st) and shall end on June thirtieth (30th) of each year. 
Sec. 2-2. - Macon-Bibb County vehicle decal. 
All motor vehicles owned or leased by Macon-Bibb County with the exception of the motor vehicle furnished the mayor, unmarked motor vehicles utilized by the sheriff, the arson investigator's car, the county manager's car, and the fire chief's car, shall display in a prominent location, a decal replica of the seal of Macon-Bibb County not less than eight (8) inches in diameter on each side of the motor vehicle. All vehicles required to display a decal shall also display a vehicle identification number below each decal. Such number shall be at least three (3) inches high. Motor vehicles requiring a decal may bear the decal of the City of Macon or Bibb County until such time as they are repainted or replaced at which time they shall be made to bear the decal of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 2-3. - Private use of Macon-Bibb County-owned vehicles; bid process. 
(a)  Except as specifically excepted in this section, no Macon-Bibb County-owned vehicle furnished to a Macon-Bibb County employee shall be driven by such employee from his place of work to his residence or from his residence to his place of work. At all times when the vehicle is not being used on Macon-Bibb County business, it shall be parked in a designated space in proximity to the place of work of the person to whom the vehicle is furnished. The provisions of this section, however, shall not apply to the vehicles utilized by the sheriff, the chief of the fire department, the assistant chief of the fire department, the director of emergency management, the director of business development services, the director of recreation, the county manager, the mayor, and to other employees who may be excepted from time to time by resolution of the commission when it is found to be in the public interest, health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Any such vehicle furnished to an employee of Macon-Bibb County is furnished as a matter of privilege and not of right, and is not a part of any employment contract, and the vehicle may be withdrawn from the employee at any time. 
(c)  Before bids for any passenger vehicles are invited, the proposed bid invitation, including specifications, shall be filed with the county clerk, and submitted to the commission for their approval. If commission does not disapprove the proposed bid invitation and specifications within thirty (30) days after filing, the invitation for bid may be issued. 
(d)  The mayor and commission shall limit the number of vehicles furnished to employees for use on Macon-Bibb County business to a specified number of vehicles for each department. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0029, § 1, 7-7-2015 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-0029, § 1, adopted July 7, 2015 , amended the title of § 2-3 to read as set out herein. Previously § 2-3 was titled "Private use of Macon-Bibb County-owned vehicles; wheelbase limitation; bid process." 
Sec. 2-4. - Scholarships. 
Any person residing within Macon-Bibb County may make application to the commission for an undergraduate scholarship to Mercer University, without being connected to any school. Applications for the fifteen (15) undergraduate scholarships to be awarded by the commission are to be made to the mayor on blanks prepared for the purpose, giving name, age and residence of applicant, name of parent or guardian, applicant's ability or inability to pay for the tuition, and the like, and the names of three (3) citizens as references. 
Sec. 2-5. - Formal action by governing body to bind Macon-Bibb County. 
Without formal action by the governing body no act or omission by a Macon-Bibb County employee with regard to private property will be an act of dominion or acceptance on the part of the Macon-Bibb County to repair, maintain or acquire the property, or for any other purpose, except that Macon-Bibb County is not prohibited from ascertaining existing easements, encroachments or other such rights. 
Sec. 2-6. - Appointments. 
(a)  No person who is in arrears or has defaulted on any legal obligation to Macon-Bibb County or who has an ownership interest greater than five (5) percent in any entity that is in arrears or has defaulted on any legal obligation to Macon-Bibb County shall be eligible for appointment to any boards, authorities, commissions or similar bodies where such appointment is to be made by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  A criminal background check, which shall be submitted to the commission for review, is required on all persons nominated for appointment to such bodies prior to such appointment being approved. 
Sec. 2-7. - Macon-Bibb County buildings. 
Except in cases where imminent danger to the public health as determined by the appropriate authorities requires such action, no Macon-Bibb County building shall be demolished, destroyed or otherwise disposed of except upon approval by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 2-8. - Bonds subject to appropriation process. 
The expenditure of any bond funds administered by Macon-Bibb County shall be pursuant to Macon-Bibb County appropriations process, as provided for in the Charter, this Code and any other regulations of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 2-9. - Balanced budgets. 
Macon-Bibb County shall adopt and operate under balanced budgets as to all Macon-Bibb County funds (other than fiduciary funds) and such budgets shall reflect any and all transfers between funds anticipated to be necessary in order to balance all such funds. 
Sec. 2-10. - Reserve accounts and fund balance of the general fund. 
(a)  Working capital reserve. The finance director shall maintain at least a five million six hundred thousand dollars ($5,600,000.00) working capital reserve in a separate bank account and such account shall be accessed only by resolution of mayor and commission, provided that, in the event there are not adequate funds to maintain such a reserve, the county manager shall work to build such reserves. Any and all interest earned in the working capital reserve account shall accumulate in said account and shall not be transferred or expended except by resolution of mayor and commission. 
(b)  In addition, it shall be the policy of Macon-Bibb County that the fund balance of the general fund shall be greater than the average quarterly operating expenses of the prior fiscal year. 
(1)  The fund balance shall be defined as the net current assets of the general fund, or the difference in current assets and current liabilities of the general fund. 
(2)  Current assets shall be defined as all cash, cash equivalents, investments, accounts receivable, and funds due from other funds and governments. The working capital reserve account is included in the scope of this definition. 
(3)  Current liabilities shall include accounts payable, retainage payable, accrued liabilities, due to other funds, deferred revenues, and advances from other funds. 
(c)  The county manager shall work to increase the fund balance of the general fund at a rate of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each fiscal year until the minimum amounts referenced in subsections (a) and (b), are reached. 
(d)  Until such minimum fund balance of the general fund is attained, it shall be the policy of Macon-Bibb County that no year end operating surplus shall be budgeted to meet the next year's operating expenses, unless and except to the extent such funds are needed in the event of an emergency, defined as: 
(1)  A fiscal financial crisis acknowledged by resolution of mayor and commission that would otherwise require Macon-Bibb County to pursue the issuance of a tax anticipation note ("TAN"); and/or 
(2)  Any situation where Macon-Bibb County, or any portion thereof, has been officially declared to be in a state of emergency by the governor of Georgia. 
(e)  Where working capital reserve account funds have been accessed, the finance director shall repay the funds to such account as follows: 
(1)  All grant or reimbursement funds related to repayment of funds expended by Macon-Bibb County for the emergency shall be deposited into the working capital reserve account immediately upon receipt; and/or 
(2)  Funds used in lieu of obtaining a TAN shall be repaid to the working capital reserve account as determined by the commission or as would be required by the laws of the state for repaying a TAN. 
(3)  The goal of repayment is to replenish the working capital reserve account as soon as possible upon receipt of the respective funds by Macon-Bibb County, and to maintain at least the minimum required fund balance of the Macon-Bibb County's general fund. 
(f)  Landfill closure capital reserve. The finance director shall maintain a four million five hundred thousand dollars ($4,500,000.00) landfill closure capital reserve in a separate bank account and such account shall be accessed only by resolution of mayor and commission, provided that, in the event there are not adequate funds to maintain such a reserve, the finance director shall present to mayor and commission a plan to build such reserves in a separate bank account, in as expeditious a manner as feasible. Such plan shall be approved by mayor and commission as part of the budgetary process. Once the plan is approved, funds shall be accumulated in such account pursuant to the approved plan and shall not be expended except by resolution of mayor and commission. Any and all interest earned in the landfill closure capital reserve account shall accumulate in said account and shall not be transferred or expended except by resolution of mayor and commission. 
Sec. 2-11. - Travel expenditure restrictions. 
(a)  No funds of Macon-Bibb County shall be expended to fund or reimburse any travel to any country certified by the Secretary of State of the United States of America or her designee as not fully cooperating with United States counter-terrorism efforts or designated by the United States Department of State as a state sponsor of terrorism. 
(b)  Further, no funds shall be expended to pay for any expenditure or reimburse any expenditure made by any person when the expenditure was incurred in any country so certified by the Secretary of State or her designee or designated a state sponsor of terrorism. 
(c)  This section shall apply to all expenditures as listed in subsections (a) and (b), and any such funds expended in violation of this section shall be reimbursed by the person incurring the expenditures. Any person who violates this paragraph shall be personally liable to Macon-Bibb County for any charges associated with the improper expenditure. 
Sec. 2-12. - Designating buildings which constitute the courthouse. 
(a)  The structure which stands at the corner of Second and Mulberry Streets and which has historically been known and used as the county courthouse, together with the entrances to and appurtenances thereto, is hereby designated as the Macon-Bibb County Courthouse together with such other properties as are hereinafter specified. 
(b)  The grand building and the grand theater building, together with the entrances to and appurtenances thereof, which are now or may hereafter be used by Macon-Bibb County or by any other public agency, are hereby declared to be a part of the courthouse for all purposes. 
(c)  The building commonly known as the courthouse annex which has been constructed between and connects with the original county courthouse and the grand building and the grand theater buildings referred to in the preceding paragraph is hereby designated as a part of the courthouse of Macon-Bibb County for all purposes. 
(d)  The grounds owned by Macon-Bibb County in Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, bounded by First, Oglethorpe, Second and Hawthorne Streets, together with the improvements thereon owned by Macon-Bibb County and specifically, but not limited to, the building known as the law enforcement center, together with its entrances and appurtenances, are hereby declared to be a part of the Macon-Bibb County Courthouse for all purposes. 
Sec. 2-13. - Smoking prohibited in all Macon-Bibb County-owned buildings. 
(a)  Prohibited activity. The smoking of tobacco in all buildings owned or independently operated by Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, is hereby prohibited. Designated smoking areas outside of the buildings may be provided for employees and the public. 
(b)  Enforcement. Any law enforcement officer shall be authorized to issue a summons for any violation of this section except that they may arrest for instances when: 
(1)  The alleged violator refuses to provide the officer with such person's name and address and any proof thereof as may be reasonably available to the alleged violator; or 
(2)  The alleged violator refuses to cease such person's illegal activity after being issued a citation. 
(c)  Penalty. The first and second violations shall be treated as warnings. The third and each subsequent violation thereafter shall constitute an offense punishable under this code. 
(d)  Other remedies. No provision of this section shall be construed to impair or replace any common law or statutory cause of action or any other legal remedy of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section or from the privacy rights of such individuals. 
Sec. 2-14. - Destruction of paid general obligation bonds and interest coupons. 
From time to time, as that officer shall determine, the finance director is hereby authorized and empowered to select paid general obligation bonds of Macon-Bibb County, Bibb County, or the City of Macon and paid interest coupons originally issued in connection with general obligation bonds and to provide for their destruction. Destruction shall be accomplished by cremation or burning in the presence of the finance director who shall thereafter execute a memorandum in writing containing a general description of the bonds and beginning and ending numbers thereof and a general description of any interest coupons so destroyed. Any paying agent for the Macon-Bibb County general obligation bonds who shall have custody of paid bonds or coupons issued in connection therewith shall likewise have authority to destroy such paid bonds and coupons from time to time. In such case, destruction shall be accompanied by cremation or burning the paid bonds and coupons, and two officers of the paying agent shall attest to the fact, and execute a written certificate describing in general the bonds cremated together with the beginning and ending numbers thereof and a description of the interest coupons so destroyed. Such certificate shall be forwarded to the finance director. 
Sec. 2-15. - Destruction of revenue bonds and coupons. 
Revenue bonds and coupons issued in connection therewith may be destroyed in like manner as prescribed for general obligation bonds. 
Sec. 2-16. - Audits of agencies disbursing tax funds. 
(a)  Required annually. Every agency receiving at least $5,000.00 in tax funds derived from Macon-Bibb County shall have an audit made at least annually by a certified public accountant who shall also prepare and furnish a management letter as an adjunct thereto. Those agencies receiving less than $5,000.00 in tax funds derived from Macon-Bibb County shall submit a compilation made at least annually by a certified public accountant. 
(b)  Time frame. Such audit shall be accomplished as soon as practicable after the end of each fiscal year of each agency receiving funds from Macon-Bibb County and a copy thereof furnished to the mayor and commission along with a copy of the management letter not later than 120 days following the end of the fiscal year for reporting agencies having expenditures of less than $3,000,000.00 and 180 days following the end of the fiscal year for reporting agencies having expenditures in excess of $3,000,000.00. 
(c)  Extension of time. For good cause shown to the finance director, time for filing the audit report and management letter with the mayor and commission be extended by 30 days, but his or her authority shall go no farther. 
(d)  Review and report. Macon-Bibb County will cause a review of the audit to be made and will report to the agency involved any exceptions which it finds to the management of public funds entrusted to it. 
(e)  Penalty for failure to file. Macon-Bibb County reserves the right to suspend further payments in the event an agency fails to file a timely audit report and management letter prepared by a certified public accountant. 
Sec. 2-17. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Principal policies. The public trust requires public servants to fulfill their duties faithfully and honestly and to subordinate any personal interest which conflicts with the public interest. A public servant is a trustee of the people and should strive to further the general welfare and not use public office or position to unethically improve his or her own private standing. The principal policies that form the foundation of this code of ethics are as follows: 
(1)  The trust of citizens in their government is cultivated when individual public servants act with integrity and when the public is aware that its servants act with integrity. 
(2)  The constitutions, laws and regulations of the United States and the State of Georgia and ordinances of Macon-Bibb County should be upheld as a minimum standard of conduct. 
(3)  The most effective way to eradicate unethical practices is consistently to act with the highest moral principles and react appropriately to the ethical decisions of others. 
(4)  Macon-Bibb County officials should exercise sound judgment and apply ethical principles in making decisions that in any manner reflect upon their elected office. 
(5)  All citizens should be treated with courtesy, impartiality and equality. 
(b)  Intent. It is the intent of this code of ethics that Macon-Bibb County officials shall not knowingly engage in any activity that is incompatible with the proper discharge of their official duties or which would tend to impair their judgment or actions in the performance of their official duties. Furthermore, Macon-Bibb County officials should avoid any action that might result in or create the appearance of, 
(1)  Using public office or position in an unethical manner for private gain, 
(2)  Impeding Macon-Bibb County efficiency or economy, or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of those who conduct the affairs and business of Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to them below [unless otherwise required by context]: 
(1)  Benefit means anything of monetary value that a reasonably prudent person would recognize as being likely to be intended to influence a Macon-Bibb County official or employee in the performance or non-performance of an official action. 
(2)  Immediate family means spouse, child, parent or sibling of a Macon-Bibb County official. 
(3)  Financial interest means any potential direct or indirect financial gain, payment or benefit accruing to a Macon-Bibb County official or their immediate family as a result of a contract or transaction that is, or may be, the subject of an official act or action by, or with, Macon-Bibb County. Macon-Bibb County officials shall be deemed to have a financial interest in any business in which the Macon-Bibb County official or their immediate family member, individually or in the aggregate, owns five percent or more of the business or is a director, officer, employee, or agent of the business. 
(4)  Macon-Bibb County official means the mayor, commission members. 
(5)  Third degree of consanguinity or affinity shall include the following familial relationships whether by blood or marriage: parents, children, grandparents, grandchildren, great-grandparents, great-grandchildren, siblings, aunts and uncles, nieces and nephews, and spouse. 
(d)  Acceptance of gifts. Macon-Bibb County officials shall not solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, any benefit or payment from any person, corporation or group that has, or is seeking to obtain, a contractual or other business or financial relationship with the Macon-Bibb County. 
(e)  Financial interests. 
(1)  Macon-Bibb County officials may not: 
a.  Have a financial interest that conflicts with their responsibilities and duties as trustees of the public good, or 
b.  Directly or indirectly engage in financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, confidential information obtained in the course of their office or received due to their position. 
(f)  Use of public property. A Macon-Bibb County official shall not use Macon-Bibb County property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he or she direct a Macon-Bibb County employee to use such property for other than official purposes. 
(g)  Use of confidential information. A Macon-Bibb County official shall not directly make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, Macon-Bibb County information not made available to the general public. 
(h)  Coercion. A Macon-Bibb County official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing: 
(1)  Another person to provide any benefits to him or her or to his or her immediate family as defined herein, or 
(2)  A Macon-Bibb County employee, an appointed official of the Macon-Bibb County, or a contract employee to provide any benefit to him or her or to his or her immediate family as defined herein, or 
(3)  Any judge in the outcome of matters before the court. 
(i)  Purchases. A Macon-Bibb County official shall not order any goods or services for the Macon-Bibb County or on behalf of Macon-Bibb County without proper authorization in compliance with the Macon-Bibb County Code. 
(j)  Nepotism. In accordance with the Charter, no person shall be appointed by the mayor, commission, or any member thereof, to any office, agency, or employment who is related within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity to the mayor or any member of the commission, nor shall any other board created by the Charter of the head of any department appoint or employ any person who is related to any member of such board or head of such department, nor shall any person be appointed or employed in any capacity on behalf of Macon-Bibb County who is related to the person so appointing or employing him or her. No elected member of the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County nor any company or business in which such elected member or a member of his or her immediate family presently has an interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties, shall do business with an authority associated with Macon-Bibb County nor an authority whose members in whole or in part are appointed by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County nor shall any member of an authority of the restructured government do business with an authority associated with Macon-Bibb County or an authority whose members in whole or in part are appointed by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County. 
(k)  Conflicts of interest. In accordance with the Charter, no elected official, appointed officer, or employee of Macon-Bibb County, or any authority or agency to which the Charter applies shall represent private interests, other than his or her own, in any action or proceeding against Macon-Bibb County or any portion of its government; or vote or otherwise actively participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract between the Macon-Bibb County government and any business or entity in which he or she has a substantial financial interest. 
(l)  Macon-Bibb County employees. A Macon-Bibb County official shall not use a Macon-Bibb County employee for personal or private business during regular business hours or during the employee's scheduled shift. 
(m)  Travel expenses. A Macon-Bibb County official shall not draw per diem or expense money from Macon-Bibb County to attend a seminar, convention, conference or similar meeting and then fail to attend the seminar, conference, convention or similar meeting. 
(n)  Commitments. A Macon-Bibb County official shall not act or create the appearance of acting on behalf of the Macon-Bibb County by promising to authorize or prevent any future official action of any nature, without proper authorization. 
(o)  False statements. No Macon-Bibb County official shall make a false or materially misleading statement or in any manner commit fraud in relation to any Macon-Bibb County or public business. 
(p)  Disclosure. A Macon-Bibb County official or employee shall disclose the nature of any financial interest he or she has in a matter at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and commission for discussion and/or action. Such disclosure shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and become part of the public record. 
(q)  Deliberation and vote prohibited. No Macon-Bibb County official shall participate in a Macon-Bibb County Commission Committee or Commission meeting during the discussion, debate, deliberation or vote, or otherwise take part in the decision-making process on any agenda item, any official act or action in which he or she has a financial interest. Provided, however, that such elected official shall not be precluded from addressing a commission committee or the commission during the discussion of any agenda item or any official act or action in the same manner as a member of the general public. 
(r)  Duty to leave meeting. To avoid the appearance of impropriety, after any member of the commission is determined to have a financial interest or a potential financial interest in any matter, they shall leave their regular seat as a member of the commission or commission committee and not return to it until deliberation and action on the matter is completed. Provided, however, that such elected official shall not be precluded from addressing a commission committee or the commission during the discussion of any agenda item or any official act or action in the same manner as a member of the general public. 
(s)  Ethics hearing officer. The chief judge of municipal court, or in his absence his designee who shall be another municipal court judge, is hereby designated as the ethics hearing officer. The ethics hearing officer shall serve without compensation and may be removed for cause by a majority vote of the commission. If the hearing officer is removed for cause, the next most senior municipal court judge shall serve as hearing officer. 
(t)  Receipt of complaints. All complaints against a Macon-Bibb County official shall be filed in writing with the county manager to be referred to the ethics hearing officer in such form as may be prescribed by the ethics hearing officer. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics hearing officer shall: 
(1)  Review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke disciplinary action or is to be considered for further investigation. 
(2)  Be empowered to dismiss those complaints that are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or that fail to state facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this article; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics hearing officer shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he or she might otherwise have at law or in equity against the Macon-Bibb County official; 
(3)  Be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add to the findings and results of its investigation to the file containing such complaint; 
(4)  Be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings. The ethics hearing officer shall give the Macon-Bibb County official notice and an opportunity for a hearing; 
(5)  Be empowered to recommend to the commission that any Macon-Bibb County official found to have violated any provision of this article receive a reprimand, censure or be requested to resign his or her office. 
(6)  Be empowered to refer a complaint to the sheriff of Macon-Bibb County or other law enforcement agency for investigation and possible prosecution; 
(7)  Take action within 30 days of receipt of the complaint. The decision by the ethics hearing officer shall be reduced to writing and served upon all parties at interest within five days of reaching a decision. 
(u)  Penalties. Upon majority vote of the commission, any violation of this code of ethics shall subject the offender to disciplinary action including reprimand, censure, or a request to the offending Macon-Bibb County official that he or she resign their office. 
(v)  Right to appeal. Any Macon-Bibb County official adversely affected by a disciplinary action taken by the commission may appeal the decision to the Bibb County Superior Court in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. Provided, however, that no action of a decision maker refusing or failing to take action pursuant to this code of ethics shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
Secs. 2-18—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-21. - Powers, duties and functions of mayor. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of Macon-Bibb County and shall have any powers and duties as may be provided by the Charter of Macon-Bibb County, this Code or state and federal law. 
Sec. 2-22. - Mayor's directives and policy statements. 
(a)  The mayor may: 
(1)  Issue written administrative directives or amendments thereto which, consistent with the Charter and this Code, establish policy for Macon-Bibb County; 
(2)  Amend department or agency rules or regulations; 
(3)  Order any employee of Macon-Bibb County to perform some lawful act or refrain from performing some act not otherwise required by law; 
(4)  Authorize the creation of a policy or directive and assign its preparation in draft form to the county manager for the mayor's own subsequent review, modification and consideration for adoption. 
(b)  The county manager, or department heads through the county manager, may suggest the need for a policy or directive and submit, if desired, a draft copy for the mayor's consideration. 
(c)  The commission may recommend to the mayor the consideration and possible adoption of certain policies or directives. 
(d)  Following its adoption by the mayor, a policy or directive shall be indexed and reproduced for general distribution to interested parties and the clerk of commission. Each policy or directive shall be filed by the clerk as a public record. 
(e)  Failure by any employee of Macon-Bibb County to obey and faithfully enforce all lawful administrative directives and policy statements shall be grounds for dismissal or other disciplinary action. 
Sec. 2-23. - Powers and duties of the commission. 
(a)  The commission shall have general legislative authority as granted by the Charter of Macon-Bibb County, this Code or state and federal law and shall provide by ordinance for the execution of all powers, functions, rights, privileges, duties, and immunities of the restructured government. 
(b)  The commission shall, in January of each year, elect from among its members a mayor pro tempore, who shall preside over meetings in the mayor's absence. 
Sec. 2-24. - Compensation of the mayor and commissioners. 
(a)  The mayor shall be paid an annual salary of $100,000.00 and shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in the performance of his or her official duties. 
(b)  Each commissioner shall be paid an annual salary of $15,000.00 and shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses reasonably and necessarily incurred in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the government. 
(c)  Future changes in the salary and expenses of the mayor and commissioners shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-4 and 36-5-24; provided, however, that any increase shall equal no more than one-half of the average percentage salary increase granted to employees of Macon-Bibb County over the preceding three years. Any action to increase the salary of the mayor or commissioners shall not become effective until the date of commencement of terms of those officials elected at the next regular election following such salary action. 
Sec. 2-25. - Meetings; quorum. 
(a)  The commission shall meet at 6:00 p.m. on the first and third Tuesdays in each month and such meetings shall be deemed to be regular meetings. Should any of the regular meeting dates fall on legal holidays, regular meetings which would otherwise have been held may, by vote of the majority of the commission, be cancelled or postponed to a day and time certain. If the meeting is held upon the postponement date it shall be deemed to be a regular meeting. If, at any time, there shall not be a quorum present at a meeting, those present shall adjourn until the next regular meeting and the matters which would otherwise have been disposed of at such meeting which lacks a quorum shall be taken up and disposed of at the next regular meeting. 
(b)  Six members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of ordinary business. In order for the commission to take any official action, the affirmative vote of at least five members shall be required. 
(c)  All meetings of the commission, including special meetings and emergency meetings, shall be open to the public to the extent required by state law and notice shall be given as required by state law. 
(d)  Meetings of the commission shall be held in the chamber of the former city council unless and until the commission takes action to establish a different location for its meetings. 
Sec. 2-26. - Committees. 
All committees of the commission, except for internal advisory committees, shall be created, abolished, and appointed by the committee on committees as provided for in the Charter. 
Sec. 2-27. - General commission rules. 
The commission shall organize and adopt rules of procedure by an affirmative vote of a majority of all commission members. The general commission rules may also contain any other provision for the organization and operation of the commission and the conduct of its business. 
Sec. 2-28. - Enactment of ordinances and resolutions; mayor's approval or veto. 
(a)  All ordinances and resolutions or amendments thereto shall be introduced in writing at any regular or special meeting called for the purpose. The mayor may propose ordinances in the same manner as a commissioner but shall not be a voting member of the commission; provided, however, that the mayor may vote to break a tie of the commission. 
(b)  All ordinances and resolutions or amendments shall be adopted only by affirmative vote of a majority of commission members as required by the Charter. 
(c)  Debate or discussion on ordinances or resolutions shall be organized by the general commission rules. 
(d)  Every ordinance adopted by the commission shall be presented promptly by the clerk of commission to the mayor after its adoption. The mayor may take action to approve or disapprove an ordinance and the commission may override the mayor's veto of an ordinance as authorized in the Charter. 
Sec. 2-29. - Hierarchy of law. 
(a)  Ordinances shall be superior in legal effect to resolutions and no resolution shall be passed which limits, expands, amends, or otherwise affects an ordinance of Macon-Bibb County unless so provided by the ordinance affected. 
(b)  Resolutions shall be superior in legal effect to administrative directives of the mayor for purposes of amending department or agency rules or regulations and personnel policies and guidelines. 
Sec. 2-30. - Employee surety bonds. 
The mayor may, by administrative directive, order any nonelected officer, department or agency head, or any other employee of Macon-Bibb County to post a surety bond payable to the government for faithful performance of duty from a commercial surety company licensed to do business in this state for an amount set in the directive. All premiums on such bonds shall be paid by Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 2-31. - Mayor's records. 
Records and files of the mayor, other than personal correspondence not issued on Macon-Bibb County letterhead or other personal documents, shall remain the property of Macon-Bibb County and shall be placed at the disposal of newly elected mayors to provide a reasonable transition between administrations. 
Sec. 2-32. - Administrative support. 
The mayor may employ such clerical and other personnel as may be necessary, and special agencies may be assigned directly to the mayor's office or to the department of administration temporarily by an administrative directive or permanently by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-33. - Background investigations required. 
For all department head positions, and for all positions appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the commission, the mayor shall cause a criminal and professional (to include employment history, certifications, and references) investigation to be made of all nominees for such positions by a qualified background investigator acceptable to the commission, and shall submit the results of said investigation to the commission at the time the name of the nominee is submitted to the commission for confirmation. 
Sec. 2-34. - Access to the mayor. 
The head of each department, office or other agency created in the Charter or this Code shall have direct access to the mayor at the mayor's convenience. 
Sec. 2-35. - Commission staff. 
(a)  The commission, by a motion adopted by an affirmative vote of a majority of all commissioners, may hire or appoint any additional staff for the clerk of commission, a commission committee, commission advisory commission or board, attorneys, accountants or other advisors for the city commission itself as the commission deems necessary. 
(b)  Except for any staff of the clerk of commission, all commission staff provided for in this section shall be retained only on a temporary basis. 
Sec. 2-36. - Parliamentary procedures for organizing and conducting meetings of the county commission. 
(a)  Main motion. In order for the Macon-Bibb County Commission, (hereinafter the "Commission"), to take any official action on any subject, a commissioner must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the presiding officer until another commissioner agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the commissioner seconding the motion to support the motion. A commissioner may withdraw a main motion that he or she has made at any time before the Commission has voted on that motion. 
(b)  Debate. After the main motion is recognized by the presiding officer, the Commission shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the presiding officer in a manner that is fair to all members of the Commission. Commissioners can participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the presiding officer. During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce Subsidiary Motions that propose that the Commission take a particular action on a motion (Section 5). There are two classes of Subsidiary Motions: Debatable Subsidiary Motions and Undebatable Subsidiary Motions. Debatable Subsidiary Motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Debatable Subsidiary Motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three Undebatable Subsidiary Motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. Commissioners may also introduce Privileged Motions (Section 6). Privileged Motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged Motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on Privileged Motions. 
(c)  Voting procedure. Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
a.  If debate has been completed and no other commissioner wishes to speak, the Mayor can call for the vote. Absent an objection, the presiding officer can proceed with the vote; 
b.  If the presiding officer calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the Commission may move to vote immediately ("move the previous question"). If this motion is seconded and approved by a vote of at least five commissioners, debate will stop. The presiding officer will then read the proposed motion to the Commission and ask for the votes of the commissioners. 
(2)  Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the presiding officer. The presiding officer shall read the proposed motion to the Commission and then call for the vote. 
(d)  Ranking of motions. Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the Commission returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with the table in this section. Motions at the top of the following list take precedence over motions at the bottom of the list. 
Ranking of Motions (Highest to Lowest) 
Privileged Motions (Undebatable) 
(1)  Adjourn. 
(2)  Recess. 
(3)  Question of Privilege. 
Subsidiary Motions (Undebatable) 
(4)  Lay on the Table (Postpone Temporarily). 
(5)  Vote Immediately (Previous Question). 
(6)  Limit Debate or Extend. 
Subsidiary Motions (Debatable) 
(7)  Postpone to a Time Certain (Postpone Definitely). 
(8)  Refer to Committee (Commit). 
(9)  Amend. 
(10)  Postpone Indefinitely. 
Other Motions 
(11)  Main Motion. 
(e)  Subsidiary motions. During the course of debate, commissioners may introduce motions that propose that the Commission take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions and they allow the Commission to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions, (amend, limit debate and vote immediately), also can apply to other subsidiary motions. 
(1)  Postpone indefinitely. If a commissioner believes that the main motion should not be considered by the Commission, that commissioner may move to postpone the consideration of the main motion indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled for the duration of the meeting. A motion to postpone indefinitely can be debated but it cannot be amended. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the commission is required for the motion to pass. 
(2)  Amend. If a commissioner believes that a main motion should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he or she can move to amend the motion. Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a time certain and the motion to recess can also be amended. A motion cannot be amended more than two times. Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable. Debate is limited to the proposed amendment. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the commission is required for the Commission to adopt an amendment. If the amendment is adopted then the Commission shall consider the amended version of the motion. 
(3)  Refer to a committee (commit). If a commissioner believes that further information is needed before the Commission can act on a main motion and the matter to be considered has not already been reviewed by a committee, he or she may propose that the motion be referred to a committee. A motion to commit should specify the date that the committee will report back to the Commission. This motion is debatable and amendable. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the commission is required is required for the motion to pass. 
(4)  Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a commissioner believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the presiding officer will bring the original motion back to the Commission for consideration at the specified time which may be at the same meeting, at a subsequent meeting, or upon the occurrence of a specified event. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the commission is required is required for the motion to pass. 
(5)  Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the commissioner who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion and a vote of at least six members of the Commission is required for the motion to pass. 
(6)  Vote immediately (previous question). If a commissioner believes debate on a motion should end and that the motion that is being considered should be voted on, the commissioner can move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable and a vote of at least six members of the Commission is required for the motion to pass. 
(7)  Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the same meeting. The main motion can be brought back for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the Commission during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion and the motion is not amendable. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the commission is required is required for the motion to pass. 
(f)  Privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on these motions. 
(1)  Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the presiding officer concerning the rights of a commissioner or of the Commission as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The presiding officer is required to make a ruling on the question. 
(2)  Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time when business is still pending. It is a temporary intermission of the proceedings. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion but the motion can be amended. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission is required is required for the motion to pass. 
(3)  Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a commissioner must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second, but is not debatable or amendable. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission is required is required for the motion to pass. 
(g)  Incidental motions. Incidental motions allow commissioners to exert their rights as members of the Commission. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. 
(1)  Appeal. If a commissioner disagrees with a ruling that is made by the presiding officer, that commissioner may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the Commission. The presiding officer has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The Commission may then debate the appeal. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission is required to overturn the presiding officer's decision. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to lay on the table. 
(2)  Parliamentary inquiry. If a commissioner has a question about the rules or order, he or she may ask the presiding officer or the County Attorney to give an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the Commission. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motions. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. 
(3)  Point of order (question of order). If a commissioner believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he or she can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The presiding officer can make a ruling on the question or can allow the Commission to debate and then rule on the question by the affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. 
(4)  Point of information (request for information). If a commissioner has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he or she may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the presiding officer and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
(h)  Supplementary main motions. Three motions allow the Commission to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the Commission. These motions are considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the ways specified. 
(1)  Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the Commission to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the Commission to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any commissioner can make a motion to reconsider and any commissioner may second the motion. The motion is debatable but it cannot be amended. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the Commission will return to debate and revote the original motion. 
(2)  Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the Commission to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the commission is required is required for the motion to pass. 
(i)  Suspending the rules. The Rules of Order may be temporarily suspended. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable, and requires the affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission. The suspension shall only be applicable to the meeting during which the motion to suspend was adopted. 
( Ord. No. O-2013-5, §§ 1—9, 12-31-2013 ) 
Sec. 2-37. - Governmental decision making process of the county commission. 
(a)  Open meetings. All meetings of the Macon-Bibb County Commission, (hereinafter the "Commission"), shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq., as amended. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(b)  Quorum and official action. Six members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of ordinary business. Unless otherwise required by the Charter, the Code, these rules, or other applicable law, the affirmative vote of at least five members shall be required for the Commission to take official action. A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the Commission. It is the duty of the presiding officer to enforce this rule. Any commissioner may raise a point of order directed to the presiding officer if he or she believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a commissioner or commissioners leave and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting may not continue. If a quorum is not attained within thirty minutes, the meeting may be rescheduled by the presiding officer with the approval of a majority of the commissioners present. 
(c)  Mayor. The Mayor, as presiding officer, is responsible for the orderly conduct of the meetings of the Commission. In order to fulfill this duty, the Mayor shall enforce the rules of procedure adopted by the Commission. The Mayor shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The Mayor may introduce motions or second motions. The Mayor shall not vote except to break a tie. 
(d)  Mayor pro tempore. The Commission shall select a Mayor Pro Tempore from among its members in January of each year who shall serve as presiding officer over meetings of the Commission in the Mayor's absence. 
(e)  Presiding officer. If the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore are absent or otherwise unable to serve as presiding officer at a meeting and a quorum of commissioners is present, the remaining commissioners shall select a commissioner to serve as presiding officer of the meeting until either the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore is present at the meeting. 
(f)  Decorum. The presiding officer shall enforce the rules of decorum. The purpose of meetings of the Commission is to conduct Macon-Bibb County's business. Meetings shall be conducted in an orderly and respectful fashion. They are not a forum to belittle, ridicule or embarrass commissioners, other public officials, governmental employees, or others in attendance at the meeting. 
(1)  Conduct of members of the public in meetings generally. 
a.  All cell phones and other communication devices shall be turned off or switched to silent mode; provided, however, that a cell phone or device may be used to make a video or audio recording of the meeting. 
b.  All meeting attendees must be silent during the meeting while business is conducted. 
c.  Anyone who wants to speak must first be recognized by the presiding officer. 
d.  All comments must be directed to the presiding officer and not to individual commissioners, staff or others. 
e.  All meeting attendees must conduct themselves in a respectful manner. 
f.  Personal attacks and derogatory or inappropriate remarks are not permitted. 
g.  There shall be no use of profanity during the meeting. 
(2)  Conduct of members of the commission. 
a.  Commissioners should arrive on time for a meeting and be prepared. 
b.  Commissioners should make every effort to attend the entire meeting. 
c.  Cell phones or other communications devices shall be turned off or in silent mode. 
d.  Commissioners should not take phone calls, text, or e-mail, or use social networking sites, chat rooms or other internet sites during a meeting. 
e.  Commissioners shall conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. 
f.  Commissioners desiring to speak must first be recognized by the presiding officer. 
g.  Commissioners may only address the motion that is being discussed. 
h.  Commissioners shall direct their remarks to the Mayor and not to individual commissioners, staff, or citizens in attendance. 
i.  Only one commissioner at a time is permitted to speak. Commissioners shall not interrupt any other person who has the floor. 
j.  Personal attacks and inappropriate remarks shall be ruled out of order by the Mayor. Commissioners may not use commission meetings to make derogatory comments about particular employees or to air their personal grievances with the Mayor or other commissioners. 
k.  There shall be no use of profanity during the meeting. 
l.  Remarks may not address the character of the person involved. 
m.  Commissioners shall not confront other Commission members, department heads, employees or other officials in an accusatory manner. 
n.  Commissioners may raise a point of order if a rule is believed to have been broken. A second is not required. The Chair may rule on the question or may allow the board to debate the issue and decide the issue a by a majority vote of at least five members of the Commission. 
(3)  Conduct of the presiding officer. In addition to rules of decorum applicable to commissioners generally, the following rules shall apply to the presiding officer: 
a.  The presiding officer shall recognize any commissioner who has the right to speak. 
b.  The presiding officer shall rule out of order any discussion on topics other than the motion being discussed. 
c.  The presiding officer shall only permit one commissioner at a time to speak. 
d.  Personal attacks, breaches of the rules of decorum and inappropriate remarks shall be ruled out of order by the presiding officer. 
e.  The presiding officer shall not confront other Commission members, department heads, employees or other officials in an accusatory manner. 
(g)  Suspending the rules. Unless otherwise prohibited by the Charter, the Code, these rules, or other applicable law, the Rules of Procedure may be temporarily suspended. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable, and requires the affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission. The suspension shall only be applicable to the meeting during which the motion to suspend was adopted. 
(h)  Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the first and third Tuesdays of each month. All regular meetings shall be held in the Commission Chambers of City Hall located at 700 Poplar Street, Macon, Georgia. 
(i)  Order of business. All regular Commission meetings shall substantially comply with the following order of business: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Minutes. 
(3)  Invited guests. 
(4)  Public Comments on Agenda Items. 
(5)  Reports from committees and departments. 
(6)  Consent agenda. 
(7)  Old business. 
(8)  New business. 
(9)  General Public Comments. 
(10)  Adjournment. 
(j)  Agenda. The Mayor, with the advice of the County Manager and County Clerk, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. The agenda shall be provided to each of the commissioners at least twenty-four hours before any regular Commission meeting. The Mayor, with the advice of the County Manager and County Clerk, may first refer items sponsored by the Mayor to a committee established by the committee on committees. 
(1)  Requests for agenda items. 
a.  Commissioners who wish to have an item placed on the agenda must submit an agenda request with any available supporting documentation to the County Clerk. The Mayor, with the advice of the County Manager and County Clerk, may first refer requested items sponsored by the Commissioners to a committee established by the committee on committees. 
b.  Other county officials or department heads who wish to have an item placed on the agenda must submit an agenda request with supporting documentation to the county Clerk. The Mayor, with the advice of the County Manager and County Clerk, may first refer requested items sponsored by other county officials or department heads to a committee established by the committee on committees. Agenda requests shall include the following, provided, however, that any failure to include any of the information requested below shall not prevent the Mayor from placing an item on the agenda or referring an item to a committee: 
1.  The date of the meeting that the proposed agenda item is requested to be considered. 
2.  The amount of money required to implement the agenda item if any, including whether the money has been appropriated and the budget line number as appropriate. 
3.  A clear statement of the agenda request, including why it is needed and its impact upon Macon-Bibb County. 
4.  A summary of any requirements, laws, regulations or ordinances that necessitate the agenda item or apply to the agenda item (i.e., purchasing ordinance, advertising requirements, certifications, etc.) and a statement as to whether these requirements have been satisfied or will be satisfied. 
5.  A list of any options or alternatives that the Commission has in approving the request. 
6.  A statement regarding the impact of the requested agenda item on other departments of Macon-Bibb County. 
7.  Analysis and appropriate review from the legal department, if necessary. 
8.  A recommendation for Commission action on the requested agenda item. 
(2)  Changing the agenda. The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by the affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission. A new item may be added to the agenda by the affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission only if it becomes necessary to address the item during the meeting. 
(k)  Consent agenda. A consent agenda may be prepared by the Mayor, with the advice of the County Manager and County Clerk, for the Commission to unanimously adopt on routine items. Any items of business that are expected to receive unanimous approval without debate may be placed on a consent agenda. At the appropriate time of the meeting, the presiding officer shall read all of the items on the consent agenda. If a commissioner objects to an item being on the consent agenda, the presiding officer shall move that particular item to the regular agenda. Following the reading of the consent agenda, the presiding officer may ask for unanimous approval of the items on the consent agenda. If there are no objections, all the items on the consent agenda shall be approved by the affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission. 
(l)  Voting. Unless otherwise required by the Charter, the Code, these rules, or other applicable law, passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of at least five members of the commission present at and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Any member of the commission shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. 
(m)  Abstentions. A commissioner shall vote on all motions unless he or she has a conflict of interest preventing him or her from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the commissioner shall explain for the record his or her decision to abstain on any vote. Unless a commissioner is abstaining due to a conflict of interest, all abstentions shall be counted as affirmative votes. 
(n)  Public participation. Public participation in meetings of the Commission shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Public comments on agenda items. An agenda item shall be reserved near the beginning of the meeting pursuant to this sub-section for comments from the public on specific items of business listed on the meeting's agenda. All members of the public wishing to address the Commission on specific agenda items shall submit their names and the agenda items on which they wish to comment to the County Clerk at least five minutes before the regular meeting is called to order. Individuals shall be allotted five minutes to make their comments and those comments shall be limited to their chosen agenda topic. Members of the public may speak for five minutes and may speak only once. At the discretion of the presiding officer, a maximum of three people may be allowed to provide public comment in favor of an item, and a maximum of three people may be allowed to provide public comment opposing an item. These limits may be waived by the affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission. 
(2)  General public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved pursuant to this sub-section for general comments from the public. All members of the public wishing to address the Commission on a matter of general interest shall submit their names and the topic of their comments to the County Clerk at least five minutes before the regular meeting is called to order. Individuals shall be allotted five minutes to make their comments and those comments shall be limited to their chosen topic. 
(3)  Decorum. Members of the public are expected to comply with the rules of decorum established in this ordinance [section]. Anyone wishing to speak at any Commission meeting must be recognized by the presiding officer before addressing the Commission. Individuals violating any rules of the Commission may be ruled out of order by the presiding officer or on a point of order made by a commissioner. A majority vote of at least five members of the Commission shall rule on the point out of order. An individual violating the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the presiding officer. 
(4)  Public hearings. The Commission may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the Commission. Hearings may be held immediately prior to, during or following a meeting of the Commission or at such other places and times as the Commission may determine. Time for public comment may be limited to a specified amount of time per side. 
(o)  Committees. In accordance with the Charter, the committee on committees shall create, abolish, and appoint all committees and the members thereof. Whenever a committee is created by the committee on committees, its duties and any limitation on the scope of its duties, shall be determined by the committee on committees. Any such committees may make recommendations to the Commission, but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. A committee may take any of the following actions: 
(1)  Recommend approval. 
(2)  Recommend disapproval. 
(3)  Recommend approval as amended. 
Committees should act on items in a prompt manner and report them back to the Commission without unreasonable delay. At any time following the referral of any ordinance, resolution, or other item to a committee, the Mayor or any commissioner may make a motion to place such item as a subject to be acted on at the next regular Commission meeting. The affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission is required for this motion to pass. Each committee shall elect its own chair and vice chair to serve for a period of one year or until a new chair or vice chair is elected. This election shall be held in January of each year. The chair and vice chair shall be eligible for reelection. 
(p)  Pre-commission meetings. At the discretion of the presiding officer, the Commission may hold pre-commission meetings prior to its regularly scheduled meetings for the purposes of functioning as a committee of the whole commission. 
(q)  Executive session. In accordance with Georgia law, the Commission may close a portion of a meeting to the public to discuss certain topics that are exempted from the Open Meetings Laws. Such meetings shall be referred to as executive sessions. Any portion not subject to any exemptions authorized by law shall be open to the public. Commissioners, officials, employees and other individuals who attend executive sessions are prohibited from discussing or in any other way divulging confidential information, legal advice and/or legal strategy discussed in the executive session unless: 
(1)  The disclosure is required by law; 
(2)  The disclosure is part of a judicial or administrative decision; or 
(3)  The majority of the Commission authorizes the disclosure. 
In no way shall this subsection prevent a county attorney or other attorney representing the Commission from discussing any matters discussed in executive session relative to such attorney's representation of Macon-Bibb County. Any commissioner or official that divulges, has previously divulged, or has threatened to divulge confidential information, legal advice or strategy discussion may be excluded from participation in an executive session by majority vote of at least five members of the Commission. A commissioner or official that divulges confidential information, legal advice, or strategy discussions may be publicly sanctioned or reprimanded by a majority vote of at least five members of the Commission. 
( Ord. No. O-2013-6, §§ 1—6, 8—18, 12-31-2013 ) 
Secs. 2-38—2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 

Secs. 2-51—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS AND VACANCIES 

Sec. 2-66. - Election; qualifications; terms; term limits. 
(a)  The mayor and commission shall be elected in nonpartisan elections for four-year terms as provided in the Charter. 
(b)  Qualifications for election of mayor and commissioner shall be as provided in the Charter. 
(c)  The mayor shall be limited to serving two four-year terms of office and each commission member shall be limited to serving three four-year terms of office as provided in the Charter. 
Sec. 2-67. - Filling of vacancies. 
In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor or commissioner, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term by special election or appointment as provided in the Charter. 
Secs. 2-68—2-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICIALS AND DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-351. - Department of emergency management established; composition. 
A department of emergency management is hereby created, utilizing to the fullest extent personnel and facilities of existing Macon-Bibb County departments and agencies. A director, under the general direction of the mayor, shall be responsible for its organization, administration and operation. The organization shall consist of the following: 
(1)  A director of the emergency management agency nominated by the mayor for appointment by the governor of the state, and any assistants, clerical help, other employees and emergency management volunteers as are deemed necessary to the proper functioning of the organization; 
(2)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all Macon-Bibb County departments and agencies suitable for or adaptable to emergency management and designated by the mayor to participate in the emergency management activities; 
(3)  Emergency management volunteers, including persons of private agencies or governmental units offering services to the organization. The emergency management agency shall be established around existing Macon-Bibb County departments and agencies and emergency functions are assigned to departments and agencies as provided in the emergency management plan; 
(4)  All heads of departments are responsible for developing the plan for their assigned emergency function. Each plan shall be submitted through the emergency management director to the mayor and to the commission for approval by resolution. 
Sec. 2-352. - Duties of director of emergency management. 
(a)  The director shall be the executive head of the emergency management agency, and shall have the responsibility, under the direction of the mayor, for the organization, administration and operation of the emergency management and disaster control organization and shall: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of Macon-Bibb County on matters pertaining to emergency management; 
(2)  Assist Macon-Bibb County officials in organizing Macon-Bibb County departments for emergency operations; 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with other Macon-Bibb County departments, the plan for emergency functions, provided the plan will be consonant with the state emergency plan and shall be submitted to the commission for approval by resolution and thence to the state director for approval; 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management office in carrying out the day-to-day administration of the emergency management and disaster program, including the rendering of required reports to the state emergency management office; 
(5)  Render reports on finances and daily activity as required by the mayor in keeping with good business practices; 
(6)  During periods of a declared emergency, and under the supervision of the mayor, coordinate the activities of the Macon-Bibb County emergency operating center staff; 
(7)  Develop, in cooperation with the state emergency management agency, with the federal emergency management agency, and with other selected public or private agencies within this state, and recommend to the mayor and the commission for approval by resolution, mutual aid agreements for reciprocal civil defense aid and assistance in case of an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted; 
(8)  Make a continuing study of the emergency management and disaster plan of Macon-Bibb County in light of current needs and developments, and recommend to the mayor and to the commission for adoption by resolution, amendments and improvements thereof to meet changing conditions and to keep the plan in a state of readiness at all times; 
(9)  Survey the resources and facilities and study and ascertain the requirements of Macon-Bibb County for food, medicine, clothing and shelter; medical, health, police, firefighting, rescue, transportation, engineering and construction services, equipment, and personnel; and any other supplies, equipment, facilities, personnel and services as may be needed in event of an emergency, and recommend to the mayor and the commission a plan for the procurement thereof; 
(10)  Coordinate all activities in Macon-Bibb County for emergency management and disaster control and maintain liaison and cooperate with other interested and affected agencies, public and private, provided, nothing contained in this division shall be construed to limit or in any way affect the responsibilities of the American Red Cross under federal or state law; 
(11)  Coordinate the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the Macon-Bibb County of emergency management purposes; 
(b)  The director may issue proper insignia and papers to emergency management workers and other people directly concerned with emergency management in accordance with state regulations. 
(c)  The director may remove or cause to be removed, any individual previously certified as civil defense volunteer in accordance with the Georgia Emergency Management Agency Act of 1981, as now or hereafter amended. 
Secs. 2-353—2-359. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - E-911 DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-360. - E-911 department established; composition. 
The E-911 department is hereby established as a department of Macon-Bibb County. The department shall be composed of the E-911 director and any other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the Mayor, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the director. The department shall be responsible for operating the Macon-Bibb County E-911 Center in compliance with applicable federal, state, and Macon-Bibb County laws and regulations. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-2, § 1, 1-21-2014 ) 
Secs. 2-361—2-580. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - RESERVED 

Secs. 2-581—2-600. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY RECREATION ADVISORY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-601. - Recreation advisory commission established. 
There is hereby established the Macon-Bibb County Recreation Advisory Commission, referred to in this division as the commission, for the purpose of advising the mayor on administrative matters through the department head and the county manager, and advising the commission committee responsible for recreation on legislative matters concerning the department's purposes. 
Sec. 2-602. - Membership; terms; appointment; organization vacancies; ex officio members. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of nine (9) citizens of Macon-Bibb County, eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(b)  Each member shall serve without pay for a term of three (3) years or until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the members regularly appointed in 1977 shall initiate a rotation system established to allow three (3) members to go off each year. Members completing their term are ineligible for reappointment for a period of one (1) year, except that those who have not served a full three-year term are immediately eligible for reappointment for a full three-year term. 
(c)  Appointments to the commission shall be made by the mayor and approved by the Macon-Bibb County Commission by December thirty-first (31st) of each year. 
(d)  Each year immediately after appointments are made to the commission, the commission shall meet, reorganize and elect new officers. 
(e)  Vacancies on the commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the mayor and approved by the Macon-Bibb County for the unexpired term. 
(f)  The commission shall have ex officio members composed of the following: 
(1)  The chairman of the committee of the Macon-Bibb County Commission responsible for recreation; 
(2)  A member of the Macon-Bibb County Commission; 
(3)  The chairman of the chamber of commerce recreation committee or a chamber representative; and 
(4)  An elected member of the county board of education. 
Sec. 2-603. - Functions. 
The commission shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  The commission shall adopt bylaws for the proper performance of their functions. These bylaws may not conflict with this article; 
(2)  Advise the mayor in the development of a sound financial plan; 
(3)  Advise the mayor in the development of a variety of innovative and quality programs and a variety of facilities to meet the various needs of all of the citizens of Macon and Bibb County; 
(4)  Assist the mayor by keeping the public informed and educated as to the importance of and need for recreation programs, facilities and services; 
(5)  Advise and aid the mayor in maintaining an effective and efficient public relations program; 
(6)  Advise the mayor concerning public needs and desires for recreation programs, facilities, and services; and 
(7)  Assist the mayor in securing financial contributions and physical properties for the advancement of the recreation cause. 
Sec. 2-604. - Macon-Bibb County not bound by commission contracts. 
The commission shall not have the power or authority to bind Macon-Bibb County by any contract, agreement, financial obligations, indebtedness of any kind, or otherwise. No contract, financial obligation, or indebtedness, incurred by the commission, shall ever be a claim or a charge against Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 2-605. - Restrictions on acceptance of grants, gifts, donations. 
The recreation commission shall not be authorized, without the prior official approval of the mayor and of the Macon-Bibb County Commission, to accept any grant, gift or devise of real estate or any gift, grant or bequest of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or recreation purposes, if the acceptance of any grant, gift, bequest or devise will subject the Macon-Bibb County to additional expense for improvements, maintenance or renewal. 
Sec. 2-606. - Deposit and use of funds. 
All money received by the recreation commission, from whatever source derived, shall be deposited with the finance officer of Macon-Bibb County to the account of the Macon-Bibb County recreation department to be used for the financing of the Macon-Bibb County recreation program. 
Secs. 2-607—2-685. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY INDUSTRIAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-686. - Creation of authority and citation to laws. 
The Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority was established, created and authorized by an amendment to Art. VII, § V, ¶ of the Georgia Constitution approved by the general election of 1962 (Ga. Laws 1962, p. 885) which also granted certain powers to the Authority, the City of Macon and Bibb County; said Amendment was implemented pursuant to confirmation by said vote by an Act of the Legislature approved by the Governor on February 27, 1962. (Ga. Laws 1962, p. 2323), as later amended, specifically to increase the membership of the Authority from five to six members (Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3600) (collectively, said pieces of legislation are referred to hereinafter as the "Act"). 
( Ord. No. O-14-0033, § 1, 5-20-2014 ) 
Sec. 2-687. - Member position on authority formerly held by chairman of board of commissioners of Bibb County. 
In light of the elimination of the office of "chairman of the County Board of Commissioners for the County of Bibb" by and other provisions relating to membership on authorities in the Charter, and pursuant to the Act providing that the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County may promulgate ordinances relating to the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority which are permitted under and not inconsistent with the Act, said member position on the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority formerly filled by the serving Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Bibb County shall henceforth be appointed by the Mayor of Macon-Bibb County and approved by a majority of the members of the Board of Commissioners of Macon-Bibb County. Said appointed member's term of office on the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority shall be coincident with the term of office of the Mayor of Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0033, § 1, 5-20-2014 ) 
Secs. 2-688—2-700. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED 

Secs. 2-701—2-710. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-711. - Name of organization. 
An advisory body for local community action programs as part of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 for Macon-Bibb County is hereby established, and shall hereafter be known as the Macon-Bibb County Economic Opportunity Council, referred to throughout this division as the Economic Opportunity Council. 
Sec. 2-712. - Membership; terms. 
The Equal Opportunity Council shall be composed of such persons as shall be determined by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County, in accordance with the Charter, for two (2) year terms. 
Sec. 2-713. - Neighborhood advisory committees. 
In addition to those named in section 2-712 there will be established a neighborhood advisory committee in each of six (6) target areas, consisting of residents of such areas and members of the groups to be served, and having responsibility to elect from its membership one representative from each of the six (6) neighborhood advisory committees to serve on the Equal Opportunity Council. 
Sec. 2-714. - Organization. 
The Equal Opportunity Council shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from among its members. Each shall be elected for a term expiring on December 31st of each year, and shall be eligible for re-election. The Equal Opportunity Council shall have as its secretary the community program developer, or his representative, from the local office of economic opportunity. Minutes of meetings of the Equal Opportunity Council shall be recorded by the secretary, and shall be public record. The Equal Opportunity Council shall meet at least once each month and at other times when necessary. 
Sec. 2-715. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Equal Opportunity Council shall: 
(1)  Make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing local problems of poverty; 
(2)  Propose local action programs designed to improve economic opportunity for low-income families; 
(3)  Prepare priority listings for such local action programs; 
(4)  Prepare community action programs applications for federal assistance under the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964; and 
(5)  Assist in carrying out such local community action programs approved by the government of the United States of America. 
(b)  Community action program applications shall be subject to the final approval of the Macon-Bibb County Commission prior to transmission to the state and federal office of economic opportunity. In general, the council shall have such powers as may be needed to recommend the necessary local action programs and to carry out the programs as shall from time to time be determined jointly by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County; provided, however, it will not be necessary for grantees to obtain the approval of the governing authorities of Macon-Bibb County for those programs which will not require a contribution from such local authority to the nonfederal share necessary to qualify for a federal grant for such program. 
Sec. 2-716. - Fiscal power; power to contract; reports required; termination of projects. 
(a)  The Equal Opportunity Council shall have power to receive and disburse funds within the limitations of appropriations, gifts and grants which have been previously approved by Macon-Bibb County, and in connection with projects or undertakings previously approved under the terms of section 2-715. Within the same limitations, the Equal Opportunity Council shall be empowered to contract with any private or public agency to the extent required for its proper operation. The Equal Opportunity Council, on June 30th and December 31st of each year, shall report to Macon-Bibb County its actions and doings in connection with each project or undertaking and shall include as a part of its report, a statement of its receipts and disbursements, from whatever source and to every object, for the preceding six (6) months. Additionally upon the completion of each project or undertaking, the Equal Opportunity Council shall make a complete report to Macon-Bibb County with respect to such project or undertaking, showing the action in connection therewith and funds received and expended in its behalf. The Equal Opportunity Council shall keep such records as will enable it to make such reports and accountings, and the same shall be subject to verification and examination by auditors of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  Any project or undertaking begun by the Equal Opportunity Council shall be terminated at any time upon the decision of the Macon-Bibb County governing authority that the continuance thereof is not in the public interest. 
Sec. 2-717. - Technical staff. 
The technical staff to aid the Equal Opportunity Council in performing its duties shall be the local office of economic opportunity, the personnel of which shall be employed by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 2-718. - Bylaws. 
All bylaws of the Equal Opportunity Council and any amendments thereto shall be approved by the mayor and the Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
Secs. 2-719—2-735. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - KEEP MACON-BIBB BEAUTIFUL COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-736. - Commission established. 
There is hereby established the Keep Macon-Bibb Beautiful Commission, referred to throughout this division as the commission. 
Sec. 2-737. - Duties. 
(a)  The duties of the commission shall be to: 
(1)  Promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment of Macon-Bibb County; 
(2)  Initiate, plan, direct and coordinate programs for litter control for the community on a sustainable basis; 
(3)  Implement and maintain the clean community system; 
(4)  Study, investigate and develop plans for improving the health, sanitation, safety, and cleanliness of Macon-Bibb County by beautifying the streets, highways, alleys, river and stream banks, lots, yards and other similar places in Macon-Bibb County; 
(5)  Aid in the prevention of fires, diseases and other casualties by the removal and elimination of trash and other debris from the streets, highways, alleys, lots, yards, plots and other similar places; 
(6)  Encourage the placing, planting and preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects or ornamentation in Macon-Bibb County; 
(7)  Protect song birds and other wild fowl; 
(8)  Advise and recommend plans to other agencies of Macon-Bibb County for the beautification of Macon-Bibb County; and 
(9)  Promote public interest in the general improvement of the environment of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to abridge or change the powers and duties of other commissions, departments, boards and like agencies of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 2-738. - Authority. 
In order to perform the foregoing duties, the commission shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Adopt bylaws to facilitate the attainment of its purpose and functions; 
(2)  Initiate, plan, direct and coordinate community-wide efforts to achieve its goals; 
(3)  Solicit and accept donations and appropriations of money, services, products, property and facilities for expenditure and use by the commission for the accomplishment of its objects; 
(4)  Employ, to pay and to terminate the employment of staff as may be required for the fulfillment of commission purposes; and 
(5)  Make recommendations to Macon-Bibb County governing bodies as well as to the private sector regarding measures which it deems necessary to accomplish its objects. 
Sec. 2-739. - Membership. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of no more than twenty-eight (28) members appointed by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County, in accordance with the Charter, who shall be residents of Macon-Bibb County and who shall serve without remuneration. 
(b)  In addition to the appointed members of the commission, the mayor, and one member of the Macon-Bibb County Commission selected by the Macon-Bibb County Commission and the president of the chamber of commerce shall serve as ex officio members of the commission. 
(c)  The names of the twenty-eight (28) members and the term of office of each shall be filed in the office of the county clerk, and any further changes in the membership shall also be filed with the county clerk. 
Sec. 2-740. - Terms of office. 
The terms of office of the members of the commission shall remain three (3) years each. 
Sec. 2-741. - Election of officers. 
The commission shall elect from its membership, a presiding officer and any other officers as may be desired. Officers shall be elected on a calendar year basis but may be re-elected for succeeding terms. 
Sec. 2-742. - Management of funds; reports; records. 
(a)  The commission shall have the power to receive and disburse funds within the limitations of appropriations, gifts and grants which have been previously approved by Macon-Bibb County, and in connection with projects or undertakings previously approved under the terms of section 2-737. Within the same limitation, the commission shall be empowered to contract with any private or public agency to the extent required for its proper operation. 
(b)  The commission, on March 31st and September 30th of each year, shall report to Macon-Bibb County its activities in connection with each project or undertaking, and shall include as part of its report, a statement of its receipts and disbursements, from whatever source and to every object, for the preceding six (6) months. 
(c)  Additionally, upon the completion of each project or undertaking, the commission shall make a complete report to Macon-Bibb County with respect to the project or undertaking, showing the action in connection therewith and any funds received or expended in its behalf. 
(d)  The commission shall keep any and all records as will enable it to make these reports and accountings, and these records shall be subject to verification and examination by auditors of Macon-Bibb County. 
(e)  The commission shall not have the power or authority to bind Macon-Bibb County by any contract, agreement, financial obligation or indebtedness or otherwise and no contract, agreement, financial obligation, or indebtedness incurred by the commission shall ever be a claim or charge against Macon-Bibb County. 
(f)  Any project or undertaking begun by the commission shall be terminated at any time upon the decision of the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County that the continuance thereof is not in the public interest. 
Sec. 2-743. - Compensation. 
All of the members of the commission shall serve without pay. 
Sec. 2-744. - Beautification tree committee—Established; composition. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a beautification tree committee for the city, referred to throughout this division as the committee, which shall consist of twelve (12) members, citizens and residents of this community, who shall be appointed by the Keep Macon-Bibb Beautiful Commission. 
(b)  These members shall include a horticulturist, registered landscape architect, registered architect, registered forester, parks and recreation department representative, Georgia Power representative, public works street department representative, Macon-Bibb County government representative, planning and zoning representative, and three (3) interested lay citizens. 
Sec. 2-745. - Same—Terms of office; vacancies. 
The terms of the twelve (12) persons shall be three (3) years, except that the terms of three (3) of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one (1) year and the terms of three (3) members of the first board shall be for two (2) years. If a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed by the commission for the unexpired portion of the term. 
Sec. 2-746. - Same—Compensation. 
Members of the committee shall serve without compensation. 
Sec. 2-747. - Same—Officers; rules and regulations; quorum. 
The committee shall be chaired by the vice president of the Keep Macon-Bibb Beautiful Commission. It shall otherwise choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members, seven (7), shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
Sec. 2-748. - Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the committee to develop and update annually and administer a written Macon-Bibb County tree plan for the care and planting of street and park trees. Such plan will be reviewed by the commission and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive Macon-Bibb County tree plan for Macon-Bibb County. The committee, when requested by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, shall investigate, recommend, and report on any special question coming within the scope of its work. 
Sec. 2-749. - Same—Review by Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
The Macon-Bibb County Commission has the right to review and act on the recommendations of the committee. All final decisions shall be made by the governing authority of the Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
Secs. 2-750—2-765. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FORT HAWKINS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-766. - Creation; composition. 
There is hereby established in Macon-Bibb County a commission to be known as the Fort Hawkins Commission, referred to throughout this division as the commission. The members of such commission shall be individuals living in the middle Georgia area who are vitally interested in the early history of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 2-767. - Authority and functions. 
The Fort Hawkins Commission shall have the following authority and functions: 
(1)  To provide for the organization of the commission, the officers thereof, their terms of office and all matters needful and necessary with regard thereto; 
(2)  To adopt rules and regulations to facilitate the accomplishment of its objectives; 
(3)  To investigate, promote and accomplish, as nearly as is practicable, the complete restoration of Fort Hawkins as it was originally constructed including the site, buildings and other facilities; 
(4)  To solicit and accept gifts, grants and donations of money and other property for the accomplishment of its objectives and functions, provided that the legal title of all real and personal property, acquired by the commission by gift or otherwise, shall be taken and held in the name of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 2-768. - Members; officers. 
The Fort Hawkins Commission shall consist of twelve (12) members, one of which shall be the Chairman of the Community Resources and Development Committee, or his designee. All members shall serve without remuneration. The remaining eleven (11) members shall be appointed by the mayor and subject to confirmation by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, and shall serve for terms of five (5) years each or until their successors are appointed and confirmed. The appointment of the members of the commission shall be made by the mayor and submitted to the Macon-Bibb County Commission for confirmation within thirty (30) days. Following the appointment and confirmation, members of the commission shall meet and organize by electing one (1) of their members as chairperson of the commission and by electing other officers as the commission deems appropriate. Vacancies among the members of the commission, other than by expiration of term, shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, subject to conformation of the Macon-Bibb County Commission, for the unexpired term in which the vacancy occurs. In order to be eligible for appointment to the commission, a person must live in the middle Georgia area and must be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
Sec. 2-769. - Macon-Bibb County not bound by commission contracts. 
The commission shall not have the power or authority to bind Macon-Bibb County by any contract, agreement, financial obligation, indebtedness of any kind, or otherwise. No contract, financial obligation or indebtedness, incurred by the commission, shall ever be a claim or charge against Macon-Bibb County or a lien on any Macon-Bibb County property which might have been improved as a result of any contract, financial obligation or indebtedness made or incurred by the commission. 
Sec. 2-770. - Acceptance of gifts and grants. 
The commission shall not be authorized, without the prior official approval of mayor and the Macon-Bibb County Commission in writing, to accept any grant, gift or devise or real estate or grant or bequest of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for any purpose authorized by this article, if the acceptance of any such grant, gift, bequest or devise will subject Macon-Bibb County to any expense or liability. 
Sec. 2-771. - Moneys; disposition. 
All money received by the commission from whatever source derived shall be deposited with the director of finance of Macon-Bibb County to the account of the Fort Hawkins Commission to be used for financing the projects and functions of the commission. 
DIVISION 8. - DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-772. - Creation; mission. 
There is hereby established in Macon-Bibb County a commission to be known as the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Commission, referred to throughout this division as the commission. The mission of the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Commission is to promote understanding and acceptance of nonviolence and human equality as a way of building community among all citizens of Macon-Bibb County by commemorating the work and life of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. 
Sec. 2-773. - Commission members—Appointments. 
The commission shall consist of eleven (11) members, one of whom shall be the chairman of the community resources and development committee, or his designee, one (1) of whom shall be a member of the mayor's administrative staff, and one (1) of whom shall be the superintendent of the Bibb County Board of Education. The remaining members shall be appointed by the mayor from members of the community and shall be approved by a majority of the Macon-Bibb County Commission. In making appointments from among the members of the community, the mayor shall be mindful of the goal of the commission to promote racial harmony, understanding, community service, respect, diversity and goodwill among all citizens. Each member shall serve for a term of five (5) years, or until a successor is appointed and confirmed. 
The appointment of the members of the commission shall be made by the mayor and submitted to the commission for confirmation within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of the expiration of a term on the commission. Following the appointment and confirmation, members of the commission shall meet and organize by electing one (1) of their members as chairperson of the commission and by electing other officers as the commission deems appropriate. Vacancies among the members of the commission, other than by expiration of term, shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, for the unexpired term in which the vacancy occurs. 
Sec. 2-774. - Commission members—Qualifications. 
In order to be eligible for appointment to the commission, a person must live in the Macon and Bibb County area, must be at least eighteen (18) years of age and must be vitally interested in the principals of equality, human rights, civil rights, and nonviolence for all people for which Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and many others of all races and nationalities have given their lives. 
Sec. 2-775. - Authority and functions. 
The commission shall have the following authority and functions: 
(1)  To provide for the organization of the commission, the officers thereof, their terms of office and all matters needful and necessary with regard thereto; 
(2)  To adopt rules and regulations to facilitate the accomplishment of its objectives; 
(3)  Promote racial harmony, understanding, community service, respect and goodwill among all citizens; 
(4)  Promote principles of nonviolence; 
(5)  Promote awareness and appreciation of the civil rights movement and advocacy of the principles and legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.; 
(6)  Develop, coordinate and advise the mayor and city council of ceremonies and activities throughout the state relating to the observance of Dr. King's holiday; and 
(7)  To solicit and accept gifts, grants and donations of money and other property for the accomplishment of its objectives and functions, provided that the legal title of all real and personal property, acquired by the commission by gift or otherwise, shall be taken and held in the name of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 2-776. - Macon-Bibb County not bound by commission contracts. 
The commission shall not have the power or authority to bind Macon-Bibb County by any contract, agreement, financial obligation, indebtedness of any kind, or otherwise. No contract, financial obligation or indebtedness, incurred by the commission, shall ever be a claim or charge against Macon-Bibb County or a lien on any Macon-Bibb County property which might have been improved as a result of any contract, financial obligation or indebtedness made or incurred by the commission. 
Sec. 2-777. - Acceptance of gifts and grants. 
The commission shall not be authorized, without the prior official approval of mayor and the commission in writing, to accept any grant, gift or devise or real estate or grant or bequest of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for any purpose authorized by this article, if the acceptance of any such grant, gift, bequest or devise will subject Macon-Bibb County to any expense or liability. 
Sec. 2-778. - Moneys; disposition. 
All money received by the commission from whatever source derived shall be deposited with the director of finance of Macon-Bibb County to the account of the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Commission to be used for financing the projects and functions of the commission. 
Secs. 2-779—2-799. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OF MACON-BIBB COUNTY 

Sec. 2-800. - Finding of need. 
There is hereby determined and declared a pressing, existing and future need for a development authority to function in Macon-Bibb County for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in Macon-Bibb County thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry and, in the furtherance of that purpose, to finance projects permitted thereby including projects for air and water pollution control facilities by industries. 
Sec. 2-801. - Authority activated. 
There is hereby continued the public body corporate and politic known as the "Development Authority of Bibb County" which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-802—2-809. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-810. - Creation. 
Pursuant to the powers granted to Macon-Bibb County under and by virtue of the "Hospital Authorities Law" (O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.), Macon-Bibb County does hereby continue a hospital authority to be known as the Macon-Bibb County Hospital Authority. 
Sec. 2-811. - Board of trustees—Terms. 
The authority shall be administered by a board of trustees consisting of seven members who shall serve for terms of three years each. The successors of all of the initial appointees shall serve for three-year terms and be appointed by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County, in accordance with the Charter. 
Sec. 2-812. - Same—Subsequent nominations and appointments. 
If for any reason there should be a vacancy in the board of trustees during the term initial established hereby, the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County shall make nominations for the unexpired terms as provided by law. Upon the expirations of the respective initial terms, the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County shall, as provided by law, nominate three successors for the three-year terms which ensue, with the board of trustees having power to select the persons to fill the succeeding three-year terms from among the nominees; provided, however, that it is declared to be the policy of Macon-Bibb County not to nominate to succeed himself or herself any trustee who shall have served five three-year terms. 
Sec. 2-813. - Powers and duties. 
The Macon-Bibb County hospital authority, acting through its trustees, shall have all of the rights, powers, privileges, and immunities and duties as are set out in the hospital authorities act as the same now exists or may hereafter exist, and the authority shall continue from September 1, 1968, until dissolved as provided by law. 
Sec. 2-814. - Citizens hospital advisory committee. 
(a)  There is hereby established and created a citizens hospital advisory committee, to be known as the Macon-Bibb County citizens Hospital Advisory Committee. 
(b)  The committee shall be composed of 15 members. 
(c)  The governing authority of Macon-Bibb County shall appoint the successors to those members at the expiration of their respective terms of membership on the committee, to serve for terms of three years each. 
(d)  Vacancies among the members of the committee, occurring otherwise than by expiration of term, shall be filled by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County for the unexpired term in which the vacancy occurs. 
(e)  Members of the committee must be at least 21 years of age and must be legal residents of Macon-Bibb County. Members of the committee shall serve without remuneration. 
(f)  The primary purposes for which the committee is established are to assist and cooperate with the trustees of the hospital authority, in their efforts to provide the best possible public hospital care and facilities and to act as a liaison between the trustees of the hospital authority and the general public in the interest of greatest efficiency and utmost public support. In carrying out these basic objectives, the members of the committee shall consult periodically with the trustees of the hospital authority, concerning hospital problems and affairs, and shall transmit in writing to the trustees the suggestions and recommendations of the members of the committee and those received by the committee from the general public for operation of the Medical Center of Central Georgia. In addition, the members of the committee shall, when requested by the trustees, give their active support and assistance to the accomplishment of plans and projects adopted by the trustees for improvement of the Medical Center of Central Georgia. 
(g)  Promptly after the initial appointment of the members of the committee, the committee shall meet and organize by electing one of its members chairman, electing such other officers and adopting such rules, regulations and bylaws as the committee may deem needful, necessary or desirable. 
(h)  The committee may be dissolved by resolution of the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County at the time it may be decided to dissolve the committee. 
Secs. 2-815—2-819. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY URBAN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-820. - Designation; term. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-44-4, Macon-Bibb County hereby designates the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority (the "authority") as the sole redevelopment agency for the purposes of acting for and on behalf of the Macon-Bibb County government and the authority shall hereafter act as a redevelopment agency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-44-3(6). The authority shall continue to serve as such redevelopment agency until such designation is terminated by the Macon-Bibb County governing authority. 
Sec. 2-821. - Statutory authority; limitations. 
The Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority is a public agency created by the General Assembly of Georgia and by certain amendments to the Constitution of the State of Georgia (1974 Ga. Laws, page 1754 et seq.; 1976 Ga. Laws, page 1827, and 1980 Ga. Laws, page 2128), duly ratified and proclaimed, and Acts of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia (1974 Ga. Laws, page 3093, and 1981 Ga. Laws, page 4872), and shall be vested with all of the powers, duties and obligations imposed by the Redevelopment Powers Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-44-1), provided, however, that: 
(1)  The exercise of all powers available to the authority as the redevelopment agency shall nevertheless be limited by and in accordance with the specific requirements of this subsection; and 
(2)  This subsection is not intended to limit in any way the powers, duties and responsibilities of the authority as now exist, but this subsection merely grants supplementary and additional powers, duties and responsibilities pursuant to the Redevelopment Powers Law. 
Sec. 2-822. - Redevelopment plans—Submittal; tax allocation districts, bonds; approval. 
The authority shall submit any and all redevelopment plans to the Macon-Bibb County government pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-44-6(b)(1), and it shall thereafter be necessary for both governments to create, by resolution, a tax allocation district and the approval of the issuance of tax allocation bonds as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-44-6(3) and (4), but it shall also be necessary, before the issuance of any such tax allocation bonds, that the authority present to the Macon-Bibb County government for approval a redevelopment plan including anticipated both private and public improvements and a debt service financing plan which shall make representation satisfactory to the Macon-Bibb County government that the issuance of such bonds is sound and feasible and that the debt service necessary to retire such bonds is reasonably assured through contractual arrangements with developers or other parties. It is the intention of this subsection to facilitate the approval of a redevelopment plan as provided for generally in O.C.G.A. § 36-44-6, but to nevertheless reserve unto the Macon-Bibb County governing authority the right to approve specific funding arrangements through the issuance of bonds as contemplated by said law. Further, so as to explain the intent of this provision, it is the desire of the Macon-Bibb County governing authority that the authority, prior to issuance of such bonds, shall have entered into arrangements which will reasonably guarantee minimum debt service obligations for the retirement of bonds to be committed. 
Sec. 2-823. - Same—Certifications. 
A redevelopment plan to be submitted by the authority pursuant to section 2-822 shall certify that all privately owned properties within the redevelopment area have been included within the area and the authority shall also certify that the redevelopment area proposed would not create any known negative effect upon properties adjacent thereto. 
Sec. 2-824. - Same—Cooperation of board of tax assessors. 
The Macon-Bibb County Board of Tax Assessors is hereby authorized and directed to cooperate with the authority in connection with its activities pursuant to the Redevelopment Powers Law by providing ad valorem tax information, as well as advisory appraisals on existing and anticipated land and improvements thereon located or to be located within redevelopment areas. 
Sec. 2-825. - Same—Bond proceeds. 
O.C.G.A. § 36-44-3(5), which defines "redevelopment" as used in the act, is to be strictly construed in that the proceeds of tax allocation bonds shall be used exclusively for public improvements and shall not be used to improve private property. 
Sec. 2-826. - Same—Review by the board of public education of the county. 
While it is the intention of the Macon-Bibb County governing authority to provide for and permit tax increment financing through the use of certain limited proceeds to be received by the government from ad valorem taxes, it is agreed that the board of public education for the county shall also be advised by the authority of redevelopment plans as described by the act and that review and comments by such board shall be necessary of any such plan before the tax commissioner shall be authorized to pay over tax allocation increments as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-44-3(14) of the act with reference to tax receipts which would otherwise be payable to such board. 
Sec. 2-827. - Same—Approval of Macon-Bibb County government. 
It is the intent of governing authority of Macon-Bibb County that the approval of any redevelopment plan as described hereinabove and the approval of the specific plans for the issuance of tax allocation bonds must have the formal approval the Macon-Bibb County government. 
Sec. 2-828. - Support for, implementation of, tax increment financing plan. 
Macon-Bibb County further pledges their cooperative and best efforts in the implementation of the tax increment financing plan adopted by the General Assembly of Georgia and approved by the voters Macon-Bibb County, and to diligently assist and support the authority in its endeavors in this respect. 
Sec. 2-829. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - MACON-BIBB COUNTY LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

Sec. 2-830. - Name. 
The name of the governing board of the library shall be "The Macon-Bibb County Library Board of Trustees." 
Sec. 2-831. - Composition. 
The library board of trustees shall consist of nine members who shall be appointed by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County, in accordance with the Charter. 
Sec. 2-832. - Terms of service. 
All members of the Macon-Bibb County Library Board of Trustees shall serve for terms of five years. 
Sec. 2-833. - Rotation of members. 
The members of the present library board of trustees, whether appointed under prior ordinances, shall continue to serve as members of the board of trustees for the terms for which they have been appointed, and their successors shall be appointed for five-year terms. After a trustee has served a full five (5) year term, he may not be reappointed to the board of trustees unless and until one-year has elapsed. 
Sec. 2-834. - Appointment and replacement of trustees. 
When a vacancy occurs for any reason, the Macon-Bibb County governing authority shall appoint a new member to the board for the unexpired term of the person creating the vacancy. 
Sec. 2-835. - Compensation of members. 
No member of the board of trustees shall receive any compensation for services on the board. 
Sec. 2-836. - Officers. 
The board of trustees shall elect at its first meeting in each year a presiding officer and a secretary/treasurer, together with such other officers as it shall deem proper, all of whom shall serve for one-year terms with the right to be elected for one additional one-year term. After the service of two years, no board member may be eligible for the same office until the expiration of two years; except that the secretary/treasurer may serve for five years. 
Sec. 2-837. - Scope of authority; duties and responsibilities of board. 
The library board of trustees shall have general management, supervision and control of all public libraries in Macon-Bibb County and all powers and privileges incident thereto with an enumeration of the following, which in no way limits the general powers of the board: 
(1)  Adopt bylaws under which the board shall operate. 
(2)  Prescribe rules and regulations for the control, operation, management and use of the public libraries of Macon-Bibb County. 
(3)  Establish branches of the public libraries. 
(4)  Establish the compensation and qualifications for employees of the public libraries. 
(5)  Enter into contracts with other governmental bodies for the operation of a regional library and extend or renew these agreements upon terms satisfactory to the board. 
(6)  Enter into contracts for the benefit of the libraries. 
(7)  Expend appropriated and donated funds in accordance with the budget of the libraries. 
(8)  Accept donations of money, land and other property for the use and benefit of the libraries, the title to any land to be taken in the name of Macon-Bibb County. 
(9)  Manage property, including land, buildings, books and other equipment for the use and benefit of the libraries. 
(10)  Direct the policies of the public libraries. 
(11)  Do any other acts that may be necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes for which the board is hereby created. 
Sec. 2-838. - Receipt and disbursement of funds. 
The board shall receive appropriated funds from Macon-Bibb County, the state and the United States Government, and shall be the final authority as to the disbursement of these funds in accordance with present regulations and provisions of law of the several existing governmental bodies. 
Sec. 2-839. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-0051, § 1, adopted October 20, 2015 , repealed div. 13, §§ 2-840—2-848, in its entirety. Former div. 13 pertained to "Safety Review Board," and was derived from Original Code. 

Secs. 2-840—2-848. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - PEDESTRIAN FATALITY REVIEW BOARD 

Sec. 2-849. - Board created. 
There is hereby created a body known as the "Pedestrian Fatality Review Board." 
( Ord. No. O-15-0018, § 1, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-850. - Duties; mission. 
(a)  There is hereby established in Macon-Bibb County a body known as the "Pedestrian Fatality Review Board", referred to throughout this division as the Board. The Board shall be responsible for monitoring, reviewing, and evaluating all pedestrian fatalities that occur in Macon-Bibb County. The Board shall determine the cause of each such pedestrian fatality and prepare recommendations stating how such an accident can be prevented in the future. In addition, the Board shall prepare recommendations for additional safety protocols that can be implemented in the area of each pedestrian fatality to ensure the area is safe for pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  In addition to the review of areas involving pedestrian fatalities, the Board shall work to ensure that proper safety protocols and precautions are in place to protect pedestrian traffic on all roads, streets, alleys, and other roadways in Macon-Bibb County in order to prevent future accidents, as necessary. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0018, § 1, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-851. - Board members appointments. 
(a)  The Board shall consist of nine (9) members as follows: 
(1)  The Mayor, or his/her designee; and 
(2)  Two (2) members from the Bibb County Sheriff's Office, who shall be appointed by the Sheriff and who shall be current employees of the Bibb County Sheriff's Office; and 
(3)  One (1) member from the Macon-Bibb County Commission to be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, provided, however, that said appointed Commission member may designate a proxy to attend Board meetings in said Commission member's place; and 
(4)  The Director of the Macon-Bibb County Facilities Management Department, or his/her designee; and 
(5)  The Traffic Engineer of Macon-Bibb County, or his/her designee; and 
(6)  The Administrator of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department, or his/her designee; and 
(6)[(7)]  Two (2) citizens at large from the community to be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
(b)  Each such appointed member shall serve a term of five (5) years, or until a successor is appointed and, if necessary, confirmed. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(c)  The appointment of the members of the Board shall be made by the Mayor and submitted to the Macon-Bibb County Commission for confirmation within thirty (30) days. Vacancies among the members of the commission, other than by expiration of term, shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, subject to confirmation of the Macon-Bibb County Commission, for the unexpired term in which the vacancy occurs. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0018, § 1, 4-21-2015 ; Ord. No. O-16-0025, § 1, 2-2-2016 ) 
Sec. 2-852. - Board members qualifications. 
In order to be eligible for appointment to the Board, a person must live inside the county limits of Bibb County, Georgia, must be at least eighteen (18) years of age, and must be vitally interested in the safety of pedestrians on roadways in Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0018, § 1, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-853. - Meetings of the board. 
The Board shall meet at least twice per calendar year, however, the Board shall also have the authority to meet as often as it deems necessary in order perform its duties. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0018, § 1, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-854. - Summonses. 
The Board shall have the right to issue such summonses to such persons as it shall deem appropriate for the proper determination of the facts surrounding each pedestrian fatality and subpoena such documentary evidence as shall be needful to complete its investigation. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0018, § 1, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-855. - Macon-Bibb County not bound by board contracts. 
The Board shall not have the power or authority to bind Macon-Bibb County by any contract, agreement, financial obligation, indebtedness of any kind, or otherwise. No contract, financial obligation or indebtedness, incurred by the Board, shall ever be a claim or charge against Macon-Bibb County or a lien on any Macon-Bibb County property which might have been improved as a result of any contract, financial obligation or indebtedness made or incurred by the Board. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0018, § 1, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-856. - Acceptance of gifts and grants. 
The Board shall not be authorized, without the prior official approval of the Mayor and the Macon-Bibb County Commission in writing, to accept any grant, gift or devise or real estate or grant or bequest of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for any purpose authorized by this article, if the acceptance of any such grant, gift, bequest or devise will subject Macon-Bibb County to any expense or liability. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0018, § 1, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-857. - Money; disposition. 
All money received by the Board from whatever source derived shall be deposited with the director of finance of Macon-Bibb County to the account of the Pedestrian Fatality Review Board to be used for financing functions of the Board. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0018, § 1, 4-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 2-858. - Reserved. 
Chapter 3 - AIRPORT 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Airport means any and all airports owned by Macon-Bibb County. 
Department means the Macon-Bibb County department of aviation. 
Director means the Macon-Bibb County director of aviation. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
Sec. 3-2. - Application of county ordinances; collection of expenses. 
(a)  All ordinances of Macon-Bibb County shall apply to all airports owned by Macon-Bibb County as authorized by the Charter. 
(b)  All expenses charged under this chapter to any person may be collected as all revenues of Macon-Bibb County may be collected. 
Sec. 3-3. - Running engine. 
While running an aircraft engine, pilots shall not negligently allow the propeller or jet stream to come in contact with buildings, airplanes, parking areas or areas reserved for spectators. 
Sec. 3-4. - Taxiing. 
No person shall taxi an aircraft to or from the hangar line or to or from an approved parking space until he has ascertained that there will be no danger of collision with other aircraft, persons, or objects in the immediate area. 
Sec. 3-5. - Obstruction of facilities. 
No aircraft shall be parked or be permitted to remain at any place on the airport so as to interfere with the unobstructed use thereof by any person lawfully using the airport, and any such aircraft may be removed by order of the director at the expense of the aircraft operator without liability on the part of Macon-Bibb County or the director for any damage that might result to the aircraft by removal thereof. 
Sec. 3-6. - Interfering; tampering. 
No person shall interfere or tamper with any aircraft or start the engine of any aircraft without the aircraft owner's consent, or unless on orders of the director. 
Sec. 3-7. - Maintenance of area; fueling. 
(a)  Cleaning of, or otherwise maintaining aircraft shall be accomplished only in areas designated for that purpose. 
(b)  Spillage or dripping of aircraft fuel, gasoline, oil, grease, or any other material which may be unsightly or detrimental to the pavement, shall be removed immediately. The responsibility of the immediate removal of such material shall be assumed by the operator of the equipment causing the spillage or by the tenant or concessionaire responsible for the deposit thereof. 
(c)  Fueling of aircraft shall be done only with personnel and equipment furnished by the airport fixed base operators. Such equipment shall be grounded to prevent the possibility of static ignition during fuel handling operations in connection with aircraft. At least one dry chemical fire extinguisher, twenty (20) pounds or larger, shall be immediately available. 
Sec. 3-8. - Disposal of wrecked or disabled aircraft. 
The pilot or operator of any aircraft involved in any accident shall be responsible for the prompt disposal of aircraft wrecked or disabled at the airport and parts of such aircraft as ordered by the director. In the event of failure to comply with the orders, the wrecked or disabled aircraft and parts may be removed by the director at the operator's expense and without liability for damage which may result in the course of such removal. 
Sec. 3-9. - Landing fees. 
The fees to be paid for the landing of large (FAA definition) aircraft at the airport, by persons who do not operate at the airport under written contract with the owner, shall be at the rate prescribed by the department regulations. Such fees shall include touch and go's as well as full stops. Payment shall be made to the director's office at the airport. 
Sec. 3-10. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  Acrobatics. No person shall acrobatically fly an aircraft carrying passengers for hire or reward, except for necessary student instruction. Acrobatic flying means intentional maneuvers not necessary to ordinary air navigation. 
(b)  Stunt flying, parachute jumping, helicopter landings. No stunt flying, parachute jumps, helicopter landings or other hazardous exhibitions will be allowed over Macon-Bibb County or over any flying field within Macon-Bibb County or under its control without first obtaining the written consent of the director, except for emergencies. 
(c)  Advertising and exhibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to fly over Macon-Bibb County in an airplane for purposes of advertising or exhibition without having first obtained the written permission of the director. 
(d)  Dropping pamphlets. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drop from any aircraft, pamphlets, papers, noise-producing devices or other things. 
(e)  Advertising. It shall be unlawful for any person to post or tack any advertising signs or distribute advertising literature on or about any municipal flying field without the consent of the director. 
Sec. 3-11. - Regulations of certain activities. 
No person, unless authorized in writing by the director, shall in the airport: 
(1)  Sell or offer for sale any article of merchandise; 
(2)  Solicit any business or trade including carrying of baggage for hire, shining of shoes, and the like; 
(3)  Entertain any person by singing, dancing or playing any musical instrument; or 
(4)  Solicit alms or other funds, except from a booth which meets specifications provided for in the department rules and regulations. 
Sec. 3-12. - Lighted cigarettes, other items prohibited in certain areas. 
No person shall smoke, carry or possess a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, match, or other lighted item or equipment capable of causing a naked flame, in or about any loading area, building or fueling area where appropriate signs to that effect have been posted. 
Sec. 3-13. - Entering restricted areas. 
No person shall enter any restricted area of the airport posted as being closed to the public without permission of the director, except persons assigned to duty therein or authorized representatives of the airport. 
Sec. 3-14. - Entering landing area, ramps, apron area. 
No person shall enter upon the public landing areas or ramp and apron area without permission of the director, except persons assigned to duty therein, authorized representatives of the airport, air crews or passengers entering upon the public ramp and apron areas for the purpose of immediate embarkation or debarkation. 
Sec. 3-15. - Dogs or other animals. 
No person shall enter the terminal building of the airport with a dog or other animal, except that service animals may be permitted in for appropriate purposes, and where dogs or other animals are to be transported by air and are restrained by leash or properly confined. 
Sec. 3-16. - Open fires. 
No person shall start any open fires of any type, including flare pots, torches or fires in containers formerly used for oil, paint, and similar materials on any part of the airport without permission of the airport director. 
Sec. 3-17. - Lost articles. 
Any persons finding lost articles at the airport shall turn them over to the office of the director. 
Sec. 3-18. - Digging holes, trenches, excavations. 
No person shall dig holes, trenches, or do other excavation work on the airport or airport property, unless prior written approval is granted by the director. 
Sec. 3-19. - Compliance with signs. 
All persons on the airport shall comply with all signs or mechanical lights and signals, unless directed otherwise by an airport police officer. 
Sec. 3-20. - Right to regulate commercial enterprises. 
Macon-Bibb County has the right to regulate, in accordance with lease contracts, all commercial enterprises using the airport as a base of operation, whether such operation is aeronautical or nonaeronautical in nature. No commercial operation of an kind or type shall be conducted on the airport unless specifically authorized by Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 3-21. - Standards for doing business at airports. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any business at the airport without first having entered into a written contract with Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  All fixed base operations at the airport shall be full time, progressive business operations, with a manned office facility at the airport during all business hours. No fixed base operation shall begin until a written lease agreement is completed with Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  All persons doing business at the airport shall demonstrate, at all times, financial solvency and satisfactory business ability. 
(d)  All persons doing business at the airport shall have continuously in force public liability insurance in amounts provided by the written contract with Macon-Bibb County. 
(e)  Only fixed base operators, or others with the written permission of the director, shall carry on sightseeing flights for hire or any flying schools at the airport, except that the airport may be used for practice landings by anyone otherwise authorized by law. 
(f)  All airport businesses shall keep their premises clean and uncluttered with junk and if after a written warning by the director, an area is not cleaned, then the director may have it cleaned and charge the expense to the business involved. 
(g)  All construction at the airport shall be in accordance with design and construction standards established by the director. 
Sec. 3-22. - Carrying weapons in airport terminals. 
(a)  Definitions. 
1.  "Handgun" means a firearm of any description, loaded or unloaded, from which any shot, bullet, or other missile can be discharged by an action of an explosive where the length of the barrel, not including any revolving, detachable, or magazine breech, does not exceed 12 inches; provided, however, that the term "handgun" shall not include a gun which discharges a single shot of .46 centimeters or less in diameter. 
2.  "Knife" means a cutting instrument designed for the purpose of offense and defense consisting of a blade that is greater than five inches in length which is fastened to a handle. 
3.  "License holder" means a person who holds a valid weapons carry license. 
4.  "Long gun" means a firearm with a barrel length of at least 18 inches and overall length of at least 26 inches designed or made and intended to be fired from the shoulder and designed or made to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed: 
a.  Shotgun shell to fire through a smooth bore either a number of ball shot or a single projectile for each single pull of the trigger or from which any shot, bullet, or other missile can be discharged; or 
b.  Metallic cartridge to fire only a single projectile through a rifle bore for each single pull of the trigger; provided, however, that the term "long gun" shall not include a gun which discharges a single shot of .46 centimeters or less in diameter. 
5.  "Weapon" means a knife or handgun. 
6.  "Weapons carry license" or "license" means a license issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-11-129. 
(b)  No person shall enter the restricted access areas of a commercial service airport, in or beyond the airport security screening checkpoint, knowingly possessing or knowingly having under his or her control a weapon or long gun. Such area shall not include an airport drive, general parking area, walkway, or shops and areas of the terminal that are outside the screening checkpoint and that are normally open to unscreened passengers or visitors to the airport. Any restricted access area shall be clearly indicated by prominent signs indicating that weapons are prohibited in such area. 
(c)  A person who is not a license holder and who violates this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A license holder who violates this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that a license holder who is notified at the screening checkpoint for the restricted access area that he or she is in possession of a weapon or long gun and who immediately leaves the restricted access area following such notification and completion of federally required transportation security screening procedures shall not be guilty of violating this Code section. 
(d)  Any person who violates this Code section with the intent to commit a separate felony offense shall be guilty of a felony and, upon conviction of thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $15,000.00, imprisonment for not less than one nor more than ten years, or both. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0039, § 1, 4-5-2016 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-16-0039, § 1, adopted April 5, 2016 , amended § 3-22 to read as set out herein. Previously § 3-22 was titled "Carrying dangerous weapons in airport terminals." 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Brewpub means any bona fide food service establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed subject to the barrel production limits and regulations under state law. 
Brown bagging is the bringing of alcoholic beverages into business establishments licensed for the retail sale of beer, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for the purpose of drinking such alcoholic beverages at any such establishment. 
Building code means and includes all building, plumbing and electrical codes and any other similar technical code of Macon-Bibb County. 
Church means any permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
College means only such state, local government, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. For purposes of licensing and regulation, distilled spirits includes liquor, spirituous liquor, whiskey and fortified wine. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than fourteen percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the legal age as set by the state for the purchasing of alcoholic beverages. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. Premises shall also include the sidewalk serving area of sidewalk cafés permitted under the business regulations of this Code and an outside, open air or patio-type serving area on the private property of an establishment. Such outside, open air or patio-type serving area must meet all planning and zoning commission requirements and adjoin or be connected to the main service building in such a manner as to prevent the movement of pedestrians or vehicular traffic between the outside serving area and the main service building. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state actively in operation within the corporate limits of Macon-Bibb County, and having regularly paying monthly, quarterly or semiannual dues paying members. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one nor more than three families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, a boarding house where there are five or more boarders or roomers, or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application. 
Retail means retail sales packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises. 
School means only such state, local government, church or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Tax commissioner means the tax commissioner of the Macon-Bibb County. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, §§ 1, 2, 6-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-2. - Familiarity with chapter. 
It shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises, and to instruct each employee as to the terms thereof; and each licensee and employee shall at all times be familiar with this chapter. 
Sec. 4-3. - Responsibility for acts of employees and others. 
Licensees are charged with the responsibility hereunder for compliance with this chapter by their officers, agents, servants and employees. Licensees are responsible for acts in violation of this chapter performed by others if with the knowledge of the licensee. 
Sec. 4-4. - Removal of alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the premises prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverage sold pursuant to a license for sales of wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises, for sales of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises or for sales in connection with food service as provided in section 4-126, may be removed from the premises on which such alcoholic beverage is sold. 
Secs. 4-5—4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 4-21. - Required. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or manufactured in Macon-Bibb County except under a license issued pursuant to this article by the commission. 
Sec. 4-22. - License categories. 
(a)  The alcoholic beverage licenses which may be issued under this chapter are: 
(1)  Manufacturer; 
(2)  Wholesaler; 
(3)  Retail package sales of wine and malt beverages; 
(4)  Retail package sales of distilled spirits; 
(5)  Retail sales of wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises; 
(6)  Retail sales of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises; and 
(7)  Alcoholic beverage caterer. 
(8)  Brewpub. 
(b)  A separate application is required for each license category enumerated in subsection (a) of this section; the commission of Macon-Bibb County will act upon each application separately. 
(c)  No manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer licensed to sell packaged distilled spirits shall hold any consumption on the premises license for the same location. 
(d)  All businesses issued licenses under this chapter must, within ninety (90) days after the issuance of a license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses and no refund of license fees or business taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the mayor for an extension of time not to exceed ninety (90) days, and the mayor at his discretion may grant or deny the request. 
(e)  Any establishment holding a consumption-on-the-premises license for malt beverages and wine may purchase a permit so as to permit brown bagging on such licensed premises. The fee for such permit shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by the commission and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained by the commission. Establishments holding consumption-on-the-premises licenses for malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits shall be eligible to add a brown bagging permit at no additional charge. Brown bagging shall be unlawful at all business establishments that do not obtain a brown bagging permit as provided for in this section. 
(f)  Any establishment holding a license for consumption-off-the-premises at catered functions shall purchase an event permit for each event where the licensee intends to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages by the drink, off the premises, and in connection with an authorized catered function. Provided however, the issuance of an event permit shall in no way be considered a substitute for the consent of the owner or operator of the off-premises location to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages at the off-premises location. An event permit is limited in scope to the category or categories of alcohol for which the establishment is already licensed. The fee for an event permit shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by the commission and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained by the commission. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 3, 6-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-23. - Applications for new license. 
(a)  The provisions of this Code on general business licensing shall apply in addition to the provisions of this section: 
(b)  All approved applications for new licenses under this chapter shall be accompanied by a payment in cash or by certified check, for all the minimum fees and business taxes provided for in this Code for the classification into which the applicant falls. 
(c)  The application for a license of consumption-off-the-premises at catered functions shall include a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state and local applications and forms and a photostatic or other copy of the appropriate local license or licenses already issued under this chapter. 
(d)  The application for all other licenses shall be a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state applications and forms along with a local supplemental application form attached along with the following: 
(1)  Proof of planning and zoning compliance; 
(2)  Proof of building code compliance; 
(3)  A legal description of the property upon which the premises are located; 
(4)  A current photograph of the applicant; 
(5)  Fingerprints of the applicant to be taken by the Sheriff's Office; 
(6)  A letter of clearance from the clerk of the federal district court, and a letter of clearance from the clerk of the superior court, indicating that the applicant does not have any criminal charges currently pending, and that the applicant has no convictions from the respective court in the past ten (10) years; 
(7)  A letter of clearance from the clerk of the state court showing that the applicant has no criminal charges pending and no convictions in the past two (2) years; 
(8)  An affidavit from the engineering department stating that the establishment complies with the distance requirements contained in this chapter. The engineering department will charge a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for this affidavit; 
(9)  A personal performance bond conditioned upon the applicant and the applicant's employees at the licensed establishment complying with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the commission governing the issuance and control of alcoholic beverage licenses and the bond shall remain in force as long as the license and its renewals are valid and subsisting and shall be for the following amounts: 
a.  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a retail or consumption on the premises spirituous liquor license; or 
b.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for malt or vinous beverage retail or consumption on the premises license; and 
(10)  An affidavit from the publisher of the legal organ of Macon-Bibb County showing that the applicant has caused to be published in such legal organ, once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, a notice showing the name and address of the applicant, the location for which the license is sought, the type of license applied for, and the time and place the commission or its designee shall act on the application. 
(e)  The application shall also contain a form of oath providing that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct, and providing further that the applicant will abide by, observe and conduct his other business according to the rules and regulations prescribed by Macon-Bibb County, the acts of the general assembly, known as the Revenue Tax Act to Legalize and Control Alcoholic Beverages and Liquors (approved February 3, 1938), and the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue in respect thereto. The oath shall be taken by the applicant and the agent in charge of the establishment if different from or additional to the applicant, and the oath shall be taken by the true owners. 
(f)  Any false statement or material misrepresentation in any application hereunder shall be grounds for the revocation of any license granted hereunder. 
(g)  A transfer of location shall be allowed for any license under this chapter provided the licensee files with the appropriate department the following on the new location: 
(1)  Proof of planning and zoning compliance; 
(2)  Proof of building code compliance; 
(3)  A legal description of the property upon which the new premises is located; 
(4)  An affidavit from the engineering department that the establishment complies with any distance or location requirements contained in this chapter; 
(5)  Any appropriate location transfer fee; and 
(6)  An affidavit from the publisher of the legal organ of Macon-Bibb County showing that the transferor has caused to be published in such legal organ, once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, a notice showing the name and address of the transferor, the location for which the license is sought, the type of license held, and the time and place the commission or its designee shall act on the application. 
(h)  Any transfer allowed under this section may be denied or revoked on the same basis as for an application or license under this chapter. 
Sec. 4-24. - Residency required; agents. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses under this chapter and all actual owners of establishments for which licenses are sought shall be bona fide residents of Macon-Bibb County at the time of the filing of the applications and shall remain bona fide residents of such Macon-Bibb County during all times that the licenses and renewals thereof are in effect, or shall name one (1) or more residents in Macon-Bibb County as the agent or representative of the licensee, who shall be responsible for any matter relating to such license and who, at all such times, shall be a bona fide resident of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  All applications for licenses under this chapter by a corporation shall name in the application one (1) or more residents in Macon-Bibb County as the agent and representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, services of process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any Macon-Bibb County license. The application shall give the mailing address of the person and the mailing to any such person at such address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of Macon-Bibb County, another person shall immediately be appointed, in writing, in his or her place, and written notice shall be given the clerk stating the name and address of the new agent. 
Sec. 4-25. - Preliminary approval required. 
All applications shall be approved or disapproved by the Sheriff as a condition to action thereon and issuance of a license by Macon-Bibb County. If the Sheriff determines that the application is not in order, in view of the requirements of federal or state law or this Code and any Sheriff's Office investigation, Macon-Bibb County shall then notify the applicant of the reasons for not issuing the license to the applicant. 
Sec. 4-26. - Issuance of license to persons with prior convictions prohibited. 
No license under this chapter shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or conviction of two (2) or more misdemeanors of any state or of the United States or any local ordinance except traffic violations within two (2) years. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. 
Sec. 4-27. - Denial of license application; issuance. 
(a)  Macon-Bibb County may deny a license under this chapter on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure to meet state requirements for state license; 
(2)  Failure to pay required fees and taxes; 
(3)  Failure to provide required valid information, documents and the like; 
(4)  False or incomplete information in the application or attached documents; 
(5)  Failure to pass review by Office of the Sheriff; 
(6)  Improper residency of applicant, owner or registered agents; 
(7)  Prior convictions as provided in this chapter; or 
(8)  Failure to meet any other requirements in this chapter for a license of the class applied for. 
(b)  Otherwise, Macon-Bibb County may issue any license provided for in this article. 
Sec. 4-28. - Regulations. 
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth in an act of the general assembly known as the Revenue Tax Act to Legalize and Control Alcoholic Beverages and Liquors (approved February 3, 1938) and those prescribed by the state department of revenue. In addition, all businesses, the applicant for the license, the agent in charge of the business, and the owner thereof shall observe and obey the following regulations prescribed by the mayor and commission as provided in this article. 
Sec. 4-29. - Open to inspection. 
Any establishment holding a license issued under this chapter shall at all times, during the period allowable by law for operation of the business, be open to inspection by any officer of the Office of the Sheriff or any license inspector of Macon-Bibb County or to any person designated by the Sheriff or the Mayor. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, the premises may be inspected at this time by the designated persons in this section. 
Sec. 4-30. - Open containers in unlicensed premises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any establishment or any person employed by such establishment to permit any bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages to be opened or consumed by any person on the premises upon which the place of business is conducted and licensed under the chapter unless the establishment is licensed for consumption-on-the-premises of that particular classification of alcoholic beverage or has obtained a brown bagging permit under this chapter. 
Secs. 4-31—4-34. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-35. - Character. 
No person shall be granted an alcoholic beverage license unless the commission or its designee shall find that such person, the members of such firms, or the officers, directors and stockholders of such corporations, are of good moral character; and in no event shall any license be granted to any person where any of the individuals, or any of the corporate officers, directors or stockholders, as the case may be, have, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application, entered a plea of guilty, a plea of nolo contendere, or shall have suffered any conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude or involving alcohol control laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. Should any licensee, partner, officer, director or stockholder of a licensee corporation, after a license has been granted hereunder, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or to a violation of any of the laws of the state relating to alcohol, the license issued to such licensee shall stand revoked and cancelled. 
Sec. 4-36. - Other criteria declared to be in the public interest. 
In determining whether or not any license applied for hereunder shall be granted, in addition to all other provisions of this article, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character, and mental and physical capacity to conduct business. 
(2)  Whether or not applicant has violated any law or regulation relating to any alcoholic beverage business for which he may have previously held a license or in which he may have had an interest. 
(3)  Any manner in which the applicant conducted the alcoholic beverage business under any prior license. 
(4)  The distance of the premises on which the license is to be used from other premises or which a similar license has already been granted. In this connection, it is declared to be the policy of the commission that no license for the sale of distilled spirits, as authorized by this article, shall be granted to any applicant for any location which is within 1,500 feet of another location licensed for the sale of distilled spirits under the provisions of this article, provided however that renewals may be granted to any licensed establishments that were operating immediately prior to the commencement of the restructured government of Macon-Bibb County that are within 1,500 feet of another such location solely by virtue of changes in local government jurisdiction. The distance prescribed in this subsection shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest corner of the building housing the place of business for which the application is sought to the nearest corner of the building housing the previously licensed place of business. These distance limitations shall not apply, however, to any hotel, motel, or similar establishment; to any bona fide private club generally recognized as such and having bona fide membership requirements; nor to any restaurant or other food service establishment which has, as its primary function, the serving of food, and the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is made in connection with such food service; and provided that the place of business sought to be licensed otherwise meets the requirements of this article. Licenses for the sale of packaged beer or wine at retail and not consumption on the premises are also excepted from such distance limitations. 
(5)  Whether or not the applicant has previously had a license to sell alcoholic beverages of any description revoked. No person whose license has previously been revoked shall be issued a license except as provided in subsection 4-57(a). 
(6)  The extent of the financial interest of the applicant in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business. It is declared to be the policy of the commission that no person who has any financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business shall also have any financial interest in any retail alcoholic beverage business, and no financial aid or assistance to any licensee hereunder from any wholesaler or manufacturer of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted. 
(7)  The suitability of the premises for the conduct of an alcoholic beverage business, including its location, highway traffic problems and the difficulty or absence thereof of policing by law enforcement agencies. 
(8)  The sentiments of the community in which the proposed business would be operated so far as the same may be known to the commission. 
(9)  The character and reputation of the employees or proposed employees of the licensee. In this connection, it is declared to be the policy of the commission that no person shall be employed by licensee to sell or serve or participate in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages until such licensee has been issued a letter by the Sheriff's Office, indicating that such proposed employee has no record or reputation for violation of the alcohol control laws of the United States or of the state, and that he has no record or reputation for law violation generally. No person, not listed in the application filed by the licensee, shall be employed in connection with the alcoholic beverage business of the licensee until there shall have been conformity with this section, and the commission or its designee reserves the right to require that any employee or proposed employee shall be fingerprinted by the Sheriff's Office and an exhaustive search made with respect to any possible criminal record. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0041, § 1, 7-15-2014 ) 
Sec. 4-37. - Duty to report changes. 
Whenever there shall be a change in any of the facts reported to the commission or its designee in the application for a license after such license has been granted, it shall be the duty of the licensee, within three days after such change, to report the same to the tax commissioner in writing. 
Sec. 4-38. - Compliance with laws. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions of this article, licensees are also charged with responsibility for adhering to any other provisions of this Code, as well as the statutes and laws of the state and of the United States relating to the operation of their businesses. 
(b)  All applicants for licenses (in the case of pending applications) and all licensees (in the case of issued licenses) shall forthwith report to the commission or its designee any allegations of a violation of any state law or regulation or local ordinance or regulation when such allegations are made by the state department of revenue, a law enforcement officer, tax commissioner or a prosecuting attorney in this state which charges the applicant or the licensee, as the case may be, with the violation of any law or regulation which could or would, in the event of a finding of guilt, result in a suspension or revocation of such license or a denial of an application for such license. Similarly, an applicant or a licensee shall report to the commission or its designee all findings of such violations by any administrative agency, the tax commissioner or court which under this article could or would result in a revocation or suspension of a license. Failure to make reports required by this section shall itself be grounds for suspension or revocation of or the denial of an application for a license as the commission or its designee shall determine. 
Sec. 4-39. - Applicant subject to the terms of article. 
An applicant by filing an application for an alcoholic beverage license submits to all of the terms of this article, and agrees that he or she will furnish such evidence, oral or written, as the commission or its designee shall find to be reasonably necessary to the determination of the application, and such applicant further agrees by the filing of such application that if a license is issued thereon, he will comply with the terms of this article. 
Sec. 4-40. - Security cameras. 
(a)  Any establishment licensed to sell any alcoholic beverage, packaged to go, is hereby required to install security cameras of a type and number approved by the Office of the Sheriff. 
(b)  Such cameras meeting the requirements of this section must be capable of producing a retrievable image on film or tape that can be made a permanent record and that can be enlarged through projection or other means. Cameras meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Sheriff. 
(c)  Any establishment governed by subsection (a) having two (2) or more employees on duty at all times in the area where cash registers are located during hours of operation are hereby exempted from the provision of this section. 
Secs. 4-41—4-50. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-51. - Investigations. 
The commission or its designee shall have the right to make such inquiry or investigation as it may find to be reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. Such investigation may consist, among other actions, of calling licensees for examination under oath, obtaining evidence under oath from other persons; the procurement of documents and records including records of the licensee, and inspection and examination of records and documents from whatever source obtainable. 
Sec. 4-52. - Hearing. 
Any alcoholic beverage license issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the commission or its designee for cause shown, after a hearing of which at least three days' written notice shall be given to the licensee. Such notice shall specify the time, place and purpose of the hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held. At such hearing, the licensee shall have the right to appear in person and by attorney, and both Macon-Bibb County and the licensee shall have the right to present evidence under oath, introduce documentary evidence, cross-examine witnesses and generally present evidence of violation of this chapter or absence thereof. Such hearing may be conducted either by the commission or by one of its committees or by its designee. If the matter of the hearing is referred to a committee, the committee shall make its recommendations to the commission or its designee which shall act thereon. 
Sec. 4-53. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  The following shall be considered just cause for the suspension or revocation of a license issued under this article: 
(1)  The performance of any act prohibited by this chapter or the failure to perform any act required by this chapter as well as the violation of any law, state or federal, relating to the business of the licensee. If such act, omission or violation is done by an agent, servant, employee, or officer of the licensee, the lack of knowledge on the part of the licensee or the lack of authorization for such act or omission or violation shall be no defense. 
(2)  The entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the conviction of any licensee, partner, or any officer, director or stockholder of a licensee corporation with respect to a charge of violation of any of the laws of the United States or of the state relating to alcohol control, or any crime, whether a felony or not, involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Any other act or omission with respect to the operation of a business licensed hereunder which the commission or its designee shall find to be contrary to the public interest, or which shall render the licensee or the business location unfit for the continued operation of the business. 
(b)  In addition to the matters enumerated in subsection (a), the following shall be considered just cause for suspension or revocation of a license for retail sales of wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises: The occurrence on two or more occasions within any 12-month period of fights, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, breach of the peace, and other similar conduct whether the same be committed by the licensee or by customers or others. 
(c)  The Sheriff's Office shall notify the licensee in writing of the time, date, place, and nature of the violation, and the time and date when the licensee shall be afforded a hearing in municipal court with an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Proof of a criminal conviction for the violation shall not be required. The burden of proof shall be by the preponderance of the evidence. 
(d)  When a license has been revoked, no further license shall be issued under this chapter to the former licensee for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of revocation. 
(e)  Action taken by the municipal court under this section may be appealed by the licensee to the commission by serving notice to the mayor within ten (10) days following the date that the court took action. 
Sec. 4-54. - Basis of determination. 
The commission or its designee shall have the right for cause shown to revoke or to suspend an alcoholic beverage license for a period of time. Whether a license shall be suspended or revoked, and, if suspended, for what period of time, shall be determined by the commission or its designee after a consideration of the evidence in the cause and in accordance with the commission or its designee's finding as to the severity of the offense. 
Sec. 4-55. - Motion for rehearing. 
Any person aggrieved by act or omission of the commission or its designee with respect to its proceedings under this chapter including the suspension or revocation of a license shall have the right to move for a rehearing. Such motion for rehearing shall be filed within five days after the act or omission complained of, shall be in writing, and shall outline the manner in which such protestant believes that the commission or its designee erred. If the motion relates to a matter as to which evidence has already been heard, no additional evidence or argument shall be permitted on the motion for rehearing except after a grant thereof by the commission or its designee. If the matter of which complaint is made was not the subject of a prior hearing at which the protestant was permitted to be present and heard, the commission or its designee shall afford a hearing within ten days after the filing of the motion, of which reasonable notice shall be given to all parties known to the commission or its designee to be interested, at which persons interested in protesting or supporting the act or omission of the commission or its designee shall be allowed to appear, be represented, introduce oral and documentary evidence, and examine and cross-examine witnesses. 
Sec. 4-56. - Duration and renewal of license; transfers. 
(a)  Duration and renewal of licenses under this chapter shall be as for business licenses generally and no licensee shall have any vested right to the renewal of any local license. 
(b)  No licenses under this chapter may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this chapter. 
(c)  Upon the expiration of any alcoholic beverage license by its terms, licensees shall be required to apply for a new license for the succeeding calendar year as herein provided for new licenses; provided, however, that under the terms of section 4-23, advertisement of the application is waived, and provided, further, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit a licensee from applying for a new license for the succeeding calendar year within a period of 60 days next prior to the expiration of his then license. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverage licenses issued under this article shall not be transferable or assignable to new owners, but where there is a change in the ownership of a business, the new owner or owners shall file an application as for a new license as provided by this article. Changes of business interests from one party at interest named in the original application to another party at interest named in the original application and changes from one employee or manager of a social club to his successor shall not be deemed a transfer of a license. In each instance, however, the licensee shall notify the tax commissioner in writing of such change and make a complete disclosure of all of the facts in connection therewith, such notification to be made within three days from the date of such change. 
Sec. 4-57. - No new license to be issued after revocation. 
(a)  When a license has been revoked under the provisions of this division, no application for a new alcoholic beverage license for the same location will be received for a period of 12 months and no application for a new license from the licensee involved shall be received for a period of 24 months. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have or permit the possession of an opened container containing alcoholic beverages of any sort on the premises of a licensee whose license to sell alcoholic beverages has been suspended or revoked provided, however, that in the case of a suspension, this prohibition shall be in effect only for the period of the suspension. The phrase "opened container" shall include not only containers which have no caps, but those containers where the same has been uncapped whether or not the cap has been replaced. 
Secs. 4-58—4-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4-71. - Obscene, lewd or indecent entertainment on premises where alcoholic beverages are offered for sale. 
(a)  Findings; public purpose. Based on the demonstrated experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including but not limited to Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; Orange County, Florida; Indianapolis, Indiana; Los Angeles, California; Beaumont, Texas; Phoenix, Arizona; St. Paul, Minnesota; and Austin, Texas, which experience is found to be relevant to the problems that face Macon-Bibb County, Georgia and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented at the public safety committee meeting of the precursor governments to Macon-Bibb County by citizens, a number of whom are familiar with conditions resulting in other localities, and experts, commission takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country, particularly the problems of crime, blight, and deterioration which are brought about by alcohol and live nudity. 
It is the finding of the board that public nudity (either partial or total) under circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment" in conjunction with the sale of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. 
Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public indecency and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with the concentration of adult entertainment are depreciation of property values in neighborhoods surrounding nude bars or adult entertainment establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burdens on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of adult entertainment establishments in particular areas. 
Other negative effects which are found by the commission are the apparent connection of these establishments to organized crime and illegal drug sales; the potential spread of communicable diseases to law enforcement personnel who answer calls at adult establishments and to patrons of such establishments; and the potential proliferation of adult entertainment establishments after the initial siting of an adult entertainment establishment in a particular neighborhood. 
Macon-Bibb County therefore finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals and preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, and parks to prevent the adverse impact of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the board finds that the prohibition of live nude conduct in establishments licensed to serve alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare by furthering legitimate government interests, such as reducing criminal activity, protection against property devaluation and deterioration, and eliminating undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and allow and/or encourage nudity, and that such prohibition will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the meaning as set forth below unless otherwise required by context: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as more specifically defined in section 4-1 of this Code. 
(2)  Business establishment means a business within the Macon-Bibb County where alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises pursuant to a license issued by the governing body. 
(3)  Licensee means any person to whom a license for sale for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages has been issued by the governing body, including the officers and agents of the licensee. 
(4)  License means a license for sale for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages issued by the governing body. 
(5)  Live means any activity or entertainment which is carried on by actual living persons in the physical presence of the patrons. 
(6)  Live entertainment means entertainment for the benefit of patrons which is carried on in the actual physical presence of such patrons, including, but not limited to dancing. 
(7)  Mainstream performance house means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which regularly features live performances such as plays or concerts which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description or display or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities and where such depiction, if any, is only incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. 
(8)  Person means a human being. 
(9)  Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed, including the sidewalk serving area or outside, open air or patio-type serving area on the private property of an establishment, as defined in section 4-1 of this Code. 
(10)  Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; cleft of the buttocks; or any portion of the female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intercept a point above the top of the areola, or any portion of the areola, or any simulation thereof. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
b.  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(11)  Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
b.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
d.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; or 
e.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections a. through d. 
(c)  Conduct prohibited. The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within Macon-Bibb County: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person live, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas or where such person performs acts of specified sexual activities or acts which simulate specified sexual activity, as defined herein. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct proscribed in subsections (1) and (2). 
(4)  Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house or museum which derives less than twenty (20) percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any acts prohibited in subsection (c) and any such conduct will be a violation of this Code and shall be punishable in the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County as provided under this Code. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit any conduct prohibited in subsection (c) which he knows or has reasonable cause to know is taking place on the premises. Any such conduct by a licensee shall be a violation of this Code and shall be punishable in the municipal court as provided under this Code. Also, upon conviction, a licensee may have his license revoked or suspended as provided in this Code. 
Secs. 4-72—4-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 4-91. - Limitation on number of licenses. 
(a)  The number of licenses for retail package sales of distilled spirits which may be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and which may be in operation within the limits of Macon-Bibb County therein at any one time shall be based on and shall be limited to one license for each 2,800 or major fraction thereof of population in such area according to the latest United States Decennial Digest. 
(b)  The maximum number of retail distilled spirits licenses which may be issued and which may be in operation in Macon-Bibb County as is now provided shall in the future be issued or approved for transfer in location in such a manner that the number of licenses in each of the nine (9) commission districts of Macon-Bibb County shall be based on one (1) licensee for each two thousand eight hundred (2,800) or major fraction thereof of population in each commission district, according to the latest United States decennial census except as provided in subsection (c). In order to equitably administer this provision no new license shall be issued or existing license approved for transfer if located across a commission district line in the future which causes the total number of licenses in any one (1) commission to exceed a ratio of one (1) license for each two thousand eight hundred (2,800) or major fraction thereof of population in each district according to the latest census. However, in no event shall the total number of licenses issued in Macon-Bibb County exceed the maximum number provided for in subsection (a). 
(c)  Valid licenses for retail package sales of distilled spirits active immediately preceding the commencement of the government of Macon-Bibb County issued by either Bibb County or the City of Macon may be renewed in accordance with this Chapter and subsequently thereafter, assuming all other applicable legal conditions are met, notwithstanding the limits of subsection (b). 
(d)  New complete applications for licenses for retail package sales of distilled spirits shall be given priority in the order in which they are received. In the event that there are multiple new simultaneously submitted valid applications for retail package sales of distilled spirits within a particular commission district such that if all were granted the total number of licensed establishments would exceed the limits imposed by subsection (b), priority shall be granted first to renewing valid actively licensed establishments and then to new applicants in priority based on descending order beginning with the application whose proposed premises is the greater distance from the nearest other existing establishment within the same commission district. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to allow new applications to be granted in such a way as to exceed the limits of subsection (b). 
(e)  It is the policy of the commission of Macon-Bibb County that licensed establishments for the retail package sale of distilled spirits be regulated in such a way as to avoid their over-accumulation within any one commission district and within Macon-Bibb County as a whole. 
(f)  The limitations imposed by this section shall be in addition to the distance limitations imposed by Section 4-36. 
Sec. 4-92. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4-93. - Mobile home, tourist court or establishment operating self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps. 
(a)  No license shall be issued for the operation of any distilled spirits business on the premises of a mobile home court or tourist court. 
(b)  No license shall be issued for the operation of any distilled spirits business on the premises of any establishment licensed and operating self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps. 
Sec. 4-94. - When sales permitted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or person employed by a licensee for retail package sales of distilled spirits, to sell, offer for sale, transfer, or offer to transfer to others, any distilled spirits at any time on Sunday before the hour of 12:30 p.m. or after the hour of 11:30 p.m. or at any time before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 9:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, and before the hour of 9:00 a.m. and after the hour of 10:30 p.m. on Friday and Saturday of each week; and it shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive, or offer to receive from such a licensee, or a person employed by such a licensee, any distilled spirits at any time on Sunday before the hour of 12:30 p.m. or after the hour of 11:30 p.m. or before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 9:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday, and before the hour of 9:00 a.m. and after the hour of 10:30 p.m. on Friday and Saturday of each week. 
(b)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, and subject to the provisions of subsection (a), the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on elections days as the same are defined in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that it shall nonetheless be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
Sec. 4-95. - Price tags and labels. 
Licensees shall plainly indicate the price of all distilled spirits exposed for sale by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below as such containers are placed. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, custody or control any distilled spirits for retail sale unless the container shall have firmly affixed thereto a label on which there is stated in plain words or figures, the true alcoholic content by volume of the alcoholic beverage. 
Sec. 4-96. - Interest in other business prohibited. 
No person holding a license for retail package sales of distilled spirits hereunder shall have or own any interest, direct or indirect, in any other such place of business, nor shall any person become a stockholder in any other such place of business location licensed hereunder, each connection as stockholder, officer, owner, partner, director or otherwise being deemed an interest for the purposes of this section; provided, however, that an interest which an executor, administrator or trustee of the estate of a deceased person holds in his or her representative capacity shall not be deemed such an interest as is prohibited by this section. No person shall be issued a license hereunder where the applicant, or the spouse of the applicant (in the case of an individual), or where a partner, or the spouse of a partner (in the case of a partnership), or where any officer, director or stockholder, or the spouse of any officer, director or stockholder (in the case of a corporate applicant) holds a license for the sale of distilled spirits issued by any governing authority whatsoever. No person shall control or assume to control more than one business of the type licensed hereunder (whether the license is issued by Macon-Bibb County or any other authority); nor shall any licensee permit any such control or assumption of control. 
Sec. 4-97. - Distances from certain uses. 
No license shall be issued under this article where the location of a business is within 100 yards of any of the following: a church, an alcoholic treatment center, or a public library, or a Macon-Bibb County Housing Authority property. No license shall be issued under this article where the location of a business is within 200 yards of any of the following: a school ground, school building, educational building, or college campus. The distance prescribed in this section shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest corner of the building housing the place of business to the nearest corner of the building housing such church, library or branch, or to the nearest corner of the school ground or college campus. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0031, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-98. - Posting of license number. 
Every licensee shall have printed on the front of the licensed premises the name of the licensee, together with the inscription: 
"Macon-Bibb County Retail Package Sales of Distilled Spirits License No. ____________ " 
in letters not less than four (4) inches in height. 
Sec. 4-99. - Posting of signs prohibiting sales to minors. 
The holder of a retail distilled spirits license shall post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises a sign printed in letters at least four (4) inches high reading: 
Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Minors Prohibited. 
Sec. 4-100. - Limitation on the sale or transfer of business and license. 
It shall be unlawful and shall call for immediate revocation of all licenses involved, both of seller and purchaser, for any retail distilled spirits licensee to purchase the business or license of any other such licensee and attempt to operate the purchased business in addition to the business operated by the purchaser. If a bona fide sale of any license or business under this article to persons other than other such licensed dealers, full disclosure of the persons involved, the purchase price, and any other information as is required by this Code for a new license shall be filed with the commission or its designee as a condition to any sale. In addition to the revocation of the license of any person violating the provisions of this section, that person shall be subject to punishment in the municipal court as for other violations of this Code. 
Secs. 4-101—4-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES OF WINE AND MALT BEVERAGES AND RETAIL SALES OF WINE AND ANY MALT BEVERAGES FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 4-121. - Zoning. 
No license for retail sales of wine and malt beverages shall be issued unless the applicant's place of business is located within an area that is zoned by the Macon-Bibb County planning and zoning commission as allowing such use as a permitted or conditional use, including but not limited to: a C-1 neighborhood commercial district, a C-2 or C-3 (CBD) general commercial district or a C-4 highway commercial district as the districts may now or hereafter be constituted by the planning and zoning commission. A license for retail sales of wine and malt beverages may be issued to an applicant whose place of business is located in an A-agricultural district provided that the licensee shall be authorized to sell packaged beer or wine only for consumption off the premises where sold and provided the applicant is the holder of a currently valid permit from the planning and zoning commission issued pursuant to the provisions of the comprehensive land development resolution for the location for which the license is sought. 
Sec. 4-122. - Distances from certain uses. 
(a)  No license for retail sales of wine and malt beverages packaged to go shall be issued under this article where the location of the business is within 100 yards of any of the following: a school ground, school building, or college campus, an alcoholic treatment center, or a public library or any branch thereof or a Macon-Bibb County Housing Authority property. The distance prescribed in this section shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest corner of the building housing the place of business to the nearest corner of the building housing such library or branch, or to the nearest corner of the school ground or college campus. 
(b)  No license for retail sales of wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises shall be issued under this article where the location of the business is within 100 yards of a state or county owned and operated alcohol treatment center or a housing authority property as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(c)  When a license is issued for a location which conforms to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section at the time of issuance, licenses may be continued to be issued or renewed for the same location thereafter, notwithstanding the fact that adjacent or nearby property is subsequently devoted to a use which would have precluded issuance of a license in the first instance. 
(d)  Subsection (a) shall not prohibit grocery stores licensed for the sale of only wine and malt beverages for consumption off the premises from selling wine and malt beverages within 100 yards of any college campus. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0002, § 1, 16-2015 ; Ord. No. O-15-0031, § 2, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-123. - Where sales permitted. 
The point of sale for packaged malt beverages or wine not to be consumed on the premises shall be compactly placed in the rear portion of the place of business which is defined as being the portion of the sales area in the place of business furthest away from the main entrance. In no event shall displays of malt beverages or wine be permitted upon the front or in the windows of places of business. 
Sec. 4-124. - Rules adopted. 
(a)  Retail sales of wine and malt beverages fall into one of two categories: 
(1)  Retail package sales of wine and malt beverages. 
(2)  Retail sales of wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  An applicant for a license for retail sales of wine and malt beverages shall specify in his or her application for a license whether he or she wishes to engage in package sales of wine and malt beverages or sales of wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises. All licensees shall comply strictly with the varying rules and regulations relating to types of sales of malt beverages and wine hereinafter expressed. Where an applicant desires to sell packaged malt beverages and wine and for consumption on the premises, he or she shall file two applications. The commission or its designee will act upon each application separately. No person shall sell beer or wine or both either packaged or for consumption on the premises unless the application for such sale has been granted by the commission or its designee. 
Sec. 4-125. - Hours of sales; sales on election days; Sunday sales. 
(a)  No licensee shall sell or offer for sale any malt beverages or wine at any time on Sunday before the hour of 12:30 p.m. or after the hour of 11:30 p.m., nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on other days of the week. 
(b)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, and subject to the provisions of subsection (a), the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be permitted on election days as the same are defined in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that it shall nonetheless be unlawful for any person to sell malt beverages and wine within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (a), insofar as they prohibit sales between midnight on Saturday and 2:00 a.m. on Sunday, shall not apply to sales or consumption on the premises by licensees who qualify under the provisions of section 4-143 to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises. In such case, the hours of subsection (c) of Section 4-143 will control as to hours of sale of wine and malt beverages. 
Sec. 4-126. - Sales in connection with food service. 
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, a license for retail sales of wine and malt beverage may be issued to any hotel, motel, or similar establishment, to any bona fide private club generally recognized as such and having bona fide membership requirements, or to any bona fide restaurant or other bona fide food service establishment, regardless of the distance between any such place and a church, library, branch, school ground or college campus, where such place petitions to sell malt beverages or wine only in connection with sales of food therein. 
Sec. 4-127. - Wine tasting. 
(a)  A wine-tasting permit for purposes of this section shall be limited to a person possessing a current license from Macon-Bibb County for the retail sale of wine by the package and a valid current wine license from the state. 
(b)  No wine tasting shall be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in the unbroken container. Any wine tasting occurring on the premises of a business possessing a license to sell wine by the package shall be limited to an area that is separated from the retail area of the premises by walls or other partitions that prohibit pedestrian traffic through the wine tasting area. 
(c)  An eligible licensee may petition Macon-Bibb County for a wine-tasting permit provided it meets all requirements of the alcohol beverage ordinance and presently maintains a valid license for the sale of wine by the package issued by Macon-Bibb County. A wine-tasting permit shall allow the permittee to offer or sell wine samples in connection with an instructional or educational promotion. A wine-tasting permit is intended to allow such activity on a limited basis and shall not be a part of the core operations of such establishment or occur on a daily basis. 
(d)  A wine-tasting permittee shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations of Macon-Bibb County and state, including rule 560-2-5-.05 of the state department of revenue, alcohol and tobacco division, and shall be subject to permit revocation for violation thereof. 
(e)  Said wine-tasting permit need only be applied for once and shall automatically renew when said license to sell wine by the package is renewed. Provided, however, that Macon-Bibb County may revoke or suspend such wine-tasting permit and/or impose such conditions on its operation at the commission or its designee's discretion for violation of this Code or in furtherance of the health, safety and welfare of the local government's inhabitants. 
(f)  Wine tastings shall only be conducted during the hours established for the sale of alcoholic beverages consumed on premises as established in this chapter. 
(g)  Holders of a wine-tasting permit shall not allow any person to take an open container of alcoholic beverages from the designated wine-tasting area or from the licensed premises. 
Sec. 4-128. - Growlers. 
The sale of growlers in compliance with this ordinance is authorized for establishments licensed under ordinance section 4-124(a)(1) for the retail package sales of wine and malt beverages. The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this ordinance. The term "growler" means a glass bottle not to exceed sixty-four ounces (64 oz.) that is filled by a licensee or employee of the licensed establishment with beer from a keg. Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. Samples of tap beers may be made available if the licensee is providing growlers in compliance with this ordinance, but shall not exceed one ounce (1 oz.) nor shall any one (1) individual be offered more than three (3) samples within a twenty-four hour (24 hr.) period. An establishment duly licensed for the sale of growlers may also be authorized to sell wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises, so long as said establishment meets the requirements of Macon-Bibb County and obtains a second on-premises license from the County in accordance with Chapter 4, Article V, Section 124 of the Code of Ordinances of Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0042, § 1, 8-5-2014 ) 
Secs. 4-129—4-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RETAIL SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 4-141. - Zoning district. 
No license for retail sales of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be issued unless the applicant's place of business is within the district in which, under the rules and regulations of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission, the sale of distilled spirits would otherwise be allowed either as a permitted or as a conditional use. 
Sec. 4-142. - Distances from certain uses; when distances not applicable. 
No license for the retail sales of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be issued where the location of the business is 100 yards of a state or county owned and operated alcohol treatment center or a housing authority property as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0011, § 1, 3-3-2015 ; Ord. No. O-15-0031, § 3, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 4-143. - When sales permitted. 
(a)  Hours; holidays. No person shall engage in the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. the following Monday and between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on other days of the week; not at any time on Christmas Day, or when sales are prohibited by state law. Sales outside the designated hours are prohibited. 
(b)  Election days. Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, and subject to the provisions of subsection (a), the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be permitted on election days as the same are defined in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; provided, however, that it shall nonetheless be unlawful for any person to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(c)  Sunday sales. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), any licensee authorized by this article to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals at the licensed premises, and any such licensee operating an establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging may apply for a Sunday sales permit which, if granted, will authorize the licensee to sell and serve distilled spirits for consumption on the premises on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight, local time, under the following conditions: 
(1)  No license will be granted to an establishment which has not been licensed to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises for six consecutive months immediately preceding the filing of the application. However, this requirement shall not apply to an applicant that has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the tax commission its ability to comply with the conditions of a Sunday sales permit by having a proven record of operating, in another location or locations, an establishment that has been operated in a manner substantially similar to the establishment for which the Sunday sales permit is sought. Such an applicant shall further be required to post a bond in the penal sum of $5,000.00, which bond shall be subject to forfeiture by the tax commissioner should applicant fail to comply with the terms of this section during the first six months of operation. 
(2)  No application will be approved for any applicant unless the applicant holds a currently valid certificate of zoning compliance issued by the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(3)  Sales of distilled spirits for consumption off the premises or for consumption outside the hours of permitted operation shall constitute a violation of the conditions of the grant of the license. 
(4)  Licenses will be granted only to those applicants who own or operate a bona fide full-service restaurant which is defined as one which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverages or wines for consumption on the premises under this Code; where meals are served with substantial entrees selected by the patron from a full menu are served; which has adequate facilities and sufficient employees for cooking or preparing and serving such meals for consumption at tables and dining rooms on the premises; which derives at least 50 percent of its gross sales from the sale of such meals prepared, served, and consumed on the premises or which otherwise qualifies by the rental of rooms; and where the kitchens, dining rooms and related service facilities have been approved by the Macon-Bibb County Health Department and that department has issued a permit. 
(5)  At the time of the application, the applicant shall submit to the commission or its designee a certification by a certified public accountant that the applicant meets the requirements set out in this subsection. The certification shall be based upon an actual review of the applicant's total gross sales for the licensed location during the 12 months preceding which ends on the last day on the month immediately preceding the filing of the application for permit under this section. If the applicant has been in business for more than 6 months, but less than 12 months, then such certification shall be for the time the applicant has been in business, annualized. If at the time of the application the applicant has not received the required certification due to time constraints or other circumstances, then pending receipt of such certification, the applicant may submit other documentation satisfactory to the commission or its designee that the applicant meets the requirements of this subsection. 
(6)  The commission or its designee is authorized to conduct an inspection of the books of the applicant for the purpose of verifying the facts set forth in this certificate. 
(7)  Upon determination by the commission or its designee that the applicant has met the requirements of this subsection, he or she shall forward the application to the tax commissioner who shall then issue the permit if the applicant is otherwise qualified, which shall be permanently and prominently displayed by the licensee in his place of business. 
(8)  When the tax commissioner has issued the license under the provisions hereof, he shall cause appropriate notification to be made to the office of the sheriff of the issuance of the license. 
(9)  Licenses issued under the provisions of this subsection shall be valid from the date of issue through December 31st, next ensuing unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(10)  No more than 60 days prior to the expiration of the license, the licensee desiring to renew the permit shall file a new application therefor and furnish current information in like fashion as a new application. 
(11)  The commission or its designee may at any time cause an interim reverification of eligibility prior to the expiration of a Sunday sales permit and if the licensee is found, as a result of such inquiry, to be no longer qualified under the provisions of this section to hold a Sunday sales permit, the permit shall be revoked. 
(12)  If the basic license of the licensee to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises is suspended or revoked, the permit for Sunday sales shall automatically be suspended or revoked as the case may be. 
(13)  If any licensee shall be determined to have furnished materially false information in the application for a Sunday sales permit or in the application for a license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises, the commission or its designee reserves the right to suspend or revoke the Sunday sales permit and, in addition, to take such action as it shall deem appropriate under all of the circumstances with respect to the basic license. 
(14)  If the commission or its designee shall determine that there appears to be reasonable grounds for suspending or revoking a Sunday sales permit, it shall give reasonable notice, stating such grounds as are known to the board and the licensee shall have ten days after the giving of such notice within which to file with the commission or its designee documents opposing or contesting such grounds and the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing thereon to the commission or its designee which, after such hearing, may take such action as shall be just and proper. 
(15)  Licensees shall be held accountable for compliance with the conditions, terms and restrictions of this subsection and shall likewise be responsible for the maintenance of order in and about the license premises. Licensees shall, in addition, ensure that customers do not engage in loud, boisterous, and noisome conduct amounting to a nuisance outside the building located on the licensed premises. Licensee shall likewise maintain adequate accounting records kept, if possible, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, but in any event, sufficient to enable the commission, or its designee, to determine with accuracy the relative percentage of sales of food and rooms. 
(16)  The provisions of section 4-121 through 4-126, and sections 4-141 and 4-142 are incorporated herein. 
(17)  The provisions of section 4-56 relating to the time which must elapse from the date of revocation of a license until a new one can be issued are incorporated herein by reference. 
(18)  No license for Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages will be issued hereunder or remain in effect unless the licensee also holds a currently valid license for retail sales of wine and beer consumed on the premises or a currently valid license for the retail sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises, either or both, and the revocation or suspension of any such license shall automatically result in a revocation or suspension of any authorization for Sunday sales. 
Sec. 4-144. - Times and hours for sale, purchase, drinking, etc. exceptions in years when January first falls on Monday. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other ordinance or provision to the contrary, whenever January first of any year falls on a Monday, it shall not be unlawful for the licensee or his employee, authorized to sell beer, malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits by the drink, to sell and transfer same between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. on such Monday morning, nor shall it be unlawful for any adult person to purchase and receive from such a licensee, or person employed by such a licensee, such alcoholic beverages between such hours. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other ordinance or provision to the contrary, whenever January first of any year falls on a Monday, it shall not be unlawful for any person licensed for retail sale of beer, wine, or distilled spirits by the drink, to permit opened containers or bottles containing beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages, on the licensed premises at any time between 7:00 p.m. on the previous Sunday evening and 2:00 a.m. on such Monday morning, nor shall it be unlawful for any adult person to have such an opened container containing such substances in such place of business during such hours. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other ordinance or provision to the contrary, whenever January first in any year falls on a Monday, it shall not be unlawful for any owner of a place of business licensed for the retail sale of beer, wine and distilled spirits by the drink to permit any adult person to drink any whiskey, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages upon the business premises between the hours of 7:00 p.m. on the previous Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on such Monday morning, nor shall it be unlawful for any adult person to drink any whiskey, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages in such business establishments between such hours. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other ordinance or provision to the contrary, whenever January first of any year falls on a Monday, the practice commonly known as "brown bagging," that is, the bringing of liquor by patrons to business establishments licensed for the retail sale of beer, wine and distilled spirits by the drink for the purpose of drinking such liquor at any such establishments, shall not be unlawful between the hours of 7:00 p.m. on the previous Sunday evening and 12:01 a.m. on such Monday morning. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other ordinance or provisions to the contrary, whenever January first of any year falls on a Monday, the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages at the coliseum and auditorium is hereby authorized between the hours of 12:30 p.m. on New Year's Eve and 2:00 a.m. on January first. 
Secs. 4-145—4-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCISE TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - BOOKS AND RECORDS 

Sec. 4-161. - Inspection and audit of books and records. 
The books and records of all wholesalers selling or delivering any wine, malt beverages and packaged distilled spirits to retailers made subject to this tax and the books and records of all retailers made subject to this tax shall be open for inspection and audit by the agents of Macon-Bibb County, to ensure compliance herewith and it shall be unlawful for any person to deny any authorized agent of Macon-Bibb County reasonable access to such books and records. Such books and records shall, for wholesalers, contain information showing deliveries of any of such beverages to persons upon whom the tax hereby assessed and levied is imposed separately, and the monthly reports of such wholesalers shall show, separately, deliveries made to each retailer, separately, so that sales of any of the beverages described in this section may be identified with respect to each retailer upon whom the tax is imposed by this section. 
Secs. 4-162—4-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 4-181. - Levy. 
There is hereby imposed upon and levied against every licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes presently levied by the state as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
Sec. 4-182. - Payment. 
The excise tax levied in this division and imposed upon licensed wholesalers is levied and imposed with respect to malt beverages sold or distributed by such wholesalers in Macon-Bibb County to retailers doing business outside the corporate limits of municipalities in said Macon-Bibb County. The excise tax provided for in this division shall be paid by such licensed wholesale dealers to Macon-Bibb County on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of by such licensed wholesale dealer. Every licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax imposed by this section shall file a monthly report itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, for the month. Each wholesale licensee shall report and remit to Macon-Bibb County, on the tenth of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such beer and malt beverages are sold or disposed of, the tax imposed by this division. 
Secs. 4-183—4-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PACKAGED DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 4-201. - Levy. 
There is hereby levied upon every dealer at retail of packaged distilled spirits a tax of $0.22 per liter of distilled spirits, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter delivered by wholesalers to retailers whose place of business is located within the limits of Macon-Bibb County outside the corporate limits of municipalities therein. 
Sec. 4-202. - Payment. 
(a)  The taxes levied pursuant to this division shall be paid by the retailers upon whom such tax is levied to wholesalers at the time of delivery of the packaged distilled spirits to the retailer. It shall be the duty of each such retailer to pay and it shall be the duty of each wholesaler to collect the tax hereby levied, and wholesalers shall remit such taxes to Macon-Bibb County on or before the tenth of the month for all of such taxes paid by such retailers and collected by such wholesalers during the preceding calendar month. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any retail seller of packaged distilled spirits to receive and retain any beverages unless he shall have paid the tax levied in this division. It shall likewise be unlawful for any wholesaler of packaged distilled spirits to deliver any such beverage to any retailer thereof unless he shall concurrently with such delivery, collect the tax imposed hereby. It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler of such beverages to fail to remit, when due, the taxes levied hereby and collected by any such wholesaler. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person engaged as a retailer of such beverages to receive any of the same from another retailer of such beverages, unless the tax imposed and levied in this division has been paid. It shall further be unlawful for any retailer of such beverages from another retail store, whether such other store shall be owned by the receiving retailer or not, and irrespective of the location of such other store, unless the tax imposed in this division shall have been paid. 
Secs. 4-203—4-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WINE 

Sec. 4-211. - Levy. 
Retail dealers in wine shall pay a tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter on all wine delivered by wholesalers to retailers whose place of business is located within the limits of Macon-Bibb County outside the corporate limits of municipalities therein. Such a tax is hereby levied upon each such retailer. The payment of such tax is made a condition precedent to the sale of wine, and no person shall sell any wine without paying the tax hereby levied. 
Sec. 4-212. - Payment. 
The tax hereby levied upon dealers at retail in wine shall be paid and collected in the same manner as the tax levied upon retail dealers of packaged distilled spirits as prescribed in section 4-202, the terms of which are incorporated in this division and made a part of this section for all purposes. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CATERER 

Sec. 4-213. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Authorized catered function means an authorized catered function as that term is defined and used in O.C.G.A. § 3-11-2 et seq. 
Drink means any distilled spirits beverage served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares and/or serves food at any remote location, including, but not limited to, wedding receptions, graduations, anniversaries, or other functions by whatever name called, and who has a valid permit issued by the health department under the terms of this Code to do so. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall mean any retail dealer who has been licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and O.C.G.A. § 3-11-2. 
Licensee shall mean the person to whom a license is issued, or in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of such partnership or corporation. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any alcoholic beverage by the drink. 
Special event means a group activity including, but not limited to, a performance, meeting, assembly, contest, exhibit, ceremony, parade, athletic competition, reading, or picnic involving more than 20 people or a group activity involving less than 20 people for which specific space is requested to be reserved, as well as an authorized catered function, as defined above. 
Sec. 4-214. - Authority to sell; license required; separate application required for each place of business. 
Alcoholic beverage caterers may operate in Macon-Bibb County only under a license granted by Macon-Bibb County on the terms and conditions provided in this article. Wine, beer and malt beverages and distilled spirits shall not be distributed, sold, or possessed for the purpose of sale without a license granted by Macon-Bibb County. A separate application must be made and a separate alcoholic beverage caterer license must be obtained for each place of business. 
Sec. 4-215. - Eligibility for license; application; fee. 
(a)  Any holder of a Macon-Bibb County license authorizing the licensee to sell beer, malt beverages, or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises may apply for an off premises license as an alcoholic beverage caterer to sell or distribute beer, malt beverages, or wine by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function or special event, and at the location of that authorized catered function or special event. 
(b)  Any holder of a Macon-Bibb County license authorizing the licensee to sell beer, malt beverages, or wine by the package for consumption off the premises may apply for an off premises license as an alcoholic beverage caterer to sell or distribute beer, malt beverages, or wine by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function or special event, and at the location of that authorized catered function or special event. 
(c)  Any holder of a Macon-Bibb County license authorizing the licensee to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises may apply for an off premises license as an alcoholic beverage caterer to sell or distribute distilled spirits by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function or special event, and at the location of that authorized catered function or special event. 
(d)  Any holder of a Macon-Bibb County license authorizing the licensee to sell distilled spirits by the package for consumption off the premises may apply for an off premises license as an alcoholic beverage caterer to sell or distribute beer, malt beverages, or wine by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function or special event, and at the location of that authorized catered function or special event. 
(e)  Each application for a license as an alcoholic beverage caterer shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, as follows: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage caterers selling wine to be consumed on the premises of and at the location of the authorized catered function or special event, $200.00 per year. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverage caterers selling beer and malt beverages to be consumed on the premises of and at the location of the authorized catered function or special event, $200.00 per year. 
(3)  Alcoholic beverage caterers selling distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises of and at the location of the authorized catered function or special event, $250.00 per year. 
(4)  A combination license for alcoholic beverage caterers selling wine and beer and malt beverages to be consumed on the premises of and at the location of the authorized catered function or special event, $300.00 per year. 
(5)  A combination license for alcoholic beverage caterers selling wine, beer and malt beverages and distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises of and at the location of the authorized catered function or special event, $350.00 per year. 
Sec. 4-216. - Event permits; alcoholic beverage license required. 
(a)  Any alcoholic beverage caterer who possesses a valid license from Macon-Bibb County or another county or municipality in the state and possesses a valid license from the state to sell malt beverages, wine, or distilled spirits by the drink or by the package at a fixed location within Macon-Bibb County may be issued by Macon-Bibb County an event permit authorizing such sales off premises and in connection with an authorized catered event or function or special event, and at the location of that authorized catered function or special event. 
(b)  A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell only that beverage which is authorized by the alcoholic beverage license in effect. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, only malt beverages can be sold by the alcoholic beverage caterer at an authorized catered event or function or special event. 
(c)  Any food caterer, as defined herein, operating within Macon-Bibb County shall apply for an alcoholic beverage caterer's license in order to distribute or sell any distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages or wine off the premises of the food caterer's business. This does not affect any requirements that the food caterer have a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises of the food caterer's business. 
(d)  An alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off premises event permit to the tax commissioner. The license may be applied for at the same time as the appropriate alcoholic beverages license(s). 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off premises and in connection with an authorized catered event or function or special event without first having obtained a license as provided herein. 
Sec. 4-217. - Event permit required; application and fee; expiration. 
(a)  Exclusive of the license required herein, each alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to sell or distribute distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, or wine at an authorized catered event or function or special event within Macon-Bibb County must apply for an event permit. The application for the event permit shall include the name of the caterer and the alcoholic beverage caterer's license number; the date, location, time and name of the event; and the quantity of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or function or special event. 
(b)  When an alcoholic beverage caterer is domiciled outside Macon-Bibb County and is currently licensed by the local government authority in which it is domiciled as an alcoholic beverage caterer, a Macon-Bibb County license shall not be required in order for the alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine at an authorized catered function or special event inside Macon-Bibb County. However, for such alcoholic beverage caterers, there shall be an event permit fee of $100.00 charged by Macon-Bibb County and each application for an event permit as an alcoholic beverage caterer shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the event permit fee. In addition, taxes shall be levied on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into Macon-Bibb County by the caterer and they shall be levied and paid in full with the application for an event permit. A copy of the license issued by the local government authority where the alcoholic beverage caterer is domiciled shall be attached to the event application. 
(c)  The event permit fee shall be $50.00 for those caterers located within the territorial boundaries of Macon-Bibb County. Each application for an event permit as an alcoholic beverage caterer shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the event permit fee. 
(d)  The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle at all times while transporting the alcoholic beverages to the authorized catered event or function or "special event;" it also shall be maintained at the site of the catered event and available for inspection at the event or function during the duration of such event or authorized catered function or special event. 
(e)  It is unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages off premises, except as authorized by the event permit. 
(f)  The event permit will be valid for the length of the authorized catered event or authorized catered function or special event or as approved by Macon-Bibb County. After expiration of the event, the alcoholic beverage caterer shall apply for a new event permit in the same manner as the original event permit. 
Sec. 4-218. - Duration and renewal of license. 
Any license issued hereunder shall automatically expire on December 31st of the year of issuance. Each licensee shall make an application for a new license for the succeeding calendar year as provided herein for new licenses; provided, however that advertisement of the application is waived in accordance with section 4-23, and provided, further, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit a licensee from applying for a new license for the succeeding calendar year within a period of 60 days next prior to the date of expiration of his current license. 
Sec. 4-219. - Restrictions. 
(a)  No person under the age of 21 shall be employed by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer, who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages as prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverage caterer may distribute or sell alcoholic beverages during any hours prohibited in the state or Macon-Bibb County or on any days prohibited in the state or Macon-Bibb County. 
Secs. 4-220—4-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BREWPUB[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, adopted June 7, 2016 , set out provisions for use herein as art. IX, and renumbered existing art. IX as art. X. See editor's note at art. IX for more information. 

Sec. 4-300. - Brewpub license. 
A brewpub license shall only issue in conjunction with a license under ordinance Section 4-124(a)(2) for the retail sales of wine and any malt beverages for consumption on the premises and authorizes the holder to: 
(a)  Manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 10,000 barrels of malt beverages in a calendar year solely for retail sale directly to consumers; 
(b)  Operate a bona fide food service establishment which may offer for sale for consumption on the premises any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter, including wine, distilled spirits, and malt beverages, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler; 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph, sell up to a maximum of 5,000 barrels annually of malt beverages manufactured on the premises to licensed wholesalers; and 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, sell growlers of malt beverages manufactured on the licensed premises directly to consumers, and sell growlers of wine and malt-beverages produced by other manufacturers, provided that the products of other manufacturers are purchased from a licensed wholesaler. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, 6-7-2016 ) 
Secs. 4-301—4-309. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MISCELLANEOUS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, adopted June 7, 2016 , set out provisions for use herein as art. IX, § 4-300 and renumbered existing art. IX as art. X. At the editor's discretion the section numbering was also amended from §§ 4-300—4-307 to §§ 4-310—4-317, to prevent duplicate numbering. 

Sec. 4-310. - Alcoholic beverages in the Centreplex. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverages in the auditorium/coliseum/convention center (Centreplex). This prohibition shall not apply when alcoholic beverages are sold or furnished by the Centreplex or when a non-profit organization, pursuant to a lease agreement, wishes to furnish alcoholic beverages free of any type of charge to participants in the event for which the space is leased or to allow such participants to furnish their own alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  The sale and consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages at the Centreplex on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and midnight is hereby authorized; provided, however, this authorization shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the authorization required in subsection (a). 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, 6-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-311. - Sale and consumption on the premises of beer and malt beverages at Luther Williams Field on Sunday. 
The sale and consumption on the premises of beer and malt beverages at Luther Williams Field on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and midnight is hereby authorized. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale or consumption on the premises of beer or malt beverages at Luther Williams Field at any other time. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, 6-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-312. - Brown bagging. 
Every establishment obtaining a brown bagging permit and allowing brown bagging at such establishment shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  No bottle or other container of distilled spirits shall be in the possession or under the control of any owner, licensee, employee or agent of such establishment at any time. Possession of such bottle or container of distilled spirits shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this provision. Bottles or other containers of distilled spirits must remain in the possession of, or under the control of, the person bringing such bottle or container into an establishment permitting brown bagging. 
(2)  The above regulation shall not apply during legal hours for sale to those establishments holding brown bagging permits which also hold a distilled spirits consumption-on-the-premises license. 
(3)  Establishments holding brown bagging permits shall not deny or restrict the privilege of brown bagging by patrons or impose any admission charge, cover charge or minimum charge on brown bagging patrons that is not also imposed upon all other patrons during the legal hours for sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, 6-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-313. - Possession of alcoholic beverages in certain areas prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, to drink or have in his possession an open container of alcoholic beverage within the property boundary lines of any retail establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages only packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises, or within 200 feet of the entrance of any such licensed establishment, whichever is less. 
(b)  Unless otherwise excepted in subsection (c), it shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in his or her possession an open container of alcoholic beverage on any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk, park or picnic area. 
(c)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons in vehicles on any public street, highway, or alley within Macon-Bibb County; 
(2)  Sidewalk cafes licensed under the business regulations of this Code; 
(3)  Any function held within Macon-Bibb County which is sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit civic organization holding a one-day permit to sell alcoholic beverages issued by the revenue commissioner of the state and/or Macon-Bibb County; or 
(4)  Any other function held within Macon-Bibb County if written permission is granted by the mayor and alcoholic beverages are only to be given away and not sold. 
(5)  Functions held within certain areas of the downtown business area every Friday of each month between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. and sponsored by a bona fide non-profit civic organization, but only where alcohol is obtained from a participating business and is contained in and consumed from an approved container and where the person consuming or possessing such alcohol is wearing an approved wristband. 
a.  For purposes of this subpart, the "downtown business area" is defined as that area enclosed by Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd., from Walnut Street to Fifth Street; Fifth Street, from Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd. To Poplar Street; Poplar Street, from Fifth Street to First Street; First Street, from Poplar Street to Walnut Street; Walnut Street, from First Street to Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd., inclusively. 
b.  For purposes of this subpart, "participating businesses" shall be those businesses located in the downtown business area choosing to participate in each Friday event, who are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises and who comply with the guidelines of the sponsoring civic organization for each Friday event. 
c.  For purposes of this subpart, "approved container" and an "approved wristband" shall be a uniformly colored and designated plastic cup and wristband, respectively, each approved by the sponsoring organization and obtained from a participating business on the day of each Friday event. 
d.  Any participating business that allows patrons to exit their premises with an alcoholic beverage purchased from their establishment not contained in an approved container and not wearing an approved wristband shall be in violation of this section. 
(6)  Functions held within certain areas of the downtown business area or within other "designated commercial areas" as approved by the commission, during hours approved by resolution, but not later than 2:00 a.m., and under other conditions imposed by the commission, if any, and sponsored by a bona fide, nonprofit, civic organization or association, but only where alcoholic beverages are obtained from a participating business and are contained in, and consumed from, approved containers, and where the person consuming or possessing such alcoholic beverage is wearing an approved wristband. 
a.  For purposes of this subpart, the "downtown business area" is defined as that area enclosed by Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd., from Walnut Street to Fifth Street; Fifth Street, from Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd. to Poplar Street; Poplar Street, from Fifth Street to First Street; First Street, from Poplar Street to Walnut Street; Walnut Street, from First Street to Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd., inclusively. 
b.  For purposes of this subpart, "participating businesses" shall be those businesses located in the downtown business area or in other designated commercial areas, choosing to participate in the designated event or other specified events, that are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises and that comply with the guidelines of the sponsoring civic organization. 
c.  For purposes of this subpart, "approved container" and an "approved wristband" shall be a uniformly colored and designated plastic cup/mug and wristband, respectively, each approved by the sponsoring organization and obtained from a participating business on the day of the event. 
d.  Any participating business that knowingly and intentionally allows patrons to exit its premises with an alcoholic beverage purchased from its establishment and not contained in an approved container, and not wearing an approved wristband, shall be in violation of this section. 
e.  The commission, in approving any designated commercial area and in setting times for allowing an event, shall consider whether such designated area and time are safe and appropriate for the participants in the event, as well as others. 
(7)  The district herein defined between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on certain Saturdays so designated by the mayor, which designations shall only occur in concurrence with the occasion of a home football game at Mercer University by the university's official collegiate football team, but only where alcoholic beverages are contained in, and consumed from, paper or plastic cups, plastic bottles or aluminum cans. 
a.  For the purpose of this subpart the designated districts shall be defined as the area enclosed within the following boundaries, unless otherwise specifically excluded herein, both sides of the segments of the streets forming such boundaries shall be included: 
1.  Beginning at the intersection of Mulberry Street and Fifth Street; extending along Mulberry Street to Cotton Avenue; extending along Cotton Avenue to First Street; extending along First Street to Plum Street; extending along Plum Street to Fifth Street; extending along Fifth Street to the point of beginning. 
2.  Beginning at the intersection of College Street and Oglethorpe Street; extending along Oglethorpe Street to Adams Street; extending along Adams Street to Coleman Avenue; extending along Coleman Avenue up to but not including the right-of-way of Interstate 75; extending along the eastern boundary of the Interstate 75 right-of-way to Montpelier Avenue; extending along Montpelier Avenue to Coleman Avenue; extending along Coleman Avenue to College Street; extending along College Street to the point of beginning. The district shall also include the city right-of-way running between Montpelier Avenue and Mercer University Drive that traverses the Mercer University campus. 
b.  Within the district designed herein on Saturdays so designated by the mayor it shall still be a violation of this section for a person to possess open glass containers of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, 6-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-314. - Possession of glass, opened bottle or other opened container of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages; where prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter for consumption on the premises to permit any customer or other person at such establishment to have in his possession, any glass containing any alcoholic beverage, or any opened and unemptied bottle or other open container of any alcoholic beverage or in or on the premises of the place of business at any time on Sunday between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:30 p.m., on Monday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., and on the other days of the week between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. For purposes of this section, bottles or other containers from which employees of the establishment pour or draw alcoholic beverages to be served to patrons, shall not be considered open or opened containers if the containers are kept or stored in an area situated behind the counter or bar with access to said area limited to the employees of the establishment only. 
(b)  It is the purpose and intent of this section to assist in the enforcement of the regulations against selling and consuming alcoholic beverages between the hours set forth in this article, while allowing businesses and individuals a reasonable grace period in which to close, empty, or otherwise dispose of their open containers. The commission finds that the regulations herein imposed are necessary for the proper regulation of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, 6-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-315. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or six months in jail per violation. Additionally, any person violating this chapter may, after a hearing as provided under the licensee's malt beverage and wine and/or distilled spirits license(s), have the license(s) suspended or revoked and/or be subject to other penalties as provided for in connection with violations of said license(s). 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, 6-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-316. - Outstanding licenses; compliance assumed for purposes of applying for renewal. 
All licensees holding valid licenses as of December 31, 2013, issued by either of the precursor local governments to Macon-Bibb County, shall not be precluded from subsequent renewals solely on the basis that the dissolution of the previous governmental boundaries caused an otherwise valid licensed location to become a non-conforming location. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, 6-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 4-317. - Home brew special events. 
(a)  Home brewed beer for purposes of this section shall be limited to malt beverages produced by an individual(s) pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4 and any applicable rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
(b)  Home brew special event may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed under this chapter for the sale, storage, or distribution of alcoholic beverages by the package or for consumption on-the-premises, or may be conducted at locations not otherwise licensed under this chapter. 
(c)  All applications for home brew special event permits shall be accompanied by a payment in cash, check, money order, or by credit card of fifty dollars ($50.00). Applications shall be made at the business licensing office. Applicants shall provide the following information in their application: 
(1)  Name, address, and contact number of the applicant; 
(2)  Location of the event; 
(3)  Date and times at which the event will be held; and 
(4)  Estimated number of participants in the event. 
(d)  Applicants for home brew special event permits shall not be subject to the requirements of sections 4-23 and 4-25. 
(e)  Upon determination that the application meets the requirements of this section, the business licensing office shall issue an individually numbered home brew special event permit to the applicant. 
(f)  Individuals obtaining permits pursuant to this section shall be entitled to hold up to six (6) events per calendar year under one (1) permit. 
(g)  Home brew special events shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Events shall only be held during legal hours for drinking on premises defined in section 4-125. 
(2)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages at the event shall be limited solely to home brewed beer produced pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4. Consumption of other alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Consumption of home brewed beer shall be limited solely to participants in and judges of the special event. For the purpose of this section participants shall be either individuals submitting home brewed beer to the event or individuals admitted to the event by the sponsor without having to submit a home brew. 
(4)  At the event, home brewed beer shall not be sold, offered for sale, or made available for consumption by the general public. 
(5)  Permittee shall not allow any person to take an open container of alcoholic beverage from the designated event area. 
(h)  A home brew special event permittee shall be subject to all laws, rules and regulations of the city and state, including the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue and shall be subject to permit revocation for violation thereof. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0047, § 4, 6-7-2016 ) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Bird sanctuary; unlawful acts; penalty. 
(a)  That area of Macon-Bibb County comprised of the former City of Macon is hereby declared to be a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests in that area defined in subsection (a) as a bird sanctuary; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the health officer of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department, the following procedures shall apply. If no satisfactory alternative is found to abate the nuisance, then the starlings or similar birds, which constitute a nuisance or menace, as aforesaid, may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the health officer under supervision of the director of the Animal Welfare Department. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished in accordance with the general penalty section of this Code. 
(d)  The prohibitions set forth in subsection (b) shall not apply to that area of Macon-Bibb County that was formerly the unincorporated area of Bibb County or to any agricultural property that was annexed by the City of Macon between 1990 and 2007 and that is not within one-half-mile of residential property, unless special provision is made therefore by resolution of the mayor and commission of Macon-Bibb County. Such property shall also be excluded from the provisions of section 16-25. This subsection shall only apply to hunting with shotguns during dove hunting season. 
Sec. 5-2. - Animal welfare department established; composition. 
(a)  To protect the public health and promote the general welfare of the community, the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department is established. The department shall be composed of a director, who shall be the animal control officer, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c) and other applicable laws, and of other employees as may be necessary. 
(b)  The director shall have such powers and duties as may be set out in this chapter. The director is specifically charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
Sec. 5-3. - Regulations. 
(a)  The animal welfare director may promulgate written regulations, or amendments thereto, to organize and operate the animal welfare department in the most efficient manner reasonably possible, consistent with the Charter and this Code. 
(b)  These regulations shall become effective only after approval by the mayor, and after being filed with the clerk of commission unless disapproved within fifteen (15) days of such filing by motion of the commission. 
Sec. 5-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate food, water, ventilation, or shelter, for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
Animal means every non-human species of animal, both domestic and wild. 
Appropriate shelter means a cover or protection from the elements containing adequate and appropriate bedding such as straw, hay, or wood shavings, which is small enough to allow the dog or cat to retain its body heat but is large enough to allow the animal to stand, turn around, and lie down. 
At large means any dog when it is off the property of its owner and not under control of a competent person. 
Cat means the domestic cat, felis catus. 
Control shall mean a dog is under control of a competent person within the meaning of this chapter if it is on a leash or accompanied by a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or on or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits of the owner. 
Director means the person employed by and designated by Macon-Bibb County as director of the animal welfare department. 
Dog means the domestic dog, canis familiaris, of either sex. 
Dog control officer means the person employed by and designated by Macon-Bibb County, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), section 5-2, and other applicable law, as director of the animal welfare department. 
Exposed to rabies. Any animal has been exposed to rabies, within the meaning of this chapter, if it has been bitten by, or exposed to any animal known to have been infected with rabies. 
Harness means a combination of leather or nylon straps and buckles which, when fitted around the neck and torso of the dog or cat, helps to distribute the pulling force more evenly across the shoulders. 
Health officer means the health officer of the Macon-Bibb County health department. 
Owner means any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat or both. 
Rabies control officer means the director of animal welfare, or a designee. 
Shelter means any premises designated by the regulations of the animal welfare department for purposes of impounding and caring for all animals found running at large in violation of this Code. 
Tethering means attaching a dog or cat to a stationary object or pulley run by means of a chain, rope, tether, cable, or similar restraint. "Tethering" does not include the use of a leash to walk a dog. 
Veterinarian means any person holding a current license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in the state. 
Transport means, as used herein, the act of carrying, moving or conveying a dog or cat from one place to another. 
Wild and/or exotic animals means any living member of the animal kingdom including those born or raised in captivity except the following: domestic dogs, domestic cats, common farm animals, rodents, fish, non-poisonous reptiles, common caged birds and invertebrates and includes but is not limited to any monkey, nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, bear, wild rabbit, tarantula, wild rodent, prairie dog, alpaca, fiddler crab, land snail, hedgehog, kinkajous, llama, sugar glider, opossum, wallaroo, and reptiles or amphibians such as crocodile, alligator, snake, caiman, gecko, chameleon, Chinese water dragon, iguana, turtle and tortoise. 
Sec. 5-5. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Authority to impound. Unlicensed dogs or cats and licensed dogs found not to be under control shall be taken up by the agents of the animal welfare department and impounded in the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department shelter, and there confined in a humane manner. 
(b)  Citation in lieu of impoundment. When licensed dogs are found not to be under control and their ownership is known to the agents of the animal welfare department, such animals need not be impounded, but the agent may, in his discretion, cite the owner to appear in the municipal court to answer to charges of violation of this Code. 
(c)  Notice of impoundment. Immediately upon impounding dogs or cats, or other animals, the agent of the animal welfare department shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owners of the dogs or cats or other animals so impounded, and inform the owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of the animal. 
(d)  Procedure for disposal of domestic animals. All horses, mules, cattle and domestic animals other than dogs and cats found running at large within Macon-Bibb County shall be taken up by the agents of the animal welfare department and impounded by at the shelter designated for these purposes by the animal welfare department and there confined in a humane manner until disposed of as follows: Upon the impoundment of any such animal, the director shall immediately notify the purchasing director and shall give notice twice, each notice to be in separate calendar weeks, in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are published in Macon-Bibb County. The notice shall state that the animal has been impounded and that it will be sold at the expiration of seven (7) days unless identified and claimed by the owners thereof within that time, who may have the animals released from impoundment upon compliance with the requirements of the animal welfare department and the payment of impoundment fees as set forth in this chapter, and all costs. Provided, if the animal is one to which respective rights of the owner and the person in possession or custody are determined by state law, that law shall be complied with. 
Sec. 5-6. - Other permitted animals. 
(a)  Domestic animals other than dogs, cats. All horses, mules, cattle, goats, chickens, ducks, geese and other domestic animals or fowl, except dogs and cats, shall be permitted within the area that was formerly the City of Macon only with approval of the director after investigation and determination that such animals will not constitute a public nuisance as defined by sections 15-1 and 15-26(b)(3). If the express approval of the director is obtained, then such animals may be kept but they shall be confined by the owner in a secure enclosure and shall not be permitted to run at large, to trespass upon the premises of any person, or to otherwise injure and damage the property of any person. The restrictions of this subsection shall not apply to the area that was formerly unincorporated Bibb County. 
(b)  Wild and/or exotic animals. No wild and/or exotic animals may be kept within, Macon-Bibb County except under conditions as shall be fixed by the animal welfare department regulations. 
(c)  Impoundment. Any non-permitted animals and any permitted animals described in this section found at large shall be impounded by the animal control division and may be redeemed by the owners as provided in this chapter. 
(d)  Citation in lieu of impoundment. When permitted animals are found to be at large within the city, and their ownership is known to agents of the animal control division, such animals need not be impounded, but the agent may, in his discretion, cite the owner to appear in municipal court to answer to charges of a violation of this Code. 
Sec. 5-7. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
(a)  Dogs and cats. The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any unlicensed dog or cat, upon compliance with the license provisions of section 5-5 and the payment of impoundment fees. The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any licensed dog or cat upon the payment of impoundment fees. 
(b)  Other animals. Except as provided in subsection (c), any other animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be reclaimed by the owner upon compliance with the requirements of the animal welfare department and the payment of impoundment fees as set forth in section 5-8. 
(c)  Failure to reclaim dogs or cats. Any dog or cat impounded under the provisions of this chapter and not reclaimed by its owner within seven (7) days may be disposed of by the animal welfare department or placed for adoption by a person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter and any other regulations as shall be fixed by the animal welfare department rules and regulations. If the dog or cat is one to which the respective rights of the owner and the person in possession or custody thereof are determined by state law, such law shall be complied with. 
(d)  Euthanizing of animals. All animal shelters owned or operated by Macon-Bibb County shall use sodium pentobarbital injections as the only method to perform euthanasia on animals. 
Sec. 5-8. - Impoundment and adoption fees. 
The animal welfare department regulations shall include a schedule of the proposed fees for the impoundment, permanent disposal and keeping of dogs, cats, horses, mules, cattle, goats and other domestic and wild animals. The animal welfare department regulations shall include a schedule of fees for the adoption of dogs and cats that have not been claimed by the owner. 
Sec. 5-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING AND RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 5-10. - Licensing; rabies inoculation; tag; fees. 
(a)  License required. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having custody of a dog or cat six (6) months old or older within the territorial limits of Macon-Bibb County for more than 120 days in a 12-month period is required to obtain a registration license tag for such animal by registering it with the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department. 
(b)  Rabies inoculation. When initially registering an animal, the owner shall produce proof of current rabies vaccination and shall thereafter forward proof of vaccination renewal to the Macon-Bibb County animal welfare department. Failure to maintain current rabies vaccination records with Macon-Bibb County shall render the annual animal registration invalid. All dogs and cats must be inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian before a license can be issued; provided, however, a license may be issued in cases where a licensed veterinarian certifies that a vaccination against rabies would be detrimental to the dog or cat. 
(c)  Tag. The license tag and rabies tag may be combined in one metallic tag as prescribed by the regulations of the animal welfare department and shall be issued by the licensed veterinarian at the time the dog or cat is inoculated against rabies. In the event that the dog or cat is inoculated outside of Macon-Bibb County, a separate license tag may be issued for such animal. The license tag shall carry a serial number which shall be shown on the receipt given the owner of the dog or cat along with the breed of dog or cat, color and sex. A duplicate copy of this receipt shall be filed with the director of the animal welfare department in a manner and within the time prescribed by the department regulations. 
(d)  Fees. 
(1)  The amount of yearly license fees, duplicate tag fees, and transfer of license fees shall be provided for by regulations of the animal welfare department. 
(2)  Prior to the filing of any revision of fees with the clerk of the commission such revision shall be published once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the publication used for the publishing of other notices to the public. 
(3)  The animal welfare department may budget a portion of the fees received, up to fifty (50) percent of the total, to fund participation in a low cost spay/neuter program to be provided for by department regulations. 
(e)  Term of license; time of inoculation. All dogs and cat licenses shall be issued for one (1) year and shall be renewed annually. All dogs and cats shall be inoculated for rabies prior to each annual renewal of their licenses. Newly born dogs and cats shall be given their initial inoculation within 16 weeks after birth, and the inoculation shall be renewed each year thereafter on or within thirty (30) days prior to the date of issue. 
(f)  Duplicate tag. If the metallic license tag or tags issued for a dog or cat shall be lost, the owner may obtain a duplicate tag or tags upon the payment of the required fee and the presentation of the original license certificate or proof thereof to the officer of the animal welfare department or a licensed veterinarian. 
(g)  Transfer of license. If there is a change in ownership of a dog or cat during the license year, the new owner shall have the current license transferred to his or her name upon the payment of the required transfer fee to the animal welfare department or licensed veterinarian. 
(h)  Unlawful use of license. No person shall use a license receipt or license tag issued for one (1) dog or cat on a different dog or cat. 
(i)  Exemptions. Working law enforcement dogs, registered service dogs, and service dogs in training shall be exempted from payment of an annual license fee. A veterinarian inoculating such exempt dog shall note the exemption on the record to be submitted to the animal welfare director along with the number of the tag issued to such dog. Any person falsely certifying an animal to be exempt under this subsection shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(j)  [ In lieu of civil penalty. ] In lieu of the civil penalty for violation, a person cited under this section may register his or her dog or cat with the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the citation and the civil penalty will be voided. 
Sec. 5-11. - Tag and collar. 
(a)  Upon complying with the provisions of section 5-10, there shall be issued to the owner a numbered metallic tag or set of tags, stamped with the number and the year for which issued. The shape or design of such tag or tags shall be changed from year to year. 
(b)  The numbered tag tags so issued shall be attached to a collar or harness which shall be worn by the dog at all times. All cat and dog owners shall be required to furnish proof of their licenses upon a request by the officers of the animal welfare department and the Office of the Sheriff. 
Sec. 5-12. - Care and control of licensed or permitted animals. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, caretaker, or possessor of any licensed or permitted animal to provide adequate shelter, food water, and sanitary conditions for said animal at all times, and to provide said animal with necessary medical care including, but not limited to, the required annual rabies vaccination. 
(b)  The owner of any licensed or permitted animal shall be responsible for maintaining control of that animal at all times so as not to be a danger to the person or property of others, or constitute a nuisance as defined in sections 15-1 and 15-26(b)(3). 
The owner of any licensed or permitted animal shall be in violation of this Code section if he or she allows their animal to: 
(1)  Defecate on private property other than that of the owner or on public property unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the animal owner; 
(2)  Chase moving vehicles including bicycles; 
(3)  Molest, attack or interfere with persons in the use of the public rights-of-way; 
(4)  Otherwise act in a manner that is contrary to the public health, welfare or safety according to the law. 
(c)  Every female cat or dog in heat shall be kept segregated from males of their species, except for intentional breeding by the owner. 
(d)  A person who is convicted or who pleads guilty or nolo contendre to a violation of this section shall suffer the following minimum punishment: 
(1)  First offense, a minimum fine of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(2)  Second offense within a one-year period, a minimum fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(3)  Third offense within a one-year period, a minimum fine of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00), with a mandatory appearance in Municipal Court. 
(4)  Fourth offense within a one-year period, a minimum fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00), with a mandatory appearance in Municipal Court. 
(5)  In addition to the above fines, all fines, regardless of the number of the offense, shall include a five dollar ($5.00) fee to be charged and dedicated to support the educational requirements mandated for Animal Welfare personnel. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0048, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 5-13. - Abandonment of animals prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally abandon any domesticated animal upon any public or private property or public right-of-way within Macon-Bibb County. Each person who does abandon, knowingly or willingly permits such abandonment, or aids in the abandonment of any domesticated animal shall be in violation of this section. 
(b)  A person who is convicted, or who pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of this section shall suffer the following minimum punishment: 
(1)  First offense, a minimum fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(2)  Second offense, a minimum fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(3)  Third offense, a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with a mandatory appearance in Municipal Court. 
(4)  Fourth offense, a minimum fine of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1500.00), with a mandatory appearance in Municipal Court. 
(5)  In addition to the above fines, all fines, regardless of the number of the offense, shall include a five dollar ($5.00) fee to be charged and dedicated to support the educational requirements mandated for Animal Welfare personnel. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0047, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 5-14. - Rabies control. 
(a)  Quarantine authorized. Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the rabies control officer or agent of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of that officer for a period of ten (10) days and shall not be released from quarantine except by written permission of that officer. In the discretion of the rabies control officer, quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, or at the Macon-Bibb County animal shelter, or at the owner's expense, in a veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the case of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the Macon-Bibb County animal shelter. 
(b)  Duty of the owner. The owner, upon demand made by the rabies control officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human or which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, which expense shall be borne by the owner. The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies upon payment of the impoundment fee therefor and upon compliance with the licensing provisions as set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  Pathological examination of animal head. When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies while under such observation, the rabies control officer shall immediately send the head of the animal to the state health department for pathological examination. 
(d)  Jurisdiction-wide quarantine. When one (1) or both reports give a positive diagnosis of rabies, the rabies control officer shall recommend to the mayor a quarantine for the entirety of Macon-Bibb County for such period of time as may be proper and, upon invoking of the quarantine by resolution of the commission, no animal shall be taken into the streets, or permitted to be in the streets during the period of quarantine. During the quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from Macon-Bibb County without written permission of the rabies control officer. 
(e)  Treatment, destruction of animal. Every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith destroyed or, at the owner's option and expense, may be treated for rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian, provided the treatment is started within five days and the animal is held under six (6) months quarantine by the owner in the same manner as other animals are quarantined. 
(f)  Extension of quarantine. If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of the quarantine, the period of quarantine may be extended at the discretion of the rabies control officer. 
(g)  Destruction of animal regulated. No person shall destroy any rabid animal, or any animal that has bitten a human, except as provided in this section, nor remove the animal from Macon-Bibb County without the written permission of the rabies control officer or agent. 
(h)  Disposal of carcass. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies, shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the rabies control officer of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department. 
(i)  Authority of rabies control officer. The rabies control officer shall direct the disposition of any animal infected with rabies. 
(j)  Refusal to surrender animal upon demand. It shall be a violation of this Code for a person to fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required in this section, when demand is made therefor by the rabies control officer. 
Sec. 5-15. - Reports of bite cases. 
It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the rabies control officer the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with any other information as may be required by such officer for the purpose of rabies control. 
Sec. 5-16. - Responsibilities of veterinarians. 
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the rabies control officer his diagnosis of any animal observed as a rabies suspect. The rabies control officer shall furnish full information of each rabid suspect or incident to all licensed veterinarians. 
Sec. 5-17. - Exemptions. 
The licensing and vaccination requirements of this Code shall not apply to any dog or cat belonging to a nonresident of Macon-Bibb County and kept within the jurisdiction for not longer than thirty (30) days, provided all such dogs or cats shall, at all times while in the jurisdiction, be kept within a building, enclosure or vehicle, or be under control by the owner. 
Sec. 5-18. - Investigation. 
(a)  Investigation of alleged violations of this chapter and allegations of cruelty to animals shall be conducted in accordance with proper law enforcement procedures. 
(b)  Upon receiving a report which requires an investigation, or observation of a situation that requires an investigation, the Animal Welfare Officer will produce the necessary identification, explain the need to enter the property and seek oral authorization to enter the property to conduct an investigation. If a property owner or resident fails to grant said authorization, the Animal Welfare Officer shall seek the necessary warrant where required by law, and upon production of said warrant, the owner shall be required to allow entry. 
(c)  It is further provided that any agent of the animal welfare department may take possession of the animal when, in his or her opinion, it requires humane treatment. Any animal taken into custody for inhumane treatment may be reclaimed by the owner upon compliance with the regulations of the animal welfare division, subject to and/or unless otherwise ordered by the Court. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0006, § 1, 1-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 5-19. - Interference. 
It shall be a violation of this Code for any person to resist, interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the animal welfare department or the health officer or rabies control officer in the performance of the duties imposed upon them in this chapter, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal welfare department or its agents, or the rabies control officer, except as provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 5-20. - Records. 
(a)  Licensing, impoundment and disposition. It shall be the duty of the animal welfare department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the licensing, impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into its custody. 
(b)  Bite cases. It shall be the duty of the rabies control officer to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to the officer, and the investigation thereof. 
(c)  Moneys. It shall be the duty of the director of the animal welfare department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all monies received by the department and to remit the same at least weekly to the director of finance. The records of the department shall at all times be open and available for inspection by members of the commission and proper officers of Macon-Bibb County and shall be subject to audit in the same manner as other Macon-Bibb County records are audited. 
Sec. 5-21. - Guard dogs. 
The owner or person in control of property where a guard dog is assigned, used or employed for guarding purposes shall post signs sufficient to warn others that a guard dog is on the property. Such signs shall contain the words "danger, guard dog on premises." Such signs shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches square and the letters shall be at least six (6) inches high and three (3) inches in width. 
Sec. 5-22. - Tethering and transport, prohibited conduct. 
[(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person controlling or possessing any dog or cat to:] 
(1)  Leave a dog or cat tethered outdoors while unattended by its owner. 
(2)  Tether a dog or cat except by means of a properly fitting harness or collar of nylon or leather construction and a tether in proportion to the size of the animal. The tether must be at least fifteen (15) feet in length with a swivel at both ends. 
(3)  Tether a dog or cat outdoors under conditions where the animal or tether can become entangled on the tether, another animal, or some other object or where the tether can restrict the animal's access to suitable, edible, and sufficient food, clean water (cool in summer and unfrozen in winter), and appropriate shelter. 
(4)  Tether a dog or cat outdoors in unsafe or unsanitary conditions or when said tether does not allow the animal to defecate or urinate in an area separate from the areas where it must eat, drink or lie down. 
(5)  Expose a dog or cat to any weather conditions that cause immediate imminent threat to the animal's physical well-being. 
(6)  Transport any dog or cat in the bed of a pickup truck unless the dog or cat is secured inside of a commercially designed container intended for the safe transport of dog[s] and cats or otherwise secured so as not to allow the dog or cat the ability to escape from the vehicle. 
(b)  A person who is convicted, or who pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of this section shall suffer the following minimum punishment: 
(1)  First offense, a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  Second offense within a one-year period, a minimum fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(3)  Third offense within a one-year period, a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with a mandatory appearance in Municipal Court. 
(4)  Fourth or subsequent offense, a minimum fine of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1500.00), with a mandatory appearance in Municipal Court. 
(5)  In addition to the above fines, all fines, regardless of the number of the offense, shall include a five dollar ($5.00) fee to be charged and dedicated to support the educational requirements mandated for Animal Welfare personnel. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0046, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Secs. 5-23, 5-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS 

Sec. 5-25. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Dog control officer means the person employed by and designated by Macon-Bibb County as the director of the animal welfare department and, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22 and other applicable law, to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and of state law. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, or having custody or control of a dog within the boundaries of Macon-Bibb County. In the case of a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or a vicious dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
Sec. 5-26. - Investigation by dog control officer; notice to owner; hearing; determination; review. 
(a)  Upon receipt by the dog control officer of a report of a dog within Macon-Bibb county believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall investigate to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
(b)  When the dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail notice to the dog's owner of such classification within 72 hours. 
(1)  The notice to the owner shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice. 
(3)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Appeal Board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the Board via the Macon-Bibb County Health Department. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Appeal Board ("Board"). 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog will become effective for all purposes. 
(b)  The Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Appeal Board shall be comprised of: one (1) veterinarian licensed by the State of Georgia and operating a practice in Macon-Bibb County, one (1) professional animal handler, trainer, or technician with a recognized certification or credentials. one (1) licensed health care provider by the state of Georgia (MD, NP, PA, RN, LPN, etc.), one (1) at-large member whom has demonstrated a commitment to animal welfare and advocacy and is a resident of Macon-Bibb County, two (2) at-large members whom are residents of Macon-Bibb County. The members of the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Board shall be appointed by the Mayor of Macon-Bibb County, and subject to approval by the Macon-Bibb County Board of Commission. Each appointment shall be for a term of four years. 
The Administrator of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department, or his or her designee, will serve as Secretary of the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Appeal Board and will receive and mail notices related to appeals, shall secure the location, court reporter, etc., to effectuate appeals, and will receive appeal fees to cover administrative costs incurred for mail, notices, preparation of the record for further appeal, etc. 
(d)  When a dog owner requests a hearing, the owner is required to submit a fee in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00) made payable to the Macon-Bibb County Health Department, along with the notice requesting the hearing. Said fee may be waived where the owner demonstrates sufficient showing of indigence in keeping with the qualification of individuals for governmental benefits. The hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received. The Administrator of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department, or his or her designee, shall notify the dog's owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog's owner at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify, and present evidence and the Board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the Board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(e)  The Board shall make a written decision within 10 days of the date of the hearing. The Board shall notify the dog's owner in writing by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery of the Board's determination on the matter within seven (7) days of its decision, and shall send a copy of such decision also to the dog control officer via the Administrator of the Macon-Bibb County Health Department, or his or her designee.. 
(1)  If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which such determination is effective. 
(2)  If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(3)  Judicial review of the Board's final decision may be had in the Probate Court of Bibb County in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.9. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0012, § 1, 2-17-2015 ; Ord. No. O-15-0026, § 1, 6-16-2015 ; Ord. of 1-17-2017(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 5-27. - Impoundment; euthanasia. 
(a)  The dog control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(b)  A judge of the superior court of Bibb County may order the euthanasia of a dog if, after notice and opportunity for a hearing as provided in section 5-26, the court finds that the dog has seriously injured a human or presents a danger to humans not suitable for control under this article and: 
(1)  The dog owner has been convicted of violation of a state criminal law and the crime was related to such dog; or 
(2)  The board of health has filed a civil action with the court requesting euthanasia of the dog. 
(c)  A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for a hearing, to have caused a serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized. 
Sec. 5-28. - Registration; requirements; annual renewal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within Macon-Bibb County a dangerous dog or a vicious dog without a certificate of registration, issued in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 and this article. Certificates of registration are not transferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  A certificate of registration shall be issued for a dangerous dog if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides. 
(c)  A certificate of registration shall be issued for a vicious dog if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; and 
(4)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. 
(d)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
(e)  No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. 
(f)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dogfighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1 
from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(g)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. The dog control officer shall verify that the owner of a classified dog is continuing to comply with the requirements of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration shall be a violation of this article. 
Sec. 5-29. - Notification of a dangerous or vicious dog's being loose, attacking a person, or death; change of ownership. 
(a)  The owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(b)  A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(c)  The owner of a classified dog who moves into Macon-Bibb County shall register the classified dog in Macon-Bibb County within ten (10) days of becoming a resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he or she moved. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into this state shall register the dog as required in O.C.G.A. § 5-8-27 within thirty (30) days of becoming a resident. 
Sec. 5-30. - Restrictions on classified dog's presence off owner's premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be off the owner's property unless: 
(1)  The dog is restrained by a leash not more than six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal; 
(2)  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(3)  The dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be: 
(1)  Outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property unless: 
a.  The dog is muzzled and restrained by a leash not more than six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal; or 
b.  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(2)  Unattended with minors. 
Sec. 5-31. - Grounds for confiscation of a dangerous or vicious dog. 
(a)  A dangerous dog or vicious shall be immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this article. Refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section may recover such dog upon payment of reasonable confiscation and housing costs and upon the owner's proof of compliance with the provisions of this article and upon payment of reasonable confiscation costs. All fines and charges must be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(d)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within twenty (20) days of the date the dog was confiscated, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner and the owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
Sec. 5-32. - Penalties. 
The owner of a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, who violates the applicable provisions of this article, or whose dog is subject to confiscation, shall be guilty of a violation of Macon-Bibb County's Code of Ordinances, in addition to penalties imposed by state law. 
Secs. 5-33—5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPAY/NEUTER AND REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 5-40. - Findings, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  The Macon-Bibb County Commission finds that unintended or uncontrolled breeding of dogs and cats within Macon-Bibb County leads to the birth of unwanted puppies, kittens, dogs, and cats that become strays, suffer privation and hunger, and that may constitute public hazards, and are impounded and euthanized at great expense to the community and constituting a public nuisance and a public health hazard. Without action aimed at the cause of the problem this problem and its serious consequences, including the cycle of impoundment and euthanasia of unwanted animals will remain unabated and will be compounded with time. It is declared that every feasible means of reducing the number of unwanted dogs, cats, puppies, and kittens be encouraged. 
(b)  The commission finds that one of the most effective, economical, humane, and ethical solution to the problem of dog and cat overpopulation is to substantially reduce, if not eliminate, unintended breeding and by such reduction or elimination seeks to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and environmental interests of its citizens. 
Sec. 5-41. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
Harbor means and includes legal ownership or providing regular care, shelter, protection, refuge, nourishment, or medical treatment; provided, however, that a person or entity does not "harbor" by providing nourishment to a stray or feral dog or cat, and, provided further, however, that caretakers of feral cat colonies shall use their best efforts to have those animals sterilized. 
Feral means an animal of a species normally domesticated that has reverted to a wild state. 
Service dog shall include dogs having been appropriately trained and actually being used as service dogs such as guide dogs, hearing dogs, assistance dogs, seizure alert dogs, and social/therapy dogs. 
Sec. 5-42. - Sterilization requirement. 
No person may own, keep, harbor, or have custody of a dog or cat six months of age or older within the Macon-Bibb County that has not been spayed or neutered unless such person holds an unaltered animal permit for each unaltered dog or cat, or unless the dog or cat is otherwise exempt under this article. 
Sec. 5-43. - Exemptions. 
The following persons shall not be required to obtain an unaltered animal permit: 
(1)  An individual who is a non-resident of Macon-Bibb County and resides temporarily therein for a period not to exceed 120 days within a 12-month period; 
(2)  Lawful humane societies/animal shelters, whether public or private, licensed by the Georgia Department of Agriculture whose principal purpose is securing the adoption of dogs or cats or offering sanctuary for dogs or cats and which certify in writing to the animal welfare department that they does not engage in the breeding of dogs or cats. Such organizations must comply with the mandatory sterilization requirements applicable to animal shelters and rescue organizations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-14-1 et seq., the Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq., and other applicable laws and regulations of the Georgia Department of Agriculture; 
(3)  Veterinary hospitals; and 
(4)  Person who provide nourishment and care for feral cat colonies that are registered and in compliance with Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department requirements. A person who registers a feral cat colony shall not have to obtain an unaltered license tag for any cat in the colony provided such cats remain feral and the colony registration is renewed annually. Every cat in a feral cat colony must be spayed or neutered. 
Sec. 5-44. - Unaltered animal permit and licensing requirements. 
(a)  The owner of an unaltered dog or cat six (6) months of age or older must apply to the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department for an unaltered animal permit and license tag. The Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department will issue an unaltered animal permit if the owner complies with the requirements set forth in this article and pays the permit fee. A certificate will be issued identifying the animal as a permitted unaltered animal and must be made available for inspection at all times. 
(b)  (1)  An annual unaltered animal permit and license tag is valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(2)  A lifetime unaltered animal permit and license tag is valid for the life of the animal identified in the unaltered animal permit. 
(c)  An unaltered animal license tag will be provided to the owner with every unaltered animal permit. The owner of the unaltered animal is required to see that the unaltered animal license tag is valid and is securely fastened to the animal's collar or harness at all times. The unaltered animal license tag shall indicate whether the unaltered animal permit is an annual permit or a lifetime permit. 
(d)  The cost of an annual unaltered animal permit and license tag shall be $10.00. 
(e)  The lifetime fee for a lifetime unaltered animal permit and license tag shall be $100.00. 
(f)  Owners who apply for an unaltered animal permit must provide proof of identification micro-chipping of the animal prior to issuance of the permit and license tag. 
(g)  Unaltered animal permits may be obtained for the following animals: 
(1)  Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actually being used by public law enforcement agencies, or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director of the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department after consultation with knowledgeable professionals; 
(2)  Dogs having been appropriately trained and actually being used as a service dog, such as a guide dog, hearing dog, assistance dog, seizure alert dog, social/therapy dog, or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director of the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department after consultation with knowledgeable professionals; 
(3)  Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actually being used by search and rescue agencies for search and rescue activities, or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director of the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department after consultation with knowledgeable professionals; 
(4)  Dogs or cats certified by a licensed veterinarian as having a health reason for not being spayed/neutered; 
(5)  Dogs which are appropriately trained and actually being used for herding of other animals, or as livestock guardian dogs, hunting dogs, or such dogs designated as breeding stock by an appropriate agency or organization approved by the director of the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department after consultation with knowledgeable professionals; 
(6)  Dogs or cats boarded in a licensed kennel or a business which boards such animals for professional training or resale; and 
(7)  Dogs or cats which are registered with the American Kennel Club, the Cat Fancier Association or other recognized registry or trained and kept for the purpose of show, field trials or agility trials. 
(h)  A dog or cat for which an unaltered animal permit and license tag has been issued under this section shall not be used for breeding or stud purposes unless an appropriate permit is first obtained from the animal welfare department. 
Sec. 5-45. - Deadline for compliance. 
A dog or cat governed by this article shall be spayed or neutered by its owner or, if eligible, the owner shall obtain an unaltered animal permit within thirty (30) days of the dog or cat becoming six months of age or by July, 1, 2014, whichever is the later in time, or, in the case of the owner who has acquired a dog or cat after it becomes six months of age, within thirty (30) days of acquisition. 
Sec. 5-46. - Change in address/ownership. 
The address of the owner shall be presumed to be the residence of the dog or cat. All changes of address must be reported to the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department in writing within thirty (30) calendar days following such change. A permit holder shall notify the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department in writing of any change of ownership of a dog or cat within thirty (30) calendar days following such change. If an owner does wish to sell an animal, the unaltered animal permit must be displayed. 
Sec. 5-47. - Enforcement. 
The Macon-Bibb County animal welfare department is charged with the enforcement of this chapter. Animal control officers (ACOs) are the agents of the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department which are generally charged with compliance activities. ACOs shall issue citations under this chapter. The director of the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department is authorized to suspend enforcement of section 5-42 upon a written finding that there are not adequate low or no-cost spay and neuter services available in Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 5-48. - Revocation. 
(a)  Upon receipt of information of violation of this section, the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department may issue a notice of revocation to a permit holder. The notice of revocation shall provide a summary of the violation and shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, by hand delivery by the sheriff or animal control officer, or upon posting of the property at the address listed in the permit application. The permit holder shall be entitled to a hearing. Any request for hearing shall be filed by the permit holder with the Macon-Bibb County animal welfare department within ten (10) days after the permit holders' receipt of said notice. The permit holder shall set forth the reasons why the permit holder believes the revocation would be an error. Failure to timely request a hearing shall render the revocation final. All hearings shall be conducted by the hearing officer within thirty (30) days after the receipt of a request for hearing. The original of the hearing officers' written decision shall be filed with the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department, and copies shall be mailed to the Macon-Bibb County attorney and the permit holder. 
(b)  It shall also be a violation of this article to counterfeit an unaltered animal permit or license tag, to maliciously destroy a permit or tag, or to fraudulently obtain an unaltered animal permit or license tag. 
(c)  An unaltered animal permit issued pursuant to this article is a privilege and not a right. 
Sec. 5-49. - Breeding permits. 
(a)  No person shall breed a dog or cat or offer a dog or cat for breeding or stud purposes without first obtaining an appropriate breeding permit issued by the Macon-Bibb County Animal Welfare Department or from the Georgia Department of Agriculture if such person is required to be licensed by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. The cost of the permit and other related fees shall be established by the director of animal welfare by regulation. 
(b)  No person shall sell or offer for sale any dog, cat, puppy, or kitten in a public place in Macon-Bibb County; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to "adoption fairs" conducted by the animal welfare department or by a licensed animal rescue organization or animal shelter. 
Sec. 5-50. - Penalties. 
Any person who is issued a citation for violating this article for the first time shall be provided with a list of no cost and low cost spay and neuter services. If a first time violator can demonstrate compliance with this Article within 60 days of the date the citation is issued, the citation shall be dismissed. All subsequent violations shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Building codes enforcement. 
(a)  The Department of Business Development Services shall be under the charge of the director of the Department of Business Development Services ("the building official"). 
(b)  The qualification and character of the building official and technical staff of the department shall conform to the qualifications and character as established under the provisions of "The Department of Business and Development Services Administrative Procedures for the Enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes" as revised in 2014, or as may be further established by the commission from time to time. 
(c)  There are hereby established procedures that shall be known as "The Department of Business and Development Services Administrative Procedures for the Enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes" as revised in 2014, ("administrative procedures"). Said administrative procedures are not set out herein, but are maintained on file and available for inspection in the offices of the department. These administrative procedures shall govern the administration and enforcement of all reference technical codes, standards, and requirements as set forth in subsection 6-2(a), unless otherwise noted. Copies of the technical codes, standards, administrative procedures, and requirements shall be kept in the office of the department for review by the public. The provisions of this subsection shall be administered by the director/building official. The building official shall have the power to take action against all violations as established in the administrative procedures. 
(d)  The Macon-Bibb County Commission, by resolution, may amend the administrative procedures enforced in the Macon-Bibb County, and all such amendments shall be printed and available to the public as an addendum. 
(e)  Whenever two or more technical codes adopted by reference by Macon-Bibb County are in conflict with each other, the building official is authorized to designate which code provision shall be applicable. In making such determination, the building official shall take into consideration the reasonableness of the provisions with respect to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Macon-Bibb County. 
(f)  Self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d) shall not be applicable in Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 6-2. - Codes adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a), the latest edition of the state minimum standard codes, enumerated in said section, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall be enforced in Macon-Bibb County by the department. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(b) and O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(X), the ICC Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and as amended from time to time by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs and "The Department of Business and Development Services Administrative Procedures for the Enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes", are hereby adopted as part of this Code and is enforceable by the department. 
(c)  Macon-Bibb County adopts the National Green Building Standard as an optional, non-mandatory standard for residential dwellings. In the event the Department of Community Affairs, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(XI), adopts the National Green Building Standard, the latest version of the standard, as adopted and amended from time to time by the DCA, is hereby adopted. 
(d)  Appendices "N" and "O," "Noise Control for Airport Noise Zones," as identified by the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission, are hereby adopted as the noise zones and shall become part of the codes. 
(e)  The department building division shall enforce the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 25, Fire Protection and Safety, Chapter 2, "Regulation of Fire and Other Hazards to Persons and Property Generally," and O.C.G.A. Title 30, Handicapped Persons, Chapter 3, "Access to and Use of Public Facilities by Persons with Disabilities," as they relate to access and use of public buildings and facilities by the physically impaired, as adopted and amended by the safety fire commissioner. 
(f)  The text of the codes referred to is not set forth herein but is available for inspection in the offices of the department. 
Sec. 6-3. - Other codes adopted and enforced. 
The department is hereby charged in Macon-Bibb County with the enforcement and responsibilities of O.C.G.A. Title 8, "Buildings and Housing", O.C.G.A. Title 25, Chapter 2, "Regulations, Etc. of Fire and Other Hazards to Person and Property Generally" as it relates to the construction, renovation, alteration, repair and use of buildings and structures, and O.C.G.A. Title 30, Chapter 3 relating to access and use of public buildings and facilities by the physically impaired as adopted and amended by the Safety Fire Commissioner. Chapter 120-3-20 of the Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner shall constitute the rules and regulations used by the department to enforce O.C.G.A. Title 30, Chapter 3. 
Sec. 6-4. - House numbering. 
(a)  Whenever the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall ascertain that any house or any street is improperly numbered, or whenever he shall determine that a renumbering of houses is necessary to implement any general plan of house numbering approved by the mayor and the commission, it shall be his duty to assign a proper number to each house. The owner of any such house, or if such house is not occupied by the owner, then the occupant thereof, or if the owner is a nonresident and is represented by an agent, the agent therefor, shall be notified by the Macon-Bibb County engineer of the assignment of the number. The notice shall be served by an officer of the Office of the Sheriff upon the owner, or upon the occupant, or upon the agent of the owner if the owner is a nonresident. It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or agent within ten (10) days after the service of the notice to remove the old number on the house and to affix the new number so assigned. 
(b)  The correct house numbers thus assigned shall be affixed to the residence or store building at or near the main entrance to the building in such fashion and shall be of such size as shall be legible from the street upon which the property abuts, and shall be no less than three (3) inches in height. Provided, however, that if the residence or store building is by reason of topography or distance from the street so located that a house or building number is not easily visible from the street upon which the property abuts, then, and in such event, the house or building number shall be placed upon the mailbox serving such residence or business establishment as will render the same clearly visible to passersby on the street. Provided, however, that if the mailbox is situated on the opposite side of the street from the property, the number shall be placed on the curb or on the property so numbered so that it is clearly visible from the abutting street. 
(c)  The director of Business Development Services or any other building and construction codes official of Macon-Bibb County shall not issue a final approval of any newly constructed building until the builder or owner has exhibited satisfactory proof that the newly constructed building has displayed a house or building number, assigned to it by the Macon-Bibb County engineer, which is clearly visible to the public from a position on the nearest public thoroughfare to the building. 
(d)  Any violations of this section shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in section 1-6. 
Secs. 6-5—6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS; IN REM PROCEEDINGS 

Sec. 6-21. - Declaration of findings. 
(a)  The commission hereby finds and declares that within Macon-Bibb County there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use which are not in compliance with the applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in Macon-Bibb County; or general nuisance law, and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Macon-Bibb County and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in Macon-Bibb County there are in existence conditions or uses of real estate which render adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, and that such uses are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Macon-Bibb County and a public necessity exists for the repair of such conditions or the cessation of such uses which render the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to human habitation. The Macon-Bibb County Commission finds that there exist in Macon-Bibb County dwellings, buildings, or structures which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate light, ventilation, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions which render such dwellings, buildings or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the citizens of Macon-Bibb County. It is moreover found that there exist in Macon-Bibb County vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed and private property exists which constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsafe or unsanitary conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of such private properties. 
Sec. 6-22. - Declaration of purposes. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Macon-Bibb County by requiring a level of maintenance of residential, commercial, and mixed-use dwellings, buildings and structures which will promote, protect and preserve the appearance and social and economic stability of Macon-Bibb County and which will also protect the public from health and safety hazards and the impairment of property values which result from the neglect and deterioration of property. 
(b)  It is further the intention of the Macon-Bibb County Commission that this article shall comply and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as described in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 6-23. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to every residential, nonresidential, or mixed occupancy building, dwelling or structure located within Macon-Bibb County, whether occupied or unoccupied, and which is used or intended to be used for dwelling, commercial, business, or industrial occupancy. This article shall apply whether or not such building, dwelling or structure shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this article and shall apply irrespective of any permits or licenses issued for the use or occupancy of the building, dwelling or structure. 
Sec. 6-24. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words are defined: 
Applicable codes shall mean: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. Title 25, Chapter 2; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2 after October 1, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing shall mean causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 13, Article 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, business or mixed-occupancy uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean structures that may have been originally constructed for human habitation but are currently being used for agricultural purposes such as for the storage of agricultural products and supplies. 
Governing authority shall mean the Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed for notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the Macon-Bibb County courthouse or by the Clerk of the Superior Court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; 
(5)  Parties in possession of said property and premises; 
(6)  Parties having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(7)  Parties having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, dwelling, building or structure. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of Macon-Bibb County, or the state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in Macon-Bibb County or the state. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with all applicable codes of Macon-Bibb County and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
Sec. 6-25. - Duties of owners. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within Macon-Bibb County to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within Macon-Bibb County, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
Sec. 6-26. - Nuisance abatement procedures. 
(a)  Appointment of public officer. The commission appoints and designates the director of the Macon-Bibb County Business Development Services Department and/or his designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this article and to be charged with enforcement thereof. 
(b)  Procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of Macon-Bibb County charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(c)  If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building; or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(d)  The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court, magistrate court, or state court of Macon-Bibb County at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the municipal court, magistrate court, or state court of Macon-Bibb County. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(e)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of Macon-Bibb County at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court, magistrate court, or state court of Macon-Bibb County. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(f)  A finding by any governmental health department, health officer, or building inspector, that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima-facie evidence that such property is in violation of this article. 
(g)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties an order providing as follows: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, then requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, then requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(h)  For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in Macon-Bibb County. 
(i)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to section 6-27 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(j)  If the public officer has the structure demolished; reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(k)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
Sec. 6-27. - Enforcement of lien against real property. 
(a)  The lien provided for in subsection 6-26(k) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required by subsection 6-26(e). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and shall enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(b)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the tax commissioner of Macon-Bibb County a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure of the subject premises. It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. Title 48, Chapter 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
(c)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt of the final determination of costs in accordance with this section. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties 30 days after imposition of the lien in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this section. Liens placed on properties prior to the enactment of this article resulting from the abatement of violations of the Standard Housing Code, Unsafe Building Abatement Code, or any other ordinance of this Code constituting a nuisance, shall also be enforced pursuant to this article. 
(d)  The Macon-Bibb County tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by action of the Macon-Bibb County Commission. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of Macon-Bibb County to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(e)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this article together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority and by the county tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(f)  Macon-Bibb County shall have discretion to waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with Macon-Bibb County agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(g)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
Sec. 6-28. - Enforcement powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have the following powers, in addition to others granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-10 and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-12 through 41-2-17: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in Macon-Bibb County in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon such premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession of the premises; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(6)  The public officer(s) designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citations in municipal court, magistrate court, or state court prior to issuing a complaint in rem. 
Sec. 6-29. - Standards for determining unfitness for habitation. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he or she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of Macon-Bibb County. Such conditions shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
(1)  Structural defects, including weakened structural support of interior or exterior bearing walls below the minimum required to be accepted as safe by generally accepted standards. 
(2)  Dilapidation, decay, damage from any cause, or deterioration in any manner which is likely to cause injury to persons or property. 
(3)  Weakened, defective or deteriorated footings, foundations, floorings, floor supports, ceilings, ceiling supports, roof, chimney, or other parts which are so attached that they are likely to cause injury to persons or property or which do not provide adequate weather protection or are likely to, or have resulted in, termite infestation or dry rot. 
(4)  Visible soil erosion adjacent to or under any structural support. 
(5)  Inadequate stairways, elevators, escalators, fire escapes or other means of egress such that injury to persons or property in the event of windstorm, fire, earthquake, panic, or other catastrophe is likely. 
(6)  Defective or inadequate plumbing, improper sanitation facilities, insufficient ventilation, lack of running water, or uncleanliness by failure to keep free of offensive matter or odor, including, but not limited to, rubbish, junk, garbage, animal intestinal waste and urine, and toxic or other hazardous liquids and substances and material. 
(7)  Vacancy, improper maintenance, deterioration or decay increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities. 
(8)  Property which is unsecured so as to potentially constitute an attraction to children; a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or other unauthorized persons; or so as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing any unlawful act. 
(9)  Obsolete, broken, deteriorated, or substantially defaced walls, windows, fences, signs, retaining walls, driveways or walkways such that the disrepair visually impacts on neighboring property or presents a risk to public safety. "Defaced" refers to a condition characterized by writings, inscriptions, figures, scratches, or other markings commonly referred to as "graffiti" and peeling, flaking, blistering or otherwise deteriorated paint. 
(b)  Determination of use of property for drug crimes. The public officer may determine, in accordance with this Code, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
Sec. 6-30. - Service of complaints and orders. 
Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be posted on the subject dwelling, building or structure within three business days of the filing of the complaint, and not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. 
(2)  At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identifies and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any. 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(4)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
Sec. 6-31. - Injunctions. 
(a)  Any person affected by an order issued hereunder by the public officer may petition to the superior court of the county for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause. 
(b)  Such petition shall be presented to the superior court of the county within fifteen (15) days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. 
(c)  The superior court of the county shall have a de novo hearing on any such petition within twenty (20) days of its filing and shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order and decree as law and justice may require, provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this article. 
Sec. 6-32. - Powers supplemental; continued use of other ordinances, compliance with other laws. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of Macon-Bibb County to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(b)  The provisions of all other applicable county, state, and federal laws shall apply. This article shall not be construed or interpreted to repeal or to be in conflict with any other provisions of this Code relating to public nuisance, including but not limited to Chapter 15, Nuisances and Chapter 22, Article III, Litter Control. 
(c)  The procedures for enforcement and abatement under this chapter shall be independent of those procedures for enforcement and abatement delineated in Chapter 15, Nuisances and Chapter 22, Article III, Litter Control. 
(d)  If any provision of this article is in genuine conflict with any state or federal law or requirement, the conflict shall be resolved in accordance with law. 
Secs. 6-33—6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 6-41. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of this state has in O.C.G.A. § 8-3-220 authorized local governmental units to adopt verbatim the laws against discriminatory housing practices cited in O.C.G.A. §§ 8-3-202, 8-3-203, 8-3-204, 8-2-205 or 8-3-222 as a local ordinance. 
Sec. 6-42. - Policy; purpose and construction of chapter. 
(a)  It is the policy of Macon-Bibb County to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city. 
(b)  The general purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  To provide for execution of policies embodied in Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988; 
(2)  To safeguard all individuals from discrimination in any aspect relating to the sale, rental, or financing of dwellings or in the provision of brokerage services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling because of that individual's race, color, religion, sex, disability or handicap, familial status, or national origin; 
(3)  To promote the elimination of discrimination in any aspect relating to the sale, rental, or financing of dwellings or in the provision of brokerage services or facilities with the sale or rental of a dwelling because of a person's color, religion, sex, disability or handicap, familial status, or national origin; and 
(4)  To promote the protection of each individual's interest in personal dignity and freedom from humiliation and the individual's freedom to take up residence wherever such individual chooses; to secure Macon-Bibb County against domestic strife and unrest which would menace its democratic institutions; to preserve the public safety, health, and general welfare; and to further the interests, rights, and privileges within Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  This chapter shall be broadly construed to further the general purposes stated in this section and the special purposes of the particular provision involved. 
Sec. 6-43. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Aggrieved person means any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur. 
Covered multi-family dwelling means a building which consists of four (4) or more units and has an elevator or the ground floor units of a building which consists of four (4) or more units and does not have an elevator. 
Director means the director of the business development services department. 
Disability means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
Familial status means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  That the person is a parent of or has legal custody of one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years and such individuals are being domiciled with such parent or legal guardian; 
(2)  That the person is the designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with the written permission of the parent or other person, and that one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years are being domiciled with such persons; or 
(3)  That the person is pregnant or is [in] the process of securing legal custody of an individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Family includes a single household. 
Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, or fiduciaries. 
To rent means to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
Sec. 6-44. - Unlawful practices in selling or renting dwellings; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as exempted by subsection (b) and (d) or section 6-47, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental to or otherwise make available or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin; 
(3)  To make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin or an intention to make any such preference, limitations, or discrimination; 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin or with a disability; 
(6)  To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: 
a.  That buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(7)  a.  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connections with such dwellings, because of a disability of: 
1.  That person; 
2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
3.  Any person associated with that person. 
b.  For purposes of this subsection, discrimination includes: 
1.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with disabilities, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or intended to be occupied by such person if such modification may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear expected; 
2.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling; or 
3.  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: 
i.  The public use and common use portion of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities; 
ii.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with disabilities in wheelchairs; and 
iii.  All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
(a)  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
(b)  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environment controls in accessible locations; 
(c)  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
(d)  Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
c.  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usableness for physically disabled people (commonly cited as "ANSI A117.1") suffices to satisfy the requirements of subsection (7)b.3.i. 
d.  In regard to persons with disabilities, discrimination includes, in connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that the dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impracticable to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. 
(b)  (1)  Nothing in this section, other than subsection (a)(3), shall apply to: 
a.  Any single-family dwellings sold or rented by the owner, if: 
1.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family dwellings at any one time; 
2.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family dwellings at any one time; 
3.  Such dwelling is sold or rented: 
i.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or any employees or agents of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
ii.  Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection (c); but nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
b.  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(2)  In the case of the sale of any such single-family dwelling by a private individual owner not residing in such dwelling at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such dwelling prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four (24) month period. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings, if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three or more therein; 
(2)  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwellings designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available for rental or lease to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
Sec. 6-45. - Unlawful denial of or discrimination in membership or participation in service or organization relating to selling or renting dwellings. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin. 
Sec. 6-46. - Discrimination in residential real estate related transaction; appraisals. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "residential real estate related transaction" means any of the following: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: 
a.  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or 
b.  Secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. 
Sec. 6-47. - Permissible limitations in sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings by religious organizations or private clubs; housing for older persons. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such person unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(b)  As used in this subsection, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: 
(1)  Provided under any state or federal program that the director determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons as defined in the state or federal programs; 
(2)  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection, the director shall develop regulations which require at least the following factors: 
a.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or, if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 
b.  That at least eighty (80) percent of the units are occupied by at least one person fifty-five (55) years of age or older per unit; and 
c.  The publication of and adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(4)  Nothing in this chapter limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. The provisions in this chapter regarding familial status shall not apply with respect to housing for older persons. 
(5)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: 
a.  Persons residing in such housing as of March 12, 1989, who do not meet the age requirements of subsection (2) or (3); provided, however, that the new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of subsection (2) or (3); or 
b.  Unoccupied units; provided, however, that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subsection (2) or (3). 
(6)  Nothing in this chapter prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
Sec. 6-48. - Powers and duties of director, housing and urban development programs or other agencies and departments. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for administering this chapter shall be vested in the director of the business development services department of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  The director may delegate any of the director's functions, duties, and powers under this chapter to employees of the business development services department or to boards of such employees. 
(c)  All departments and agencies shall administer their programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner to affirmatively further the purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with the director to further such purposes. 
(d)  The director shall: 
(1)  Make studies with respect to the nature and extent of discriminatory housing practices throughout Macon-Bibb County. 
(2)  Publish and disseminate reports, recommendations, and information derived from such studies; 
(3)  Cooperate with and render technical assistance to local and other public or private agencies, organizations, and institutions which are formulating or carrying on programs to prevent or eliminate discriminatory housing practices; 
(4)  Administer the programs and activities relating to housing in a manner affirmatively to further the policies of this chapter; 
(5)  Propose the adoption, promulgation, amendment, and rescission, subject to section 2-267, of such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter; 
(6)  Cooperate with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development created by Section 10(b) of the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965 (79 Stat. 667) and with other federal and local agencies in order to achieve the purposes of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 81), as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (102 Stat. 1619), and to cooperate with other federal and local agencies in order to achieve the purposes of this chapter. 
Sec. 6-49. - Educational activities; conferences; consultation as to extent of discrimination; reports. 
The director shall commence such educational activities as in the director's judgment will further the purpose of this chapter. The director shall call conferences of persons in the housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with this chapter and the director's suggested means of implementing this chapter and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary compliance and of enforcement. The director shall consult with Macon-Bibb County officials and other interested parties to learn the extent, if any, to which housing discrimination exists in Macon-Bibb County, and whether and how enforcement programs might be utilized to combat such discrimination in connection with director's enforcement of this chapter. The director shall issue reports in such conferences and consultations as the director deems appropriate. 
Sec. 6-50. - Coercion, intimidation, threats, or interference. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of such person's having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this chapter. 
Sec. 6-51. - Compliance with federal law. 
Compliance with the provisions of the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-430) shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of section 6-43 and subsection 6-44(a)(7)b. In addition, should any provision of this chapter relating to the treatment of persons with disabilities be in conflict with any provision of the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, then the provisions of the latter shall prevail. 
Sec. 6-52. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Any person who violates section 6-44, 6-45, 6-46, 6-47, or 6-50 or fails to comply with any of their requirements shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $1,000.00 as provided in section 1-6, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Macon-Bibb County or an aggrieved person from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
Secs. 6-53—6-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FORECLOSURE AND VACANT REAL PROPERTY REGISTRY 

Sec. 6-70. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Macon-Bibb County Vacant and Foreclosed Property Ordinance." 
Sec. 6-71. - Findings and intent. 
This article is adopted to address the interest of public safety. 
(1)  The governing authority finds that there is a need to establish a foreclosure and vacant real property registry as a mechanism to protect property values in neighborhoods for all property owners. 
(2)  Due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties that are foreclosed, where ownership has been transferred after foreclosure or which are otherwise vacant, the property values and quality of life of neighboring properties are negatively impacted. 
(3)  Improperly maintained and secured foreclosed and/or vacant properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of persons who may come on or near the property and can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Difficulties also often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of said real property. The governing authority finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the provisions in this article. 
(4)  This foreclosure and vacant real property registry will require owners and agents to provide Macon-Bibb County with official information for contacting a party responsible for bringing foreclosed and vacant real property into compliance with applicable provisions of the consolidated code of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
Sec. 6-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state in which he or she is authorized to accept inquiries, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. The definition of "agent" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
Department means the Macon-Bibb County Business Development Services Department. 
Director means the director of the Business Development Services Department. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by a county or municipal corporation and is held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ. 
Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust having a legal or equitable interest in a parcel of real property. 
Person means any person, agent, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. The definition of "street address" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least sixty (60) days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past sixty (60) days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one (1) unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. The definition of "vacant real property" shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
Sec. 6-73. - Registration of vacant or foreclosed property. 
(a)  Owner or agents of foreclosed real property or vacant real property, including foreclosed real property and vacant real property which is also residential rental property, are required to register such property with the department within thirty (30) days of such property becoming foreclosed or vacant real property by following the provisions of this section unless otherwise exempted by this article or state law. 
(b)  Any such owner or agent of foreclosed real property or vacant real property located within the jurisdiction of Macon-Bibb County is required to file with the department a registration form provided by Macon-Bibb County, and shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(c)  Registration is required for all vacant or foreclosed real property unless otherwise exempted, pursuant to this article, but is not required for vacant or foreclosed real property within ninety (90) days of such real property's transfer: 
(1)  Pursuant to a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; or 
(2)  To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(d)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to state law shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (a) within thirty (30) days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(e)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to state law shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (a) within thirty (30) days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(f)  Vacant properties subject to this article shall remain under the registration requirement of this article as long as they remain vacant. 
(g)  If pursuant to the terms and definitions of this article a property is determined to have multiple owners, each owner, as defined by this article shall be jointly and severally liable for the property and compliance with this article. 
Sec. 6-74. - Foreclosed and vacant real property exemptions. 
(a)  Registration or payment of any administrative fees of foreclosed real property pursuant to this article and state law is not required of transferees as described in subsection (b). 
(b)  Any transferee who acquires any real property by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, or acquires any real property pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure and: 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in subsection (a); 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk of the superior court within 60 days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the office or the officer in charge of the foreclosed real property registry: 
a.  A filing date stamp or receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
Sec. 6-75. - Removal from registry. 
(a)  Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property may apply to Macon-Bibb County to remove a vacant or foreclosed real property from the registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes a vacant or foreclosed real property. 
(b)  Any application for removal allowed under subsection (a) shall be granted or denied by the department within thirty (30) days, and if no such determination is made within thirty (30) days then the application for removal from the registry shall be deemed granted. 
Sec. 6-76. - Administrative fees. 
Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property which is required to be registered under this article shall, at the time of registry, pay an administrative fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
Sec. 6-77. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Any owner or agent aggrieved of any determination or decision of the department, or Macon-Bibb County, in the administration of this article may appeal to the municipal court. All appeals hereunder must be taken within thirty (30) days of the decision in question by filing with the director, or his/her designee, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
(b)  The department shall forthwith transmit the notice of appeal and all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken to the municipal court clerk who shall schedule an appeal hearing within sixty (60) days following the date the appealing party submits its completed written appeal with subsection (a). 
(c)  The municipal court judge may call for further information to be provided within the next thirty-five (35) days following the hearing, and may continue the hearing for the purpose of receiving such information or for such other proceedings and reasons as the municipal court judge deems appropriate. 
(d)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the director, or his/her designee, certifies to the municipal court, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the municipal court judge on notice to the department, and on due cause shown. 
(e)  The municipal court judge may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision, requirement, or determination of the department appealed by the owner or agent and may make such decision, requirement, or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
Sec. 6-78. - Administration. 
(a)  The foreclosure and vacant real property registry is subject to the Open Records Act of the State of Georgia and Macon-Bibb County may make such registry information available online. 
(b)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
Sec. 6-79. - Nuisances and code enforcement. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair, limit, or preempt in any way the power of Macon-Bibb County to enforce any applicable codes, as defined in state law, or to define or declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
Sec. 6-80. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  An owner or agent required to register a vacant or foreclosed real property under this article will be in violation this article by: 
(1)  Failing to register a subject property with the department; 
(2)  Failing to update any changes in registration information; or 
(3)  Failing to pay any fees required herein. 
(b)  Should the owner violate this article, Macon-Bibb County may issue a citation setting a hearing in municipal court. 
(c)  Any person who is found guilty of violating this article shall be subject to a fine that shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). If an owner has multiple vacant real properties that are not registered with Macon-Bibb County, each property not registered shall be a separate violation of this article. 
Chapter 7 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, vocation or calling of any kind for gain or profit, directly or indirectly, provided that this shall not include any business, trade and the like licensed by the state unless local government licensing is allowed by state law, nor shall it include any business operated solely under a franchise granted by Macon-Bibb County. 
Employee shall include: 
(1)  Every person in the service of or permitted to work for or under the direction and control of, any such business, trade or occupation in any manner or means whatsoever, whether full time or part time, whether working for regular salaries, wages or tips, wholly or partly on a commission basis, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  Owners, officers or proprietors giving their personal attention to such business, trade or occupation. 
Engaged in business. Any person shall be deemed to be engaged in business and thus subject to the requirements of this chapter when he performs any act of selling any goods or services or solicits business or offers goods or services for sale for payment in an attempt to make a profit, including the sales or services of the character as made by a wholesaler or retailer or involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, either as an owner, operator or agent in any business within Macon-Bibb County. 
Privilege license means any license or permit requiring approval of the sheriff and any license or permit wherein the business, trade or occupation is regulated and controlled by ordinance of Macon-Bibb County. Every person receiving a license for any business, trade or occupation, set forth as a privilege license, shall take such license subject to the continuing compliance with the conditions set forth in this code, and the failure of any business, trade or occupation to comply therewith at any time may result in the automatic suspension of such license until such business, trade or occupation has complied therewith. Privilege licenses specifically include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Adult entertainer permit; 
(2)  Adult entertainment establishment; 
(3)  Reserved; 
(4)  Beer or malt beverages, retail (consumed on premises or packaged to go or both); 
(5)  Beer or malt beverages, wholesale; 
(6)  Billiard or pool hall; 
(7)  Brown bagging permit; 
(8)  Reserved; 
(9)  Dealers in precious metals and gems; 
(10)  Landfill user; 
(11)  Liquor, retail (packaged to go); 
(12)  Liquor, retail (sales by the drink/consumed on premises); 
(13)  Liquor, wholesale; 
(14)  Pawnbroker; 
(15)  Reserved; 
(16)  Shooting range (indoor); 
(17)  Sunday sales permit; 
(18)  Taxicab company; 
(19)  Taxicab driver permit; 
(20)  Wine, retail (consumed on premises/packaged to go); 
(21)  Wine, wholesale; and 
(22)  Massage parlors. 
Professional bondsmen means bondsmen or persons who hold themselves out as signers or sureties of bonds for compensation. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by Macon-Bibb County. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. No local government is authorized to require any administrative fee, registration fee, or fee by any other name in connection with a regulatory fee, except an occupation tax. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
Transfer fee means a fee in the amount of ten (10) percent of the regulatory license fee assessed and levied for a particular business shall be assessed and levied from the transferee of any transferable privilege license. Transfer fees are applicable to a transfer of ownership or location unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 7-2. - Administration; enforcement. 
(a)  It is hereby made the duty of the Department of Business and Development Services and the sheriff's department to see that the provisions of this article relating to regulatory fees and privilege licenses are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the Department of Business and Development Services, sheriff, and their assistants to inspect all privilege licenses issued by the Macon-Bibb County, as often as, in their judgment, it may seem necessary to determine whether the license held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. Such license inspectors may issue to any business found to be in violation of this chapter a notice or demand to appear before the municipal court for a determination of the matter by the judge of such court. 
(b)  Any notice or demand to appear before the court issued pursuant to this section shall provide a statement of alleged violations which may constitute grounds for the revocation of any Macon-Bibb County privilege license. 
(c)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the judge of the municipal court shall have jurisdiction by appropriate process to compel the presence of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records, or memoranda to enforce compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(d)  If an applicant completes one or more forms in order to comply with any ordinance imposing a regulatory fee but fails to disclose the social security number or the appropriate federal or state taxpayer identification number or other identification numbers, the Department of Business and Development Services shall report such omission in a timely manner to the state revenue commissioner. 
Sec. 7-3. - Privilege license required for each location; penalties, revocation and suspensions. 
(a)  Each privilege license required by this chapter shall be due and payable on the first day of January of each year, except as otherwise provided, and the license issued hereunder shall expire on December 31st of each year. Where a person conducts a business at more than one (1) store, location or place, each store, location or place shall be considered a separate business under the terms of this chapter and a separate license shall be required. Should more than one (1) business subject to this chapter be conducted at only one (1) location, each such business shall be separately licensed. Persons subject to license who fail to pay such license on or before April first of each year shall, in addition to other penalties as set out in this section, be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount due and unpaid. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in any regulated business in Macon-Bibb County without having first procured a privilege license therefor, or to engage in any such business in Macon-Bibb County after revocation or suspension of any privilege license previously issued therefor. Each day during which such business is so engaged in shall constitute a separate offense. The officers and agents listed for or representing any person engaged in business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to procure a license. Notwithstanding the foregoing, regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession when: 
(i)  The work done or service provided are necessary for the health or safety of one or more individuals; 
(ii)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; and 
(iii)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the Department of Business and Development Services within two business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give, or cause to be given, submit or cause to be submitted, exhibit, or cause to be exhibited, or present, or cause to be presented to the Macon-Bibb County government any false, deceptive or misleading statement, affidavit, certificate, book or record of entry, or any other document or information relating to the activities of the business or practitioner, or any other data, records or information required by ordinance and applicable to such business. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person duly licensed to transact any business within Macon-Bibb County to fail to have such business privilege license posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business of such person as provided in this chapter and if such person has no fixed place of business within Macon-Bibb County, it shall be unlawful for such person to fail to exhibit to the Macon-Bibb County government's agents such privilege license after request for such license during reasonable business hours. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a privilege license shall be granted under the provisions of this chapter to do any of the acts forbidden by this chapter or to fail to do any of the things required to be done by the terms hereof, and it shall be unlawful for any person to whom a privilege license shall be granted to violate any of the terms, conditions and provisions under which such privilege license has been granted. Every licensee shall be responsible for and subject to the penalties provided in this chapter in the event of violation of this chapter by any employee or agent of such licensee. 
(c)  Revocations, suspensions and penalties. 
(1)  Any person transacting any business within Macon-Bibb County who shall violate any of the terms of this chapter or commit any offense made unlawful in this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by the general penalty section(s) of the Charter and/or code of Macon-Bibb County. The conviction and payment of a fine therefor or other punishment shall not relieve any person of the duty to comply with the requirements of any of the provisions of this chapter or to pay any licensing fee applicable to such business. 
(2)  The municipal court, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if it finds this Code to have been violated by the licensee, his agents or employees in the operation of the business, revoke the privilege license in its entirety, suspend such privilege license for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the municipal court judge may deem necessary in addition to any other lawful punishment for violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 7-4. - Discrimination by privilege license holder prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who holds a privilege license, as defined in this chapter, to discriminate against any person on the basis of race, color, national original, religion, sex, age or handicapped status. 
Sec. 7-5. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
(a)  This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the Macon-Bibb County government to assess and collect any of the fees or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and fees of any occupation and may change the classification thereto. The payment of any regulatory fee provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the assessment or collection by the jurisdiction of additional regulatory fees upon the same person, property, or business. 
(b)  This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes were levied or license fees required under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuance and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(c)  This division shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the commission. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax or fee herein levied or required shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes or fees have been paid in full. 
Secs. 7-6—7-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - RESERVED 

Secs. 7-51—7-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALARM COMPANIES 

Sec. 7-71. - License required. 
All alarm companies operating in Macon-Bibb County must be licensed and registered with the Department of Business and Development Services. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0049, § 1, 9-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 7-72. - Keying automatic dialer to emergency number unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful to key automatic dialer burglar alarms to the emergency number 911, or to Macon-Bibb County's switchboard. These types of alarms shall be keyed to a private service that can then notify the sheriffs department. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0049, § 1, 9-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 7-73. - Technical specifications. 
(a)  Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) approved equipment. All alarms shall be of Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) approved equipment and shall have complete electrical stand-by capacity. 
(b)  Circuits. All alarm circuits shall be installed in approved low voltage wire (PVC-coated). 
(c)  Connectors. All connectors used in the connection of all circuit wiring shall be either soldered or be an approved solderless connector. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0049, § 1, 9-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 7-74. - Maintenance of office and technician required. 
All alarm companies shall maintain an office with a telephone listing, and at least one (1) technician on twenty-four-hour call that can service alarms in the Macon-Bibb County area within sixty (60) minutes after activation. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0049, § 1, 9-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 7-75. - False alarms; reports. 
Upon any false burglar alarm being rendered, for any reason, by a burglar alarm system connected directly with the sheriff's department, or upon any false burglar alarm being communicated, for any reason, to the sheriff's department from any burglar alarm system not directly connected to the sheriff's department, the owner or operator of any such system is required, without notification, to submit a written report to the sheriff's department giving full details of the reasons behind the false alarm and the action taken to prevent future such occurrences. The report shall be rendered not later than seven (7) days following any false alarm. Should more than two (2) false alarms be rendered to the sheriff's department by an alarm system directly connected with the E-911 call center, or be communicated to the E-911 call center from any alarm system not directly connected to the E-911 call center, within any calendar month, the owner or operator of any such alarm system shall be assessed the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each false alarm ringing in excess of two (2) during such calendar month as partial reimbursement of the Macon-Bibb County government's cost of handling the false alarms. If the building or establishment is one required by law to have a burglar alarm system in operation, and there is default of payment of any such assessment within a period of thirty (30) days following receipt of written notification of the assessment, such owner or operator may be summoned to appear in municipal court and charged with violation of this section. The sheriff may waive this requirement if it is found that the false alarm was beyond the control of the subscriber or the alarm company. In the case of a building or establishment not required by law to have an alarm system in operation and the assessment is not paid within thirty (30) days after the assessment has been made for such false alarm ringings, the owner or operator may be notified in writing by the sheriff to disconnect such alarm system. It shall be unlawful to reconnect such alarm system until such assessment has been paid in full or otherwise satisfied. Failure of the owner or operator to obey such an order to disconnect such system may result in such owner or operator being summoned to appear in the municipal court on a charge of violating this section. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0049, § 1, 9-2-2014 ) 
Secs. 7-76—7-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AMBULANCE SERVICES 

Sec. 7-96. - General Compliance. 
All ambulance services, its vehicles and personnel shall at all times be operated in compliance with laws, rules, regulations and orders and decrees of the State of Georgia and Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-22, § 1, 3-18-2014 ) 
Sec. 7-97. - Advanced Life Support Requirement. 
Every person, firm or corporation providing ambulance service within Macon-Bibb County shall have such ambulances, except in the case of prescheduled nonemergency calls, shall be staffed, equipped and certified to provide advanced life support as presently defined in the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Health, r. 511-9-2, as presently defined or as may be defined hereafter. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-22, § 1, 3-18-2014 ) 
Sec. 7-98. - Minimum Personnel Requirement. 
The initial response to all 911 or public safety calls in Macon-Bibb County by Emergency Medical Service (EMS), shall be made with at least one licensed "Cardiac Technician (CT)" or one licensed "Paramedic". 
( Ord. No. O-2014-22, § 1, 3-18-2014 ) 
Sec. 7-99. - Violations and Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction in State Court of Bibb County shall be punished as provided by section 1-6 of the Macon-Bibb County Code of Ordinances. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-22, § 1, 3-18-2014 ) 
Secs. 7-100—7-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED 

Secs. 7-121—7-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BILLIARDS 

Sec. 7-146. - Provision for local licensing. 
The purpose of this section is to provide for local licensing and regulation of billiard rooms pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 8. 
Sec. 7-147. - Definition. 
The terms "billiards," or "pool," as used in this section, shall mean any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions, with balls which are impelled by a cue, and shall include all forms of the games known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards," (formerly called "pool"), and "English billiards." The term "billiard room" or "pool room" shall mean any public place where the game of billiards or pool is permitted to be played and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. 
Sec. 7-148. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within Macon-Bibb County any billiard room or any place of like character, without first having made application to the Department of Business and Development Services and, after paying the prescribed fees, having received a license to maintain and operate such business. No license shall be issued to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years or to any person who has been convicted of a felony within the past five (5) years. 
Sec. 7-149. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-150. - Enclosed rooms prohibited. 
No closed rooms, stalls or other enclosures wherein the game of pool is played shall be permitted within the licensed premises. This provision, however, shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes, nor the maintenance of closets for storage purposes exclusively. 
Sec. 7-151. - Access by law enforcement officers. 
All law enforcement officers shall have free access to the licensed premises at any time any person is present in the licensed premises. 
Sec. 7-152. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-153. - Operation during legal hours for drinking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person running or operating a pool room or billiard room within Macon-Bibb County wherein alcoholic beverages are licensed to be consumed on the premises to keep the room open or permit the playing of any pool or billiards within the licensed premises at any time other than the legal hours for drinking and possession of open containers of alcohol. 
Sec. 7-154. - Restriction on minors' presence. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons running or operating a pool room or billiard room within Macon-Bibb County to permit persons under eighteen (18) years of age, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, to enter the licensed premises of the pool room if the establishment also holds an alcoholic beverage license for consumption on premises. 
(b)  The provisions of this division shall not be construed to include billiard tables or billiard rooms operated by private or industrial concerns, religious orders, charitable institutions, state, county or city institutions, fraternal orders or bona fide clubs, using such tables for members or employees only. 
Sec. 7-155. - Regulatory fee. 
Billiard rooms or pool rooms shall, prior to the commencement of business, obtain a license upon application to the office of the Department of Business and Development Services and payment of an annual license fee which shall be determined from time to time by the mayor and commission based upon the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity and listed in a schedule of fees and charges maintained by the Department of Business and Development Services. 
Secs. 7-156—7-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 

Sec. 7-171. - Definition. 
Transient merchant or peddler means any person, firm, or corporation, as principal or agent, or both, which is not a regular retail or wholesale merchant with a permanent place of business in Macon-Bibb County, but rather one who displays samples, model goods, wares, or merchandise in any lot, building, room or structure of any kind, whether fixed or mobile, for the purpose of securing orders for the retail sale of such items or items of like kind or quality for immediate or future delivery. The terms "transient merchant" and "peddler" shall not include any person, firm, or corporation which: 
(1)  Sells agricultural or forestry products; 
(2)  Makes house-to-house or personal calls for the purpose of displaying samples or taking orders for shipment directly from a manufacturer; 
(3)  Conducts business at any industry or association trade show; or 
(4)  Sells items at a rummage, garage, antique, or similar sale when such person, firm, or corporation is a resident of this state or has a permanent place of business within this state and such sale is not part of the regular business activity of such person, firm, or corporation or when the net proceeds of such sale are to be used for charitable purposes. 
Sec. 7-172. - License application. 
(a)  No transient vendor shall sell any article in Macon-Bibb County without having first made application for a license to do business, which application shall recite the name of the vendor, the name of his agent conducting the sale, if any, the place where the sale is to be conducted, the hours of the sale, and the number of days during which the sale is to be conducted. There shall be appended to the application a complete and accurate list of the articles to be sold which list shall be signed by the person seeking the license and which list shall also reflect the wholesale price of the articles to be sold. The inventory shall be verified upon oath by the applicant. The application and inventory shall be accompanied by a good and sufficient bond in the penal amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) payable to Macon-Bibb County and conditioned to pay to Macon-Bibb County or anyone else suing in its name for their use for injuries or damages arising from dishonest or fraudulent conduct in the administration of the business so licensed. Upon payment of the license fee and filing of the application, inventory and bond, the Department of Business and Development Services shall be authorized to issue a license. 
(b)  The fee or tax for the license required by this section shall be an amount to be determined from time to time by the commission and listed in a schedule of fees and charges maintained by the Department of Business and Development Services. 
Sec. 7-173. - Solicitation for magazine subscriptions; permit required. 
No person shall solicit or take, or cause or instigate the solicitation or taking, of subscriptions or orders for, or sell, or cause or instigate the sale of magazines within Macon-Bibb County without first obtaining from the department of business and development services a permit so to do, and after satisfying reasonable requirements to evidence of good character. 
Secs. 7-174—7-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RESERVED 

Secs. 7-201—7-214. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - RESERVED 

Secs. 7-215—7-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS; PAWNSHOPS 

Sec. 7-236. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer in precious metals or gems means: 
(1)  Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or 
(2)  A person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Gems means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
Numismatic coins means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this section. 
Pledged goods means tangible personal property, including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this Code section, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. "Pledged goods" shall not include choses [purchases] in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness. 
Precious metals means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
Sec. 7-237. - Applicability; exceptions. 
This chapter shall apply to all pawnbrokers and dealers in precious metals or gems, resident or itinerant, but it shall not apply to those businesses which sell jewelry or items made from precious metals which have been purchased exclusively and directly from the manufacturer or an authorized salesman of the manufacturer. The buying and selling of numismatic items and gold and silver bullion are specifically excepted from this chapter. 
Sec. 7-238. - Privilege license—Required; qualifications. 
(a)  Any person within Macon-Bibb County shall, before engaging in whole or in part in the business of pawnbroker, or buying or selling jewelry, gold, silver, precious metals, etc., from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers, obtain a privilege license to conduct and carry on such business and pay an annual license fee which shall be determined from time to time by the mayor and commission based upon the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity and listed in a schedule of fees and charges maintained by the Department of Business and Development Services. The conducting of the above activities in Macon-Bibb County is hereby declared to be a privilege granted by the mayor and commission by virtue of the authority contained in the Charter. 
(b)  The application for such business shall be signed and dated by the applicant and contain answers to the following questions: 
(1)  Type of business to be operated; 
(2)  Name of business; 
(3)  Location of business; 
(4)  Telephone number of such business; 
(5)  Name of the applicant and all persons owning twenty-five (25) percent or more in such business, the addresses of all applicants along with the prior addresses for six (6) months preceding the date of this application, and social security numbers of all applicants; 
(6)  Whether the applicant or any person connected with, employed by, or having any interest in such business: 
a.  Has been charged or convicted of any violation of any law in any locality other than minor traffic violations; or 
b.  Has served time in a prison or other correctional institution. 
Sec. 7-239. - Same—Character requirements; approval, disapproval by sheriff. 
No license shall be issued to or renewed for any person who conducts a business in which the owner or manager or any employee has, within five years of issuance or renewal, been convicted or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony involving any offense or any misdemeanor involving theft-related offenses in any state. All licensees shall submit the identity of all owners and managers and employees to the sheriff's department on a continuing basis as changes occur for the purpose of allowing a complete check in order that these character requirements be fulfilled. The application must be approved by the sheriff. If disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be listed on the application. 
Sec. 7-240. - Same—Revocation. 
Licenses issued under this division may be revoked upon a conviction of the licensee or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the licensee, in the municipal court or any other court, of violation of any of this chapter's provisions, or upon a conviction of the licensee or plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the licensee in any state of any felony involving any offense or any misdemeanor involving theft-related offenses. For the purpose of this division, any conviction of the above-mentioned offenses of any employee or partner of the licensee shall be deemed a conviction of the licensee. 
Sec. 7-241. - Requirements upon purchase of items. 
All businesses regulated by this division shall fulfill the following requirements when receiving any items in pawn or purchasing jewelry or precious metals such as gold and silver and platinum, or any serialized electronic items: 
(1)  Require the pawner or seller to positively identify himself by driver's license, military identification, or other photo identification that contains information regarding such person's birthdate, sex, race, address, telephone number, and any other relevant physical descriptive information on a form prescribed and provided by the sheriff's department. 
(2)  Record on the same form which describes the pawner or seller a complete description of the merchandise pawned or purchased, including the type of electronic device, the type of gem or precious metal, the type of ornament, the type of flatware or hollowware and its pattern, the manufacturer, and any distinguishing marks such as initials or serial numbers, as well as the time it was obtained by the pawner or purchaser and from whom it was obtained. 
(3)  For a period of ten (10) days from the date of pawning or purchasing, retain in a readily accessible place on the premises designated in the license for doing business, the form containing the above information and hold on these premises in a place readily available for inspection by law enforcement officials all of these designated items in the same condition as they existed when first pawned or purchased; provided, however, that a licensee under this chapter need not hold such items for ten (10) days if he purchases from another licensee who has held the same items for the required ten (10) days. Items pawned or sold shall be kept separate from other merchandise and all items shall be accompanied by the above described identification form. Multiple items pawned or sold by the same individual will be kept together during the ten-day hold period. The premises shall be open for inspection by law enforcement officials during normal business hours and at all times when persons are present on the licensed premises. 
(4)  Require the pawner or seller to sign the sheriff's department form on a signature line which shall be proceeded by the sentence: 
"I do solemnly swear/affirm that the information provided by me on this form is true and correct." 
Sec. 7-242. - Daily reports. 
Each person operating a business under this division shall make a daily written report to the sheriff's department concerning all purchases or items received in pawn, and these reports shall contain descriptive information as may be required by the sheriff. In addition, each person operating a business under this division shall keep a record of persons from whom all pawns are received or purchases are made, along with a complete description of the items received in pawn or purchased. 
Sec. 7-243. - Dealing with minors prohibited. 
No business regulated by this chapter shall transact business with persons under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Sec. 7-244. - Records required. 
(a)  Any person doing the business of a pawnbroker shall be required to keep a book or register, upon which shall be entered each and every article or thing taken or held as security for any loan made by the person as well as the name and place of residence of the owner or person pledging the same. The book or register, as well as the articles themselves, shall be at all times open to the unrestricted inspection of the sheriff's department or other inspectors authorized by Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  Any person selling or pledging any article as provided in this division shall be required to show positive identification and the person taking the pledge shall require and record in the above-required book or register that identification. 
Sec. 7-245. - Daily reports; inspection; definition. 
Each person engaged in the business of pawnbroker, or conducting a pawnbroker shop in Macon-Bibb County, shall make a report to the sheriff's department before 12:00 noon each day (except Sunday, when the transactions of Saturday shall be reported on the following Monday) of every article or thing pawned to or purchased, whether such purchase be unconditional, or with the privilege of redeeming on the part of the seller, on the day and night previous, such report to specify the article or thing, giving a full and clearly legible description thereof, such as number, mark, and all other details as will make identification of such article or thing clear and positive. Each person shall hold the shop subject to visitation and inspection by law enforcement, and on refusal of any pawnbroker at any time to submit to visitation or inspection, his shop shall be immediately closed by order of the sheriff. Any person who purchases jewelry, guns, pistols, household effects, or other articles of merchandise or personal property, and at the time thereof gives the seller the privilege of redeeming the same thereafter, shall be held and deemed a pawnbroker, within the intent and meaning of this division. 
Secs. 7-246—7-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - JEWELRY AUCTIONS 

Sec. 7-261. - License. 
Any person engaged in the business of selling watches, clocks or jewelry at auction, shall pay the appropriate license fee or tax currently prescribed and no license shall be issued for less than the full price of one (1) year. The license fee shall be paid in advance. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-6-25.1, no license under this division shall be granted to any business or person required to obtain a state license under O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 6 ("Auctioneers") unless such business or person has obtained the state license required of it under state law. The exceptions from the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 6 listed in O.C.G.A. § 43-6-24 shall also apply to this division. 
Sec. 7-262. - Business hours. 
No person shall offer for sale or sell at public auction any watches, clocks or jewelry between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Sec. 7-263. - Bond required. 
No person shall engage in business under this division without first depositing with the Department of Business and Development Services a good and sufficient bond payable to Macon-Bibb County and conditioned to pay Macon-Bibb County or anyone else suing in its name for their use, for injuries or damages received on account of dishonest, or fraudulent conduct in the administration of the business so licensed. The amount of the bond shall be the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and shall be given for each fiscal year. The bond shall provide that any person or persons injured by the dishonest, fraudulent or improper conduct of the business may sue on the bond for their own use and the recovery, if any, shall be payable to the person. 
Sec. 7-264. - Labeling of merchandise. 
(a)  No person shall offer for sale, or sell, at public auction, any watches, clocks or jewelry, unless there is securely attached to each of such articles a tag or label upon which shall be plainly written or printed, in English, a true and correct statement of the kind and quality of the metal of which such article is made or composed and the percentage or karat of purity of such material. In case the articles are plated or overlaid, then the tag or label shall contain a true statement of the kind of material or metal covered. When precious or semiprecious stones are offered for sale or sold, a written statement shall set forth the true name, weight, quality and fineness of the stones, and imitations shall be described as such. When watches and clocks are sold, the true names of the manufacturers shall be stated in writing, and no parts of the movement or mechanism thereof shall be substituted or contain false or misleading names or trademarks, and neither shall secondhand or old movements be offered for sale in new cases, without a true statement to that effect. 
(b)  The tag or label shall remain securely attached to any such articles or merchandise, and shall be delivered to the purchaser as a true and correct description and representation of the articles sold. 
Sec. 7-265. - False bidders. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Act, or to employ another to act as by-bidder, or what is commonly known as a capper or booster at any auction sale under this division; 
(2)  Make or accept any false or misleading bid, or 
(3)  Pretend to buy or sell any aforesaid articles sold or offered for sale at any such auction. 
Sec. 7-266. - Exceptions for judicial sales. 
The provisions of this division shall not extend to judicial sales, sales under executions or to executors' or administrators' sales held before the courthouse door in accordance with the state statutes governing judicial sales, sales under executions, and executors' and administrators' sales. 
Sec. 7-267. - Exemption for established business. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply to a person who desires to close out his business, provided such person has been in continuous bona fide operation two years prior to the time the closing out sale is begun, and provided no additions or replacements are added to the stock sought to be closed out. But where a person having been in the jewelry business for two (2) years, and desiring to close out the business, and thereafter discontinue the business, the usual license for the business shall be charged instead of the license named in this division. 
DIVISION 11. - MASSAGE PARLORS 

Sec. 7-268. - Findings. 
The unlicensed practice of massage therapy has in certain contexts been associated with criminal behavior that damages the reputations of those who comply with the law as well as the communities in which these businesses operate. This is not a problem unique to Macon-Bibb County; it is an epidemic, occurring throughout the United States. As a result, a majority of the states, as well as the District of Columbia, have found it necessary to regulate message therapy and to provide for education and state certification. In these states, massage therapists must meet legal requirements to practice their profession, which may include minimum hours of training and passing an exam; Georgia is one of these states, requiring five hundred (500) educational hours including clinical work, an exam, and twenty-four (24) continuing education hours for each two-year license renewal period. [American Massage Therapy Association; O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.] 
Businesses operating massage parlors with massage being offered by unlicensed masseuses and businesses of like character are businesses that affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the communities in which they operate. Certain of these businesses have been associated with illegal sexual conduct, such as solicitation, pandering, pimping, prostitution, sodomy, lewdness, and other sexual conduct. In order to protect the public interest, health, and welfare, it is necessary that such businesses be regulated to prevent their use for unlawful and illegal activities. [FBI Weekly Reports 2009] 
Therefore, based on the demonstrated experiences of the City of Macon, Georgia, Bibb County and other urban counties and municipalities, including but not limited to Atlanta, GA; Huntsville, AL; Kansas City, MO; Ashville, NC; Spartanburg County, SC; Seattle, WA; Phoenix, AZ; Champaign, IL; Pittsburgh, PA; Knoxville, TN; Augusta, ME, and Jacksonville, FL, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems that face Macon-Bibb County, and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented at public meetings by citizens, a number of whom are familiar with conditions in other localities, the Macon-Bibb County mayor and commission take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the diverse communities within our country, especially the problems of crime, blight, and deterioration that are brought about by illegal sexual activities for hire. 
Hence, Macon-Bibb County finds that it is in the best interest of health, welfare, safety, and morals; churches, schools, and parks; and the preservation of its businesses and neighborhoods to prevent the adverse impact of unlicensed massage practitioners and the parlors and businesses of like character wherein they practice illegal sexual activities for compensation. Therefore, Macon-Bibb County finds that the prohibition of unlicensed massage practice, as well as the prohibition of dispensation and consumption of alcohol and escort dating services in connection with massage parlors, will improve the public welfare by furthering legitimate government interests, such as reducing criminal activity, protection against devaluation and deterioration of properties located nearby, and eliminating undesirable community conditions normally associated with parlors that have masseuses who are not licensed pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, and that such prohibition will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
Sec. 7-269. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for local licensing and regulation of massage parlors, pursuant to the authority of subsection O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b)(17), and O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. as amended. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to this division is a privilege, not a right. 
Sec. 7-270. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
Act means the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, enacted by and defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq. as amended. 
Board means the state board of massage therapy, enacted by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-4. 
For hire means a reasonable expectation that the person to whom the massage is provided, or some third person on his or her behalf, will pay money, give other consideration, or provide any gratuity therefore. 
Licensed massage therapist means a person who holds a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended state license in the practice of massage therapy issued by the board pursuant to the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act. 
Massage means any tactile stimulation of another person, for hire, below the collarbone on the front torso and the shoulder blades on the back torso including, but not limited to, touching, rubbing, probing, scrubbing, bathing, cleaning, rinsing, or otherwise applying hands or other body contact of the masseuse or a mechanical apparatus or appliance to the torso of another to clean, relieve tension or pain, stimulate blood flow, provide pleasurable sensation or for any other purposes. 
Massage parlor means a business with a location in Macon-Bibb County at which any person engages in or offers massage, regardless of the name of the business or the words used to describe the business through signage or advertisement or in filings with the Secretary of State. Massage parlors are subject to regulation by a local government, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b)(17) and O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22(a) as amended. 
Masseuse, masseur, massage practitioner, or persons practicing massage means a person who performs or engages in the practice of massage. 
State license means a license to practice massage therapy issued by the board, pursuant to the Act. 
Sec. 7-271. - Requirements and application. 
(a)  Requirements. 
(1)  a.  State license. No person other than a licensed massage therapist shall perform or offer to perform massage in a massage parlor within Macon-Bibb County. 
b.  No license shall be issued to any massage parlor within Macon-Bibb County under this division unless every person who performs or offers to perform massage on its premises is a licensed massage therapist, and it shall be unlawful to operate as a massage parlor unless all such persons are and remain licensed massage therapists. The Macon-Bibb County license of a massage parlor that fails to meet this requirement is subject to revocation. 
(2)  Macon-Bibb County license. No person shall operate a massage parlor without a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended license from Macon-Bibb County, pursuant to this division. 
(3)  Conviction of a crime. No license under this section shall be issued or renewed to any person who shall have been convicted or shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere for any felony within ten (10) years, or two (2) misdemeanors within five (5) years, other than traffic violations, immediately prior to the filing of the application. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilty or plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. Licenses granted to persons who fail to meet this requirement at any time shall be subject to revocation. 
(4)  Age of licensee; education. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be issued a license to operate a massage parlor. No license shall be issued to an applicant who does not have a high school diploma or its recognized equivalent. 
(5)  Personal residency; agent. All applicants for licenses under this chapter and all actual owners of parlors for which licenses are sought shall be bona fide residents of Macon-Bibb County at the time of the filing of the applications and shall remain bona fide residents of such county during all times that the licenses and renewals thereof are in effect, or shall name one (1) or more residents in Macon-Bibb County as the agent or representative of the licensee, who shall be responsible for any matter relating to such license and who, at all such times, shall be a bona fide resident of Macon-Bibb County. 
(6)  Corporate residency. All applications for licenses under this chapter by a corporation or other business entity shall name in the application one (1) or more residents in Macon-Bibb County as the agent and representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, services of process, or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation, or other action with respect to any license issued pursuant to this division. The application shall give the mailing address of the person, and the mailing to any such person at such address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of Macon-Bibb County, another person shall immediately be appointed, in writing, in his place, and written notice shall be given the department of business and development services, stating the name and address of the new agent. 
(7)  Annual license fee. The annual license fee shall be determined from time to time by the mayor and commission, based upon the reasonable costs of the actual regulatory activity, and listed in a schedule of fees and charges maintained by the Department of Business and Development Services. 
(b)  Application for license. 
(1)  To operate a massage parlor within Macon-Bibb County, the applicant must first make application to the Department of Business and Development Services on a form provided by the Department of Business and Development Services or his designee, and that person, after having fully and truthfully completed such form and paying the prescribed fees and having received a license, shall maintain and operate such business pursuant to the ordinances of Macon-Bibb County and the laws of the state. 
(2)  Upon applying for a license with the Department of Business and Development Services, each applicant shall provide a true and correct copy or original of the state license for each and every massage practitioner, performing or anticipated to perform massage at its location, to the finance officer for inspection and copying. Failure of any massage practitioner to provide his or her state license shall automatically result in the denial of the issuance of a Macon-Bibb County license to the applicant. 
(3)  Subsequent to the Macon-Bibb County license being issued, the licensee shall, in person, furnish to the Department of Business and Development Services or his designee a true and correct copy or original of the state license of each new massage practitioner at the licensee's massage parlor prior to such person's commencing to perform or offering to perform massage at such massage parlor. When any massage practitioner discontinues performing massage at a massage parlor, the licensee shall make the departure known in writing to the Department of Business and Development Services within thirty (30) days of such departure. 
(4)  Each applicant for a license shall make his or her affidavit before the Department of Business and Development Services or his designee, on a form provided by the Department of Business and Development Services, upon oath, swearing or affirming that all persons practicing massage on the premises of his or her massage parlor are licensed massage therapists and that all requirements of this division for a license have been met. 
Sec. 7-272. - License renewal. 
Licenses for massage parlors may be renewed on a calendar year basis, provided that the licensee(s) continue to meet the requirements set out in this division and the requirements of the Act. 
Sec. 7-273. - Registry. 
A registry shall be kept of all persons practicing massage on the premises of such massage parlor, which shall be available for inspection by an agent of Macon-Bibb County during normal hours of business, providing the following information: 
(1)  Legal name and any other name(s) the massage practitioner has been or is known as or by; 
(2)  Current address; 
(3)  State or country of birth; date of birth; 
(4)  Number and expiration date of state license; and 
(5)  Position with the massage parlor or business entity. 
Sec. 7-274. - Posting licenses and rates. 
(a)  Each massage parlor shall post its license obtained pursuant to this division, along with the state license of each masseuse operating on the premises of such parlor, in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep such licenses there at all times. 
(b)  Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area or other conspicuous location available for all prospective customers. No service shall be allowed or permitted that is not prominently posted with its fees in such location. 
Sec. 7-275. - Escort services and adult entertainment prohibited. 
No massage parlor shall act as an escort or dating service. 
Sec. 7-276. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed, or caused or allowed to be sold, served, given, dispensed, provided, consumed by or to any person on the premises of a massage parlor or kept thereon. Alcoholic beverages means and includes all types and kinds of alcohol as defined in the Alcoholic Beverages chapter of this Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 7-277. - Hours of operation; inspection. 
(a)  Massage parlors shall be open for business only between the hours of 6 a.m. and 11 p.m., inclusive. 
(b)  Any business holding a license issued under this division shall, at any time that the premises are open for business, be open to inspection by a law enforcement officer, the health department, license inspectors, and/or fire department inspectors. 
Sec. 7-278. - Name; place of business; sale, transfer, or change of location. 
No person or business entity granted a location license pursuant to this division shall operate the business under a name not specified in the license nor conduct business at any location or place not specified in the license. No license shall be transferable. Upon the sale or relocation of a massage parlor, the license thereof shall be null and void. 
Sec. 7-279. - Restrictions on minor's presence. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons operating a massage parlor to permit persons under eighteen (18) years of age to enter the licensed premises unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, has the written, notarized permission of the parent or guardian, or has a written prescription from a physician, surgeon, osteopath, or podiatrist who has a valid current license, issued pursuant to Georgia law. 
Sec. 7-280. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Every portion of the premises of, and all equipment and supplies of, the massage parlor shall be kept clean and shall be operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  All employees and masseuses at each massage parlor shall wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the breast, buttocks and genital areas. 
Sec. 7-281. - Revocation, suspensions, violations, and penalties. 
Macon-Bibb County may, upon notice and a hearing for good cause, revoke or suspend or place on probation the license of any massage parlor: 
(1)  That commits or allows any violations of the provisions of this division of the Macon-Bibb County Code; 
(2)  That allows any masseuse, working on the massage parlor's premises, to commit or offer to commit a sexual crime under O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 6; 
(3)  That allows any person to perform or offer massage on the premises who is not a licensed massage therapist; 
(4)  Where the applicant for the massage parlor's license gave false information on the application, in his or her affidavit, or in the massage parlor's registry as required in this division, or fails to update information related to the license to the Department of Business and Development Services as required by this division; or 
(5)  Where the licensee fails at any time to meet the requirements for licensure under this division. 
Any violation of any section of this division shall be punishable as provided in the general penalty section of the Code of Ordinances of Macon-Bibb County. Each day during which said offenses occur shall constitute a separate offense, as shall each separate act constitute a violation. 
Sec. 7-282. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The requirements of this division shall have no application to or effect upon the following persons acting within the scope of their professions: 
(1)  Medical doctors and osteopaths, chiropractors, physical and occupational therapists, podiatrists, acupuncturists, registered or licensed practical nurses, barbers, beauty culturists, and cosmetologists duly licensed to practice in this state pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 43; 
(2)  Employees of duly licensed nursing and convalescent homes and hospitals; 
(3)  Athletic directors or trainers who are affiliated with an accredited educational institution or a bona fide sports team and whose work is limited to athletic team members. 
(b)  The requirement of subsection 7-271(a)(1)a., of this division, requiring licensure under the Act, shall not apply to persons excluded from state licensure pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-19, acting within the scope of their professions. 
Secs. 7-283—7-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESSES 

Sec. 7-286. - Carnival and tent shows; permit required; prohibited locations; games tax or fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any carnival, circus, tent show, or any other show of like nature, unless they shall first obtain a permit from the Department of Business and Development Services. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any street fair, carnival, or other tent shows to exhibit, or erect any tents, huts or houses for the purpose of exhibiting, on any of the streets, lanes or parks within Macon-Bibb County; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to make it unlawful to hold such exhibitions or shows, with the permission of the commission. 
(c)  Every circus, carnival company, traveling show, and every other person operating or showing in Macon-Bibb County, whether under auspices of any local organization or not, any so-called game of skill, the operation of which is legal under state laws, and for the playing of which any charge is made or accepted, shall pay to Macon-Bibb County a fee or tax in an amount to be determined from time to time by the commission and listed in the schedule of fees and charges maintained by the Department of Business and Development Services. 
Sec. 7-287. - House moving; permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to move, carry or otherwise transport houses, buildings, parts of buildings or other large structures through or across the streets of Macon-Bibb County without first having obtained a permit from the director of the Department of Business and Development Services and approval of the sheriff's department. 
(b)  The director of the Department of Business and Development Services is hereby delegated the duty and responsibility for issuing permits to applicants desiring to use the streets of Macon-Bibb County for moving houses, buildings, parts of buildings or other large objects. 
(c)  The permit required by this section shall constitute an additional requirement to any other requirements in this Code or state law. 
(d)  In determining whether a permit shall be issued, the director of the Department of Business and Development Services and sheriff's department shall take into account the following factors in addition to any other factors as may be necessary to determine whether a proposed moving is in the public interest: 
(1)  The length of time required for the moving; 
(2)  The hours during which the moving is to take place and in particular whether the proposed moving conflicts with heavy traffic patterns; 
(3)  The route of the proposed moving; and 
(4)  The equipment and personnel available and employed for the proposed moving. 
(e)  If the director of the Department of Business and Development Services or sheriff's department determines that the proposed moving of a structure hereunder would create a serious traffic hazard or otherwise be unreasonably dangerous to the public at large, either shall deny the application for a permit as required by this section. Otherwise the director of the Department of Business and Development Services shall approve the application and issue the permit. 
Sec. 7-288. - Fortunetelling, palmistry, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, and other kindred practices. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on in or upon any premises within Macon-Bibb County fortunetelling, palmistry, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, and/or kindred practices unless that person holds a valid unexpired and unrevoked license issued by Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  The annual license fee shall be determined from time-to-time by the commission based upon the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity, and listed in a schedule of fees and charges maintained by the Department of Business and Development Services. 
(c)  No license under this section shall be issued or renewed to any person who shall have been convicted or shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere for any felony within five (5) years, or two (2) misdemeanors within two (2) years, other than traffic violations, immediately prior to the filing of the application. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilty or plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. 
(d)  Any person desiring to obtain a license under this section to operate within Macon-Bibb County shall make an application to the department of business and development services. The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Proof of planning and zoning compliance. 
(2)  Proof of building code compliance. 
(3)  Proof of fire code compliance. 
(4)  The full name, age, residence, present and previous occupations of the applicant. 
(5)  A specific description of the location of the proposed place of business of the applicant. 
(6)  A list of three (3) character references and at least three (3) business references who have known the applicant for a period of at least five (5) years. 
(7)  A list of dates and places of employment for five (5) years prior to date of application. 
(8)  A photograph and fingerprints made by the sheriff's department. 
(9)  A letter of clearance from the U.S. District Court of the Middle District, and a letter of clearance from the Clerk of Bibb County Superior Court, indicating that the applicant does not have any criminal charges currently pending and that the applicant has no convictions from the respective court within five (5) years, excluding traffic offenses. 
(10)  A letter of clearance from the Clerk of the State Court of Bibb County showing that the applicant has no criminal charges pending and no convictions in the past two (2) years, excluding traffic offenses. 
(11)  An affidavit from the applicant stating that the applicant has no criminal charges pending nor any convictions from any other court in the United States that would make the applicant ineligible as provided in section 10-333(b). 
(12)  Any false statement or material misrepresentation in any application hereunder shall be grounds for revocation of any license granted hereunder. 
(e)  Within ten (10) days after receipt of an application as provided for in this section the sheriff's department shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and his proposed operations and shall furnish his findings to the Department of Business and Development Services. 
(f)  If, upon investigation, the sheriff's department shall find that the applicant is of good moral character and meets the requirements of this section, the Department of Business and Development Services shall issue a license to the applicant. 
(g)  Any person having or applying for a license hereunder shall meet the standards set forth above and shall be subject to all regulations of this Code. 
(h)  Licenses issued under this section shall not be transferable, and shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the municipal court judge for violation of any of the provisions of this Code or misconduct by the licensee, after reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given the licensee. 
Sec. 7-289. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-290. - Motorized vendors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any motorized vehicle used for the purpose of selling ice cream, candy, soft drinks or other such similar goods from the streets in Macon-Bibb County to carry on that activity without first clearly labeling the vehicle so as to identify the types of goods sold and to further mark the vehicle to warn approaching motorists that sudden stops may be required. 
(b)  All such vehicles are prohibited from ringing bells or using other noise-producing devices in neighborhoods after the hour of 9:00 p.m. 
Sec. 7-291. - Motorized trailer exhibits restricted. 
Motorized trailer exhibits on the streets of Macon-Bibb County are hereby prohibited when such exhibits permit or require contributions or admission charges. 
Secs. 7-292. - Reserved. 
Secs. 7-293. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-294. - Convenience stores. 
(a)  All persons who own or operate a convenience store are required to ensure that at least seventy-five (75) percent of the window area through which the cash register or transaction area may be seen is free from signage or other obstructions and further must ensure that there is at all times a clear view of the cash register or transaction area along normal lines of sight from the outside of the store through all such window areas. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "convenience store" shall include any small retail store that is stocked to sell primarily prepackaged food items, but may also sell beverages, periodicals, and other household supplies to customers who purchase relatively few items per visit. Such stores may also sell fuel and are often open between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
Secs. 7-295—7-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - RESERVED 

Secs. 7-331—7-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - SELF-SERVICE FUEL STATIONS 

Sec. 7-356. - Self-service fuel pumps and stations. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1, it is hereby determined that the operation of self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps will not be injurious to the health or welfare of the citizens and residents of Macon-Bibb County so long as the operation of self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps is carried out in compliance with Chapter 120-3-11 of the Rules and Regulations of the safety fire commissioner of the state and N.F.P.A. 30 pertaining to flammable and combustible liquids, and the further requirements of this division. 
Sec. 7-357. - License application. 
Any person desiring to operate self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps within Macon-Bibb County shall make application to the Department of Business and Development Services for a license on the form prescribed by the chief of the fire prevention bureau and shall pay a license fee or business tax in the amount prescribed by the business license and business tax ordinances of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 7-358. - Issuance; display. 
The chief of the fire prevention bureau shall review the application and if the chief determines that the applicant is in compliance with the rules and regulations of the safety fire commissioner of the state and the requirements of this division, the Department of Business and Development Services shall issue a license to the applicant which shall be posted in a conspicuous location where it may be viewed by authorized representatives of the fire prevention bureau, other authorities and customers. 
Sec. 7-359. - Permitted dispensing devices. 
Approved special dispensing devices such as, but not limited to, remote-controlled pre-pay and post-pay types are permitted at self-service stations. 
Sec. 7-360. - Presence of attendant required; functions. 
All self-service stations shall have at least one qualified attendant on duty while the station is open to the public. The attendant's function shall be to supervise, observe and control the dispensing of and the collection for the various fuels. It shall be the responsibility of the attendant to prevent the dispensing of class 1 liquids into approved containers, and is fitted with a spout or so designed that the contents can be poured without spilling. It shall also be the responsibility of the attendant to control sources of ignition, and to immediately handle accidental spills and fire extinguishers as needed. The attendant or supervisor on duty shall be capable of performing the functions and assuming the responsibilities required in this section. 
Sec. 7-361. - Safety requirements. 
(a)  Emergency controls, excluding main power shutoff switches, shall be installed at a location within twenty (20) feet from the attendant's principal control location, not more than one hundred (100) feet from the dispensers, and shall at all times be accessible to the attendant on duty. Main power shutoff will be located in compliance with state regulations. 
(b)  Instructions for the operation of the dispensers shall be conspicuously posted on either the dispenser or the dispenser island. 
(c)  A list of emergency procedures and instructions shall be conspicuously posted in the immediate vicinity of the attendant's principal control location. 
(d)  The dispensing operation shall at all times be in clear view of the attendant, and the placing or allowing of any obstacle to come between the dispensing operation and the attendant so as to obstruct the attendant's view is prohibited. 
(e)  At all times while class 1 liquids are being dispensed, the attendant shall be required to remain within arm's length distance of the remote control facilities at the principal control location. 
(f)  No self-service station shall be prohibited from installing and no customer at such station shall be prohibited from using hold-open latches on gasoline or diesel fuel pumps available for operation by the customer. However, if hold-open latches are used on pumps operated by the customer, such pumps shall be equipped with a functioning automatic closing device. 
(g)  A voice communications system, such as, but not limited to, an intercom system, so as to allow direct voice communications at all times between the person dispensing gasoline and the attendant shall be required. 
(h)  On each and every dispenser island shall be conspicuously posted in letters at least two (2) inches in height, the following signs: 
(1)  "Warning—It is unlawful to dispense gasoline into any portable container unless the container is constructed of metal or is approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau of Macon-Bibb County"; 
(2)  "No Smoking" signs, four (4) inches in height, one and one-quarter (1¼) inches in width; and 
(3)  Ignition cut off signs. 
(i)  A minimum of six hundred (600) square feet shall be designated for self-service gasoline dispensing area only. This area, if in question, will have proper signs, color coded and the like, to define gasoline dispensing areas. 
(j)  Any establishment possessing a retail packaged to go liquor license or a liquor consumption-on-the-premises license or both shall be ineligible to obtain any self-service fuel licenses. 
(k)  Each license applicant must present an acceptable traffic flow chart for the station area to be licensed for approval of the chart by the Macon-Bibb County Traffic Engineer and the Fire Prevention Bureau. 
(l)  All wiring must be in compliance with the Macon-Bibb County Electrical Code and any state and local laws for such installation. 
Secs. 7-362—7-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - SIDEWALK CAFES 

Sec. 7-381. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for regulation of sidewalk cafes operated by qualified restaurants on public sidewalks in the downtown area, and to more fully promote the public interest by contributing to a viable and attractive commercial and pedestrian environment. In recognition thereof, reasonable regulation of sidewalk cafes is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and the interest of Macon-Bibb County and the primary use of the public streets and sidewalks by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
Sec. 7-381.1. - Qualifications; special permit. 
The use of sidewalks for restaurant tables shall only be permitted incidental to the operation of a qualified, registered restaurant on private property. For purposes of this chapter, a qualified, registered restaurant would be one which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales revenues from the sale of prepared meals or food. A special permit to conduct such use shall be allowed for in the office of the department of business and development services and shall become effective on the date of issuance and shall automatically expire on December 31st of the year of its issuance. A request for the use of sidewalks shall be subject to approval of the urban development authority, compliance with this Code and building code regulations, and all other legal requirements. 
Sec. 7-381.2. - No closing of sidewalk cafes for special events. 
No restaurant, nor sidewalk cafe that is permitted pursuant to this division, shall be ordered closed, or constructively closed, for any street party or similar event in the central business district regardless of street closings related to said parties and events unless specifically ordered by resolution of the mayor and commission. 
Sec. 7-382. - Restrictions on use of sidewalks. 
(a)  In no event shall the uses permitted by this division reduce that portion of any sidewalk customarily used by pedestrians to less than five (5) feet in width. At least a 15-foot setback from the street curbs at street intersection corners shall be maintained. Additionally, contiguous pedestrian flow must be maintained between two (2) or more adjacent sidewalk cafes. 
(b)  Tables and chairs cannot be placed more than ten (10) feet from the front of the building in which the food is prepared, except as provided otherwise in subsection (g). 
(c)  Tables and chairs and all other unsecured fixtures that are not fully secured must be removed from the sidewalk at the close of business of the restaurant and shall be so stored during all nonoperating hours. 
(d)  Macon-Bibb County reserves the right of access to all portions of the sidewalk included in areas permitted for the purposes of sidewalk repair or other necessary purposes. 
(e)  Persons issued permits pursuant to this section shall maintain the sidewalk area in a clean and safe condition. 
(f)  Only the area in front of a restaurant, as defined by projecting its interior width outward perpendicular to the street to a point at which it intersects the roadway, can be used by the restaurant, unless the licensee has a written agreement with adjacent property owners to use part of the sidewalk area in front of his business. Placement of tables and chairs will be permitted in areas more than ten (10) feet from the front of the building only when the permitting authorities determine it is in the best interest of the public to permit such placement. All tables and chairs must be of a design, material, and specification suitable for outside dining. The sidewalk cafe area may be delineated by the use of non-permanent decorative devices such as railings, potted plants, decorative chain fencing or other such fixtures approved by the Urban Development Authority and Macon-Bibb County. The permanent anchoring of railings, fencing, or other fixtures may be approved by the Urban Development Authority and Macon-Bibb County with assurances that the sidewalk will be repaired upon closure of the sidewalk cafe business. Such railing or fencing material shall be approved by the permitting authorities and shall be similar in design, material and construction for all sidewalk cafes. 
(g)  Sidewalk cafes will only be permitted in the CBD-Central Business District Zone as defined by the comprehensive land development resolution for Macon-Bibb County. Actual location approval within said district shall be at the discretion of the Urban Development Authority and Macon-Bibb County. 
(h)  Except as specifically provided in this division, the ownership, operation and maintenance of a sidewalk cafe shall be subject to all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
(i)  The distance requirements of subsection (a) and (b), shall not apply to nonconforming sidewalk café locations that were approved by the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority prior to November 15, 1994. 
Sec. 7-383. - Permit—Procedure. 
(a)  An applicant for a permit under this division shall file his application therefore with the Department of Business and Development Services on forms provided by the Department of Business and Development Services. In addition to the application form, petitioner must submit a site plan of the proposed area and photos or specifications of the proposed furnishings and accessory signage. 
(b)  The Department of Business and Development Services shall refer the application package to the Urban Development Authority, who shall consider the application and conduct a hearing thereon. The Urban Development Authority shall notify by mail the property owners and tenants at the three (3) adjacent business locations on both sides of the proposed sidewalk cafe of the time and place at which such application shall be considered by the authority. 
(c)  Upon approval of the Urban Development Authority, verification by the Department of Business and Development Services or his designee that the applicant is a qualified, registered restaurant operator in good standing at the specified location, payment of appropriate fees, and compliance with all other requirements of this chapter, a permit may be issued by the department of business and development services. 
(d)  Any applicant who shall be refused a permit by the Department of Business and Development Services due to disapproval of his application by the Urban Development Authority shall have ten (10) days from the date of such refusal to appeal to the commission, whose decision shall be final. 
Sec. 7-384. - Same—Insurance prerequisite. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued pursuant to this section, unless the applicant shall furnish to the Department of Business and Development Services evidence of public liability insurance, naming Macon-Bibb County and the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority as co-insured parties and insuring them against any liability resulting from the uses permitted pursuant to this section. The coverage shall not be less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(b)  No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid at any time the insurance required by this section is not maintained and evidence of its continuance filed with the Department of Business and Development Services. 
Sec. 7-385. - Same—Revocation. 
The permit may be revoked at any time by written notice to be served by the Department of Business and Development Services on the permittee; such service to be by certified mail or personal service. Upon receipt of such revocation notice, the permittee shall have ten (10) days to appeal such revocation to the commission, whose decision shall be final. 
Sec. 7-386. - Same—Fees. 
An annual fee of one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00) shall be due concurrent with the due date of the business occupation tax of the restaurant and shall be paid to the Department of Business and Development Services. All fees required herein shall be in addition to any other fees or payments required elsewhere in this Code. 
Sec. 7-387. - Same—Refunds and prorations. 
(a)  When the permit fee has been paid during the first half of the calendar year, and the person paying such fee discontinues the business during the first half of the calendar year, the mayor and Department of Business and Development Services may authorize the refunding of one-half of such fee, provided all other fees and taxes owing by such person have been paid. 
(b)  On any new sidewalk cafe permitted by Macon-Bibb County after July first of each year, the permit fee shall be one-half of the amount as set by ordinance. 
DIVISION 15.5. - SIDEWALK FOOD VENDORS 

Sec. 7-388. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide for regulation of sidewalk food vending activities in the downtown area and to more fully promote the public interest by contributing to an active and attractive pedestrian environment. In recognition thereof, reasonable regulation of the street and sidewalk vending is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare and the interest of Macon-Bibb County and the primary use of the public streets and sidewalks for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
Sec. 7-389. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to engage in and carry on the business of food vending upon streets, sidewalks or public ways of Macon-Bibb County embraced within what is known as the fire zone without first having obtained a permit as required by this division; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the issuance of temporary permits or licenses issued under other provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 7-390. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department of health means the Macon-Bibb County Board of Health. 
Fire zone means the downtown fire district which is defined as embraced within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of Martin Luther King, Jr., Boulevard and Riverside Drive; extending along Riverside Drive to Spring Street; extending along Spring Street and an extension thereof to Hazel Street; extending along Hazel Street to Fifth Street; extending along Fifth Street and Martin Luther King, Jr., Boulevard to Riverside Drive, the beginning point, including both sides of segments of the above streets forming such boundaries. 
Food means a solid food and nonalcoholic beverages allowed to be sold in accordance with this division. 
Public ways means and includes all portions of streets and alleys from property line to property line. 
Push cart means a wheeled vehicle propelled solely by a single human. 
Vending means the act of selling, offering for sale, transferring or offering to transfer to another for pecuniary gain. 
Vendor means any person engaged in the selling or offering for sale, of food or nonalcoholic beverages on the public streets or sidewalks from a push cart. 
Sec. 7-391. - Application requirements. 
The application for a permit for sidewalk food vendors shall be made at the office of the Department of Business and Development Services on a form deemed appropriate by the Department of Business and Development Services. Such application shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The expiration date of the applicant's business license; 
(3)  Type of items to be sold; 
(4)  A valid copy of all necessary permits required by the department of health; 
(5)  A signed statement that the permittee shall hold harmless Macon-Bibb County, its officers and employees and shall indemnify Macon-Bibb County, its officers and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the permit. The permittee shall furnish and maintain such public liability, food products liability and property damage insurance as will protect the permittee and Macon-Bibb County from all claims for damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations under the permit or in connection therewith. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than a combined single limit of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each occurrence. Such insurance shall name as an additional insured Macon-Bibb County, its officers and employees, and shall further provide that the policy shall not terminate or be cancelled prior to the completion of the contract without ten (10) days' written notice to the Department of Business and Development Services; 
(6)  A description (including a photograph) of the permittee's push cart; and 
(7)  The proposed location for conducting business, including written approval for each location by the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority. 
Sec. 7-392. - Permit fee. 
A permit fee of one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00) shall be collected prior to the issuance of the permit and annually thereafter. 
Sec. 7-393. - Location selection. 
(a)  The permit location shall be subject to the approval of the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority. 
(b)  No more than two (2) sidewalk food vending permits shall be issued in any one (1) block of any public way within Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  The use of the permit operating area for sidewalk food vendors must be compatible with the public interest and use of the sidewalk and street areas and public rights-of-way. In making such determination, the Urban Development Authority shall consider the width of the sidewalk, the proximity and location of existing street fixtures, including but not limited to sign posts, lamp posts, benches, phone booths, street trees, as well as the presence of bus stops, truck loading zones, handicapped parking spaces or the like. 
Sec. 7-394. - Restrictions. 
Any person with a valid sidewalk food vending permit issued pursuant to this division shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  All vendors must display, in a prominent and visible manner the permit issued by the Department of Business and Development Service's office under the provisions of this division. 
(2)  The push cart shall not occupy more than thirty (30) square feet of sidewalk space, which shall include the push cart, the operator and a trash receptacle. 
(3)  The size of the push cart shall not exceed four (4) feet, six (6) inches in widths, six (6) feet in length, and five (5) feet in height (excluding canopies or umbrellas). 
(4)  The name of the vendor and/or business shall be displayed on the exterior of the push cart. 
(5)  Vendor shall not hinder the use of any phone booth, mail box, parking meter, fire alarm, fire hydrant or traffic signal controls. 
(6)  Vendor shall obey any lawful order from a law enforcement officer or fire department official during an emergency, parade, street festival or similar event to avoid congestion or obstruction of the sidewalk. 
(7)  No vendor shall make loud noises or use mechanical, audio or noise making devices to advertise his or her product. 
(8)  No push cart shall be left unattended on the public way, nor remain on the sidewalk between midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(9)  If the vending site is located along the route or within the designated area of a parade, street festival or similar vent, a permit issued under this division shall not entitle a vendor to operate a push cart at the vending site during a parade or street festival or similar event; provided, however, nothing in this division shall prohibit a street vendor from participating in such event with the approval of the sponsor of such event. 
Sec. 7-395. - Permit revocation or denial. 
The municipal court judge shall have the power and authority to evoke, or deny the renewal of any permit applied for or issued under the provisions of this division. Any permit issued under this division may be suspended, revoked or nonrenewed based upon one (1) or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Upon the cancellation of any health department authority or permit for food or beverage vending. 
(2)  If the vendor violates or fails to meet any of the provisions of this division. 
(3)  If the vendor does not currently have in force an insurance policy in the minimum amount specified in section 7-391(5). 
(4)  If the permit was procured by fraud or false representation of fact. 
Sec. 7-396. - Hearing. 
Such suspension, revocation or nonrenewal shall not take place until after the permittee shall have been afforded a hearing before the municipal court judge. The permittee shall be given at least ten (10) days prior notice before such hearing is held. 
Secs. 7-397—7-405. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - USED AUTO PARTS, SCRAP DEALERS AND PROCESSORS 

Sec. 7-406. - Records required. 
In addition to the requirements of state law, any person engaged in business as a scrap metal processor, as defined in state law at O.C.G.A. § 43-43-1, shall: 
(1)  Keep in his place of business a book upon which should be entered at the time of any purchase all information required by state law; and 
(2)  Require the seller and/or person who delivers such items to positively identify himself by driver's license, military identification, or other photo identification that contains information regarding such person's name, birthdate, sex, race, and address. Such dealers shall also record the license plate number of the vehicle used to deliver the material. When buying autos, such dealers shall also maintain a photocopy of both the seller's and the deliverer's identification for seven (7) days; and 
(3)  Require proof of ownership as evidenced by a title record, bill of sale, or tag receipt before accepting any auto for scrap and shall record the vehicle identification number (VIN) of any auto purchased in the record book required by subsection (1). Such dealers shall notify the sheriff's department of the purchase of such vehicle and shall wait forty-eight (48) hours, from the time notice was provided to the sheriff's department, before demolishing such vehicle for scrap; and 
(4)  Require any seller of material to sign a statement stating that he is the rightful owner of the material sold or is entitled to sell the material. 
Sec. 7-407. - Period for inspection required. 
No scrap purchaser or processor or any person purchasing any of the articles mentioned in this division shall destroy, use or dispose of such articles until seven (7) days after the purchase thereof, but shall keep such articles available for inspection by the sheriff's department or Macon-Bibb County license inspectors. 
Sec. 7-408. - Itinerant scrap purchasers or scrap processors; reports to sheriff. 
(a)  Any itinerant person engaged in purchasing and accepting delivery and paying for materials at the time of purchase of any ferrous and nonferrous items within Macon-Bibb County shall make a written report to the sheriff the day following the date of the purchase and shall show the name of the person from whom the items are purchased, his address and place of business, the value and quantity of the property or material purchased and its kind and quality. 
(b)  Any itinerant person engaged in this business shall register with the sheriff before he shall be authorized to transact business in Macon-Bibb County. It shall be unlawful for any itinerant person who purchases any ferrous and nonferrous items to conceal the name and identity of any person selling such goods, or to enter upon the report a fictitious or false name of any such person. 
Sec. 7-409. - Time for inspection allowed on itinerant scrap purchasers and scrap processors. 
No itinerant person purchasing any ferrous and nonferrous materials referred to shall destroy, use or dispose of such materials until seven (7) days after the purchase thereof, but shall keep such materials available for inspection by the sheriff's department or Macon-Bibb County license inspectors. 
Secs. 7-410—7-425. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 17. - YARD, GARAGE AND PATIO SALES 

Sec. 7-426. - Permit—Required. 
Persons desiring to hold garage, yard, patio or other such sales of used items owned by the seller, when such sales are not held at the residence of one (1) of the participants, shall first obtain a permit from the Department of Business and Development Services. Such permit shall only be issued for sites other than homes, churches and property owned by charitable organizations registered with the state after presentation of a certificate of compliance from the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission and payment of a fee of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50). The duration of all such sales shall be limited to one (1) 72-hour period. Unless the sale is to be held upon property owned or leased by one (1) of the participants, written permission of the owner or lessee of the property upon which the sale is to be conducted shall be presented to the Department of Business and Development Services prior to the issuance of a permit of such sale. Unless the sale is conducted by a church or other such charitable organization, the name and address of each individual owning items to be sold in the sale shall be listed on the permit and filed in the office of the Department of Business and Development Services. No person shall participate in a sale more than three (3) times in any calendar year for which a permit is required. Permits issued for such churches and charitable organizations shall be issued without charge and shall be signed by an officer of the church or charitable organization. It shall be unlawful for any person obtaining a permit authorized under this section to knowingly make any false or fraudulent statement upon the permit application. 
Sec. 7-427. - Same—Exception. 
No permit shall be required for sales described in the above section if the sale is held upon the premises of a business properly licensed for the sale of such merchandise or for such sales held upon property of the state, such as the state farmer's market. 
Sec. 7-428. - One fee covers all persons. 
One fee of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) shall cover all persons involved in any one sale authorized under this division. 
Sec. 7-429. - Violation. 
It shall be a violation of this section for any person to sell any new merchandise or any old merchandise collected or purchased for the purpose of reselling such items during such sale. 
Secs. 7-430—7-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 18. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 7-451. - Findings; public purpose. 
Based on the demonstrated experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including but not limited to Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; Orlando, Florida; Orange County, Florida; Indianapolis, Indiana; Los Angeles, California; Beaumont, Texas; Phoenix, Arizona; St. Paul, Minnesota; and Austin, Texas, which experience is found to be relevant to the problems that face Macon-Bibb County, and based upon the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented at the joint city-county hearing conducted by the City of Macon and Bibb County by citizens, a number of whom are familiar with conditions resulting in other localities, and experts, the mayor and commission of Macon-Bibb County take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country, particularly the problems of crime, blight, and deterioration which are brought about by the combination of alcohol and live nudity. 
It is the finding of the mayor and commission of Macon-Bibb County that public nudity (either partial or total) in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment" in conjunction with the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, whether sold on the premises or not, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. 
Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public indecency and drug trafficking. 
Macon-Bibb County, therefore, finds that it is in the best interest of the health, welfare, safety and morals and preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, and parks to prevent the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, Macon-Bibb County finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment which will not be allowed to serve alcoholic beverages or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on their premises. Macon-Bibb County finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, such as reducing criminal activity, protecting against property devaluation and deterioration, and eliminating undesirable community conditions, and that such will not infringe upon the protected constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
Sec. 7-452. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words shall have the meanings as set forth below unless otherwise required by context: 
(1)  Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who appears on the premises totally nude or in such attire to expose his or her specified anatomical areas. For the purposes of this section, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
(2)  Adult entertainment means live entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas." 
(3)  Adult entertainment establishment means any of the following: 
a.  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas; 
b.  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her specified anatomical areas as defined herein; 
c.  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsection a. and b.; 
d.  An establishment which provides premises where patrons congregate, associate, or consort with employees, performers and/or other patrons or private contractors who display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such patrons. 
However, traditional or live theater as defined herein shall not be included in this definition. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as more specifically defined in the Alcoholic Beverages chapter of this Code. 
(5)  Business establishment means any business within Macon-Bibb County which conducts any trade, occupation, vocation or calling of any kind for gain or profit, directly or indirectly, provided that this shall not include any business, trade and the like licensed by the state unless local government licensing is also allowed by state law, nor shall it include any business operated solely under a franchise granted by Macon-Bibb County. 
(6)  Live means any activity or entertainment which is carried on by actual living persons in the physical presence of the patrons. 
(7)  Minor means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(8)  Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(9)  Person means a human being. 
(10)  Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
(11)  Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; cleft of the buttocks; or any portion of the female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intercept a point above the top of the areola, or any portion of the areola, or any simulation thereof. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
b.  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(12)  Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
a.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
b.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
d.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitalia; or 
e.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in a. through d. above. 
(13)  Traditional or live theater (mainstream performance house) means a theater, concert hall, opera house, museum, educational institution, auditorium or similar establishment, which regularly features live performances, including plays, operas, ballets, concerts or other similar performances, which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, description, or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activity," in that such depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. Performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise 85 percent of all performances or showings. "Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" means the dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to performances, which are "distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas," the performances so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme is the exhibition or display of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
(14)  Owner, if a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (excluding limited partners); if a corporation, all officers and persons holding more than fifty (50) percent of the outstanding shares of stock. 
Sec. 7-453. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within Macon-Bibb County, an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license to do so. The issuance of such license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone, or make legal any activity or conduct that is illegal or unlawful under any other section of this Code or the laws of the state or the United States. No license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by Macon-Bibb County if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. The annual license fee for an adult entertainment establishment shall be one thousand three hundred dollars ($1,300.00). 
Sec. 7-454. - On-premise operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premise operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
Sec. 7-455. - Employee permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any adult entertainer to be employed by an adult entertainment establishment without first obtaining a permit issued under the terms of this division. The annual permit fee for an adult entertainer permit shall be sixty-five dollars ($65.00). 
Sec. 7-456. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the establishment at all times during the establishment's operating hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant not to allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state department of public safety reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
Sec. 7-457. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  An adult entertainment establishment shall not employ any minor in any capacity. No adult entertainer permit shall be issued or renewed for any person who is convicted of a sex-related crime, or drug-related or alcohol-related felony. Any adult entertainer so convicted shall not thereafter be employed by an adult entertainment establishment licensed under this division for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere. 
(b)  Before any person may be employed as an adult entertainer, he or she shall file an application for an adult entertainer permit with the Department of Business and Development Services and receive approval by the sheriff. Each applicant shall provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center, authorizing the release of the applicant's criminal records to the sheriff's department. The sheriff's department shall have fifteen (15) days to investigate the applicant. If the prospective adult entertainer is found to meet the requirements of this section, upon receipt of the certification by the sheriff, the Department of Business and Development Services shall approve the permit and the prospective adult entertainer may begin working on the licensed premises. If the sheriff does not submit a report within fifteen (15) days of the application, it shall be concluded that the sheriff has no objection to the permit being granted. If approval is denied, the department of business and development services shall provide the applicant with the reason for the denial. 
(c)  No patron, adult entertainer or any other employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(d)  The adult entertainer permit of any employee who violates the laws and regulations of the state or any provision of this division shall be subject to suspension or revocation. 
Sec. 7-458. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, firm, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment within Macon-Bibb County shall make an application to the Department of Business and Development Services. The application must be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment and include the names of the operator and each owner as defined in this division. 
(b)  The provisions of this Code on general business licensing shall apply in addition to the provisions of this section: 
(1)  All approved applications for new licenses under this chapter shall be accompanied by a payment in cash or by certified check for a nonrefundable fee, established from time to time by ordinance of Macon-Bibb County to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this division. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  Proof of planning and zoning compliance; 
b.  Proof of building code compliance; 
c.  Proof of fire code compliance; 
d.  A legal description of the property upon which the premises are located; 
e.  A current photograph of the operator(s); 
f.  Fingerprints of the operator(s) to be taken by the sheriff's department; 
g.  A letter of clearance from the clerk of federal district court, and a letter of clearance from the clerk of superior court, indicating that the operator as well as all owners do not have any criminal charges currently pending, and that each such individual has no convictions from the respective court in the past ten (10) years; 
h.  A letter of clearance from the Clerk of the State court of Macon-Bibb County showing that the applicant has no criminal charges pending and no convictions in the past two (2) years; 
i.  A personal performance bond payable to Macon-Bibb County conditioned upon the applicant and the applicant's employees of the licensed establishment complying with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of Macon-Bibb County governing the issuance and control of adult entertainment establishments and the bond shall remain in force as long as the license and its renewals are valid and subsisting and shall be in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
j.  An affidavit from the publisher of the legal organ of Macon-Bibb County showing that the applicant has caused to be published in such legal organ, once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, a notice showing the name and address of the applicant, the location for which the license is sought, that the applicant seeks a license for an adult entertainment establishment. 
k.  The application shall also contain a form of oath providing that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct, and providing further that the applicant will abide by, observe and conduct his business according to the rules and regulations prescribed by Macon-Bibb County for adult entertainment establishments. The oath shall be taken by the applicant and the agent in charge of the establishment if different from or additional to the applicant. 
(3)  Any false statement or material misrepresentation in any application hereunder shall be grounds for revocation of any license granted hereunder. 
(4)  A general description of the services and entertainment to be provided. 
(5)  The business, occupation and employment history of each agent or operator for five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(6)  If any agent or operator has had an adult entertainment establishment license or similar type of licensed denied, revoked or suspended by any other governing authority, then the violations that led to the denial, suspension or revocation as well as the date and disposition of such, including any fine or sentence imposed, and whether or not the terms of the disposition have been completed. 
(7)  If the establishment does or proposes to do business under a trade name, then a copy of the trade name as properly recorded shall be provided. 
(8)  The application shall be signed by the operator or agent. If the owner is a corporation, it additionally shall be signed by the president and attested by the corporate secretary. 
(9)  The operator, agent or owner shall provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center, authorizing the release of their criminal records to the sheriff's department. 
(10)  The written consent of a registered agent as provided by section 7-466 shall be provided. 
Sec. 7-459. - Issuance of license to persons with prior convictions prohibited. 
No license under this division shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person where any individual having interest either as owner, partner, operator, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or conviction of two (2) or more misdemeanors of any state of the United States or any municipal ordinance except traffic violations within two (2) years. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. 
Sec. 7-460. - Application; investigation. 
(a)  Within five (5) days of receipt of the application, the Department of Business and Development Services or his designee shall review the application and send a copy to the sheriff's department or his designee to investigate the character and reputation of each owner and operator. The sheriff shall submit a report within fifteen (15) days to the Department of Business and Development Services. If no report is received, it shall be concluded that there is no objection. 
(b)  The Department of Business and Development Services may deny a license under this division on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure to pay the required fees and taxes; 
(2)  Failure to provide required valid information, documents and the like; 
(3)  False information in the application or attached documents; 
(4)  Failure to pass review by the sheriff; 
(5)  Prior convictions as provided in this chapter; or 
(6)  Failure to meet any other requirements in this chapter for a license of the type applied for. 
(c)  Otherwise, the Department of Business and Development Services shall issue any adult entertainment establishment license provided for in this article. 
Sec. 7-461. - License renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the licensee(s) continue to meet the requirements set out in this division. 
Sec. 7-462. - Open to inspection. 
Any establishment holding a license issued under this division shall at any time that the premises is open to the public for business, be open to inspection by any officer of the sheriff's department, any license inspector of Macon-Bibb County or fire department inspector of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 7-463. - Consumption; open containers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a place of business licensed under this division to permit any person to drink any whiskey, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages upon the premises at any time. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a place of business licensed under this division to permit any glass containing any alcoholic beverage, or any opened or unemptied bottle or other open container of any alcoholic beverage to remain in or on the premises of the place of business at any time. 
Sec. 7-464. - Transfer of licenses. 
(a)  Licenses under this chapter may be transferred to another person, partnership, firm or corporation provided that such person, partnership or corporation makes application to Macon-Bibb County as for a new license and pays any appropriate fees and business or transfer taxes and that person, firm, partnership or corporation otherwise meet the requirements of this chapter for a new license. 
(b)  A transfer of location shall be allowed for any license under this chapter provided the licensee files with the department of business and development services the following on the new location: 
(1)  Proof of planning and zoning compliance; 
(2)  Proof of building code compliance; 
(3)  Proof of fire code compliance; 
(4)  A legal description of the property upon which the new premises are located; 
(5)  Any appropriate location transfer fee or tax; and 
(6)  An affidavit from the publisher of the legal organ of Macon-Bibb County the county showing that the transferor has caused to be published in such legal organ, once a week for two consecutive weeks, a notice showing the name and address of the transferor, the location for which the license is sought, the type of license held. 
(c)  Any transfer allowed under this section may be denied or revoked on the same basis as for an application for license under this chapter. 
Sec. 7-465. - Unlawful operation; declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Code shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. Macon-Bibb County may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence action(s) or proceeding(s) for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in a manner provided in the applicable provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 7-466. - Notices; registered agent; jurisdiction. 
(a)  All licensed adult entertainment establishments must have and continuously maintain in Macon-Bibb County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this division to be served upon the licensee, may be served. This person shall act as registered agent for the operator and each owner collectively. This person must be a resident of Macon-Bibb County. The operator may be appointed as the registered agent if he or she is a resident of Macon-Bibb County. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the Department of Business and Development Services as part of the license application. By appointing such registered agent, and as a condition of the issuance of a license pursuant to the terms of this division, the licensee agrees that any legal action brought by Macon-Bibb County against the adult entertainment establishment or the licensee (which includes the operator or any owner) to enforce the provisions of this division, may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
(b)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the Department of Business and Development Services or any office, division, department or other agency under this division to any licensee, operator or owner of an adult entertainment establishment, may be given by either: 
(1)  Personal delivery or; 
(2)  By certified United States mail addressed to licensee's registered agent at the most recent address specified in the agent's written consent form received by the department of business and development services, or any notice of address change which has been received by the department of business and development services. 
If personally delivered, the notice's effective date shall be the date of delivery. If mailed, the notice's effective date shall be two days after the notice is postmarked. 
Sec. 7-467. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment approval. 
(a)  All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of Macon-Bibb County and the state. 
(b)  The Macon-Bibb County Fire Department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire regulations. 
(c)  The Macon-Bibb County building inspector or designee shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable building and other technical codes of Macon-Bibb County. 
(d)  The sheriff's department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this division or other applicable laws. 
Sec. 7-468. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No owner or operator shall permit any patron, customer, or guest to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No owner or operator shall permit any adult entertainer to bring into contact with any patron, customer or guest, any part of the body or clothing of the adult entertainer. 
(b)  No operator shall permit any patron, customer or guest to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of any waiter, waitress or any other person who appears on the licensed premises while exposing their specified anatomical areas. 
(c)  All adult entertainers who expose their specified anatomical areas shall conduct their performances in an open area and shall not be permitted to perform in any closed stalls or rooms. 
(d)  All adult entertainers shall remain at least ten (10) feet from any customer or patron at all times, except for those who serve beverages or food to the patrons. 
(e)  All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this division shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(f)  No adult entertainer, patron or any other person shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity on the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as defined in this division. 
Sec. 7-469. - Miscellaneous. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under any applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this division shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. This section shall supersede and limit all other provisions of this division. 
Sec. 7-470. - Penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the terms of this division and any such violation shall be punishable in the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County as a violation of the code of ordinances of Macon-Bibb County under the general penalty section of such code and/or the Charter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit any conduct prohibited in this division which he knows or has reasonable cause to know is taking place on the premises. Any such conduct by a licensee shall be a violation of this Code and shall be punishable in the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County. Also, upon conviction or plea of nolo contendere, the establishment's license may be revoked or suspended as provided in section 7-3 of this Code. 
DIVISION 19. - COMMERCIAL INDOOR SHOOTING RANGES 

Sec. 7-471. - License required. 
No person shall operate within Macon-Bibb County any commercial indoor shooting range unless such person shall have first procured an appropriate license from the Department of Business and Development Services. 
Sec. 7-472. - Residency required. 
(a)  All applicants for a license under this division shall be bona fide residents of Macon-Bibb County at the time of the filing of the application and shall remain bona fide residents of Macon-Bibb County during all times that the licenses and the renewals thereof are in effect or such applicant shall name one (1) or more residents in Macon-Bibb County as the agent or representative of the licensee, who shall be responsible for any matter relating to such license and who, at all such times, shall be a bona fide resident of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  All applicants for licenses under this division by a partnership or corporation shall name in the application one or more residents in Macon-Bibb County as the agent(s) or representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, services of process or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation in connection with the issuance holding, suspension, revocation, or other action with respect to any Macon-Bibb County license. The application shall give the mailing address of the person and the mailing to any such person at such address of any notice required to be given under this section or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the partnership or corporation. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of the county, another person shall be immediately appointed in writing in his place and written notice shall be given to the Department of Business and Development Services stating the name and address of the new agent. 
Sec. 7-473. - Preliminary approval required. 
All applicants shall be approved or disapproved by the Department of Business and Development Services as a condition to action thereon in issuance of a license by the department of business and development services. If the sheriff determines that the application is not in order, in view, of the requirements of federal or state law or this Code or any sheriff's department investigation, the department of business and development services shall then notify the applicant of the reason for not issuing the license to the applicant. 
Sec. 7-474. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions prohibited. 
No license under this division shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person where any individual having any interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted or shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere for any felony within five (5) years, or two (2) misdemeanors in the past two (2) years, other than traffic violations, immediately prior to the filing of the application. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilty or plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. 
Sec. 7-475. - Grounds for denial. 
The Department of Business and Development Services may deny a license under this section on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure to pay required fees and taxes; 
(2)  Failure to provide valid information, documents and the like; 
(3)  False information in the application or attached documents; 
(4)  Failure to pass review by the sheriff; 
(5)  Improper residency of applicant, owner or registered agents; 
(6)  Prior convictions as provided in this division; and 
(7)  Failure to meet any other requirements in this section for a license of the class applied for. 
Sec. 7-476. - License procedure. 
Indoor shooting ranges shall, prior to the commencement of business, obtain a license upon application to the office of the Department of Business and Development Services and payment of an annual license fee which shall be determined from time to time by the mayor and commission based upon the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity and listed in a schedule of fees and charges maintained by the Department of Business and Development Services. 
Sec. 7-477. - Liability insurance required. 
Each application for a license issued under this division shall be accompanied by evidence that the applicant has obtained a general liability insurance policy in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Such insurance policy shall remain in full force and effect during the term of the license. Such insurance policy shall contain a clause requiring the insurer to immediately notify Macon-Bibb County if, for any reason, coverage under the policy terminates. The proof of insurance required by this section shall be furnished to Macon-Bibb County upon each renewal of the license. Additionally, the licensee shall furnish to the department of business and development services or his designee proof of insurance when requested to do so. 
Sec. 7-478. - Certified instructors required. 
The owner or operator of an indoor shooting range shall have on the premises at all times during range operation an individual certified as a firearm or range instructor by the National Rifle Association or the Georgia Peace Officers Standards and Training (P.O.S.T.) Council. 
Sec. 7-479. - Minimum specifications. 
The applicant for a license under this division shall, before the license is issued, provide certification by the manufacturer of the range equipment that such equipment meets or exceeds the specifications hereinafter set forth, along with certification by the installer that the equipment has been properly installed. The minimum specifications are as follows: 
(1)  Range; minimum specifications. 
a.  The bullet trap shall be designed for use of all handgun ammunition, all shot shell ammunition, including slugs and .22 rim fire rifle ammunition as well as soft point rifle and machine gun ammunition with muzzle velocities and energies under two thousand (2,000) feet per second and/or two thousand two hundred (2,200) foot pounds, respectively. Use of armor piercing ammunition is prohibited. 
b.  The bullet trap for each shooting position shall be constructed of three (3) five-sixteenths-inch thick armor 46 alloy impact plates of 400 to 440 BHN hardness arranged so that the trailing edge of the lowest plate covers the leading edge of the next highest plate. Use of a single continuous impact plate is prohibited. The continuous line of the impact plates shall extend upward at a mean angle not greater than forty (40) degrees from the horizontal plane to a height of ninety-two (92) inches. The bullet trap shall be designed to direct all impacted bullets upward into the deceleration chamber so that spent lead projectiles are directed to the collection chamber at the foot of the bullet trap. All impact plates shall be interchangeable and reversible. Bullet trap sidewall plates shall be fabricated from 10-gauge hot roll steel. There shall be no external bolts exposed to gunfire. The bullet trap shall be so constructed that no gap exists between the ceiling slope and the scrolls which could result in a bullet escaping the trap. 
c.  The air foil lead recovery plates and deceleration chamber shall be fabricated from one-quarter-inch thick armor alloy plates with a hardness of 340 to 380 BHN. 
d.  A rubber/granular composite bullet trap or equivalent shall be used for rifle fire. 
(2)  Rifle bullet trap minimum specifications. The rifle bullet trap shall be designed to withstand the following types of ammunition: 
a.  Commercially loaded handgun ammunition not exceeding a muzzle velocity of three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet per second and a bullet weight of 300 grains. 
b.  Commercially loaded rifle ammunition not exceeding a muzzle velocity of 3,500 feet per second and a bullet weight of three hundred (300) grains. 
c.  Commercially loaded shotgun ammunition not to exceed a muzzle velocity of one thousand five hundred sixty (1,560) feet per second and a bullet weight of one and one-quarter (1¼) ounce. 
(3)  Shooting stall; minimum specifications. The wall of each shooting stall shall be designed to effective stop a .44 caliber magnum bullet fired at point blank range. 
(4)  Range ceiling minimum specifications. The range ceiling shall be designed to provide full ballistic protection from rounds fired from floor level to the top of the stall. The design shall be such that bullets so fired cannot escape through the ceiling. The ceiling shall be constructed of four (4) feet by four (4) feet panels of one-half-inch thick plywood, reinforced by four (4) feet by four (4) feet 10-gauge hot-rolled steel sheets. 
(5)  Wall minimum specifications. The wall shall be constructed using eight-inch number grade concrete blocks. It shall extend from the rear of the bullet trap to a point at least four (4) feet past the shooting stall and shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet. 
Sec. 7-480. - Hours of operation. 
An indoor shooting range licensed under this division shall limit its operation to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily. 
DIVISION 20. - DOOR-TO-DOOR COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION 

Sec. 7-481. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to protect the citizens of Macon-Bibb County from criminal activity, abusive conduct, unwelcome disturbance, and disruption of privacy in their homes, and to otherwise preserve the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating door-to-door commercial solicitation. 
Sec. 7-482. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means a natural person, corporation, trust, partnership, incorporated or unincorporated association, or any other legal entity. 
Solicitation means going upon the premises of any private residence in Macon-Bibb County, not having been invited by the owner, tenant, or occupant thereof, for any one (1) or more of the following purposes, if such purpose is primarily commercial: 
(1)  Selling, or taking orders for future delivery of, goods, merchandise, wares, or other items of value; 
(2)  Selling, or taking orders for future performance of, services; 
(3)  Requesting the contribution of funds, property, or anything of value or the pledge of any type of future donation; or 
(4)  Distributing handbills, leaflets, or fliers. 
Except as provided by section 7-490, nothing within this division shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict persons from going door-to-door for the primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social, or other ideological beliefs. 
Sec. 7-483. - Permit required; duration; nontransferable. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation in Macon-Bibb County without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Business and Development Services. Any person claiming exemption from the permit fee, shall demonstrate proof of exemption at the time of application. 
(b)  A permit issued under this division shall be valid for not more than sixty (60) days. 
(c)  No permit issued under this division shall be transferred to any other person. 
Sec. 7-484. - Application; fee; bond; procedures. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit to engage in solicitation in Macon-Bibb County must file an application with the Department of Business and Development Services on a form prescribed by Macon-Bibb County and containing the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name; 
(2)  Any and all other names under which the applicant has or does conduct business, or to which the applicant will officially answer; 
(3)  Full address of the applicant's permanent residence; 
(4)  The applicant's telephone number and any business telephone number or other telephone number where the applicant can be reached; 
(5)  The full legal name and address of any and all business operations owned, managed, or operated by applicant, or by which the applicant is employed, or which the applicant represents; 
(6)  Name, address, and relationship to the applicant of all persons who may engage in solicitation on behalf of the applicant; 
(7)  The nature and location of employment of the applicant during the preceding 12 months; 
(8)  A brief description of the nature, character, quality, and price of the goods, wares, merchandise, services, or other items of value that are to be offered by the applicant; 
(9)  A description of the planned solicitation activities, including the dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business; 
(10)  A statement of whether the planned solicitation activities will require cash deposits or taking orders for cash on delivery purchases (C.O.D.) or a contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services, or merchandise for future delivery, or services to be performed in the future; 
(11)  A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, any distinguishing features, and the like). 
(12)  If employed, credentials establishing the exact relationship of the applicant with the employer; 
(13)  The applicant's driver's license or other government-issued photo identification card; 
(14)  The license plate number; registration information; vehicle identification number; and year, make and model of any motor vehicle to be used in conjunction with the planned solicitation; 
(15)  A statement as to whether the applicant was convicted of or plead nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor, or local ordinance violation, and if so, the location, date, and nature of the offense and the penalty assessed; 
(16)  A statement by the applicant authorizing Macon-Bibb County to perform criminal background searches, criminal history investigations, and personal character investigations of the applicant; 
(17)  The name of any and all municipalities, counties, or other locations where the applicant has conducted solicitation or similar activities in the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of the Macon-Bibb County application; and 
(18)  Proof of any other required license or permit from Macon-Bibb County, including from the judge of the Macon-Bibb County Probate Court pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1. 
(b)  All applications shall be accompanied by the fee established by the mayor and commission as it may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  All applicants whose solicitation activities require cash deposits or taking orders for cash on delivery purchases (C.O.D.) or who require a contract of agreement to finance the sale of any goods, services, or merchandise for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future, shall deposit with the Department of Business and Development Services a good and sufficient bond payable to Macon-Bibb County and conditioned to pay Macon-Bibb County, or anyone else suing on the bond, for injuries or damages received on account of dishonest, fraudulent, or improper conduct in the administration of the business so permitted. The amount of the bond shall be the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and shall be given for each fiscal year. The bond shall provide that any person or persons injured by the dishonest, fraudulent or improper conduct of the business may sue on the bond for their own use and any recovery shall be payable to the person. 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application, fee, and any bond required by this division, the business license office will determine if the application is complete. An application will be considered complete if all required information is provided. If the business license office determines that an application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified and afforded an opportunity to submit the missing information. If the application is complete, the business license office shall order an investigation, including criminal background checks, to verify the information provided within the application. After receiving a complete application and background investigation, the business license office shall issue the permit unless grounds exist for denying the application under section 7-485, in which case the application shall be denied and the applicant may appeal in accordance with section 7-488. 
Sec. 7-485. - Ineligibility. 
The following shall be grounds for denying a permit under this division: 
(1)  The failure of an applicant to demonstrate proof of having obtained any other required license or permit from Macon-Bibb County, including and license or permit required from the Macon-Bibb County probate judge; 
(2)  The failure of an applicant to provide truthful and complete information as requested by Macon-Bibb County as part of the application process; 
(3)  The failure of the applicant to sign the permit application; 
(4)  The failure of the applicant to pay the required fee at the time of application; 
(5)  The failure of the applicant to furnish Macon-Bibb County any required bond at the time of application; 
(6)  A conviction within the past five (5) years of the date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation or of any local ordinance that adversely reflects upon the person's ability to conduct solicitation activities in a legal, honest, and professional manner. Such violations include, but are not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person; or 
(7)  The revocation within the past five (5) years of any permit issued to the applicant pursuant to this division. 
Sec. 7-486. - Identification badge. 
At the same time the permit is issued, Macon-Bibb County shall issue the permittee an identification badge, which shall be worn by the permittee at all times while engaged in solicitation activities in Macon-Bibb County. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use or wear such badge. 
Sec. 7-487. - Revocation. 
The following shall be grounds for revoking a permit issued under this division: 
(1)  Any of the reasons listed in section 7-485 as grounds for denying an application, including any convictions or complaints or other disqualifying circumstances that occurred either before, on or after the date the permit was issued; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of solicitation activities; 
(3)  Any violation of this division; or 
(4)  Conducting a business of soliciting in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or, general welfare of the public. 
Sec. 7-488. - Appeal of denial or revocation. 
(a)  If an application is denied or if a permit is revoked, the applicant or permittee, as the case may be, shall be notified in writing. The notice shall set forth the particular grounds for such decision and inform the permittee of the right to appeal. The notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permittee's last known residential address on file with the Department of Business and Development Services. 
(b)  An applicant or permittee wishing to contest such action, shall, within ten (10) days after the issuance of the notice, deliver to the county manager a written request for a hearing. 
(c)  If a written request for a hearing to contest the action is delivered to the county manager within the time limitations imposed in subsection (b), the county manager shall cause notice to be served upon the person contesting the action in person or by mail, requiring such person to appear before the municipal court judge to show cause why the permit should have been granted or not revoked, as the case may be. 
(d)  The hearing shall not be held sooner than five (5) business days from the mailing of the notice, and the notice shall specify the date, time, and place of the hearing. The municipal court judge shall notify the applicant or permittee of his or her decision within a reasonable time after the hearing in the same manner as provided herein for service of notice of the hearing. If the judge upholds the decision, no rebate shall be made on any portion of the permit fee. 
Sec. 7-489. - Prohibited times and days for solicitation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit in Macon-Bibb County between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit in Macon-Bibb County on Sunday or any federal or state holiday. 
Sec. 7-490. - Exclusion by placard. 
It shall be unlawful to enter upon the premises of another for the purpose of solicitation, whether for commercial or noncommercial purposes, when the property is posted with a sign or placard prominently placed at the entrance to the property stating "No Soliciting" or other comparable statement. 
Sec. 7-491. - Request to leave premises. 
Any person soliciting shall immediately leave the premises upon request of the owner or occupant. 
Sec. 7-492. - Permit carried upon person and produced upon demand. 
(a)  Any person engaging in solicitation or canvassing must clearly and affirmatively state to the person being solicited at the initial contact and at all subsequent contacts, the following: 
(1)  The identity of the solicitor; 
(2)  The legal name of the person represented by the solicitor; 
(3)  The purpose of the solicitation; 
(4)  The type of goods or services being offered for sale and the method of distribution, if applicable; and 
(b)  Any person engaging in solicitation in Macon-Bibb County must at all times maintain upon his or her person a legible copy of the permit issued by Macon-Bibb County. The permit must be produced for review and inspection upon demand of any person. 
Sec. 7-493. - Receipts. 
(a)  Every solicitor shall, upon request, provide written receipts to persons to which or from which the solicitor has: 
(1)  Sold, or taken orders for, the purchase of goods, merchandise, wares, or other items of value, or for services performed or to be performed in the future; and/or 
(2)  Obtained a contribution or donation of funds, property, or anything of value, or obtained a pledge for any type of future contribution or donation. 
(b)  The receipt shall reflect: 
(1)  The name and business address of the solicitor; 
(2)  If different from the solicitor, the name and address of the person for whom the solicitation was made; 
(3)  The name and address of the person solicited; 
(4)  The nature of the items sold or ordered and the amount thereof; and 
(5)  The amount of the contribution or donation or pledge for future contribution or donation and the intended uses thereof. 
Sec. 7-494. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to the maximum punishment under the Macon-Bibb County Charter or Code general penalty provision. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
DIVISION 21. - BUSINESS INCUBATORS 

Sec. 7-495. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business incubatee means a young entrepreneurial company (whether a sole proprietorship or any business entity recognized under state law) who is being assisted by a business incubator through the provision of an array of business-support resources and services, including, but not limited to, affordable physical spaces (which are for office use only), shared offices, common services, financial assistance, marketing support, coaching, and networking connections. 
Business incubator means an organization designed to accelerate the growth and success of business incubatees through an array of business-support resources and services, including, but not limited to, affordable physical spaces (which are for office use only), shared offices, common services, financial assistance, marketing support, coaching, and networking connections. 
Sec. 7-496. - License required for business incubators. 
(a)  No person or entity shall operate within Macon-Bibb County any business incubator unless such person or entity shall have first procured a business incubator license from the department of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  To be eligible for a new or renewal business incubator license, an applicant must present evidence to the business licensing office that the applicant is either a registered not-for-profit organization or that at least seventy-five (75) percent of the applicant's gross income is derived from rents and fees charged to business incubatees. 
Sec. 7-497. - Special license required for business incubatees. 
For the first two (2) years in which it is engaged in business, a business incubatee shall be eligible for a special incubate rate of half of the administrative fee for an occupational tax certificate. Incubatees will be subject to all other applicable privilege licenses associated with the nature of the business. To receive such special rate, a business incubatee must provide the department of business and development services with written evidence that it meets the requirements of this Code at the time such business applies for its occupation tax certificate. 
Sec. 7-498. - Planning and zoning compliance for business incubators. 
A business incubator shall comply with the applicable planning and zoning requirements. 
Sec. 7-499. - Application of planning and zoning requirements to business incubatees. 
A business incubatee need not submit proof of its planning and zoning compliance, and will not be inspected for planning and zoning compliance, if: 
(1)  The business incubatee is being assisted by a business incubator through the provision of a physical space (which is for office use only); and 
(2)  It has already been determined that the business incubator is complying with the applicable planning and zoning requirements. 
Sec. 7-500. - Building code compliance for business incubators. 
A business incubator shall comply with the applicable building codes. 
Sec. 7-501. - Application of building code requirements to business incubatees. 
A business incubatee need not submit proof of its building code compliance, and will not be inspected for building code compliance, if: 
(1)  The business incubatee is being assisted by a business incubator through the provision of physical space (which is for office use only); and 
(2)  It has already been determined that the business incubator is complying with the applicable building codes. 
Sec. 7-502. - Fire code compliance for business incubators. 
A business incubator shall comply with the applicable fire code. 
Sec. 7-503. - Application of fire code requirements to business incubatees. 
A business incubatee need not submit proof of its fire code compliance, and will not be inspected for fire code compliance, if: 
(1)  The business incubatee is being assisted by a business incubator through the provision of a physical space (which is for office use only); and 
(2)  It has already been determined that the business incubator is complying with the applicable fire code. 
DIVISION 22. - COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES 

Sec. 7-504. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as the "Macon-Bibb County Coin Operated Amusement Machine Ordinance." 
Sec. 7-505. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bona fide coin operated amusement machine shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70. 
Business location means the entire office or area of the business in any one location owned or leased by the same proprietor or proprietors where the lessor or lessors allow the space to be used for business purposes. 
Location owner or location operator means an owner or operator of a business where one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, or shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
Class B machine shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70. 
Operator means any person, individual, firm, company, association, corporation, or other business entity who exhibits, displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in a place of business other than his own, any bona fide coin operated amusement machine in this state, or shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
Owner means any person, individual, firm, company, association, corporation, or other business entity owning any bona fide coin operated amusement machine in this state or shall have the same definition as found in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70, should that definition differ. 
Sec. 7-506. - Prohibition on class B devices. 
Location owners and location operators are prohibited from offering more than six (6) class B machines at one (1) business location within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 7-507. - Location owner and location operator notice. 
The owner and/or possessor of each bona fide coin operated amusement machine that rewards the player exclusively as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d) with a machine located within the jurisdiction of Macon-Bibb County is required to inform the location owner and/or location operator of each business location in which one of the machine owner's machines is located of the prohibitions and penalties set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), and (g). 
Sec. 7-508. - Employee notice. 
The location owner and/or location operator of each business location which offers to the public the use of a bona fide coin operated amusement machines which rewards the player exclusively as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d) with a machine located within the jurisdiction of Macon-Bibb County is required to inform all employees of that business in which one of the machine is located of the prohibitions and penalties set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), and (g). 
Sec. 7-509. - License suspension and revocation; penalties. 
(a)  Macon-Bibb County may suspend or revoke the license of any location owner or location operator to manufacture, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages in Macon-Bibb County, or any other license granted by Macon-Bibb County, as a penalty for the conviction of the location owner or location operator of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g) or for violation of one or more provisions of this division. Violation of any provision of this division may also be punished in accordance with the general penalty section of this Code. 
(b)  Macon-Bibb County may suspend or revoke the license of any location owner or location operator of any other license granted by Macon-Bibb County as a penalty for the conviction of the location owner or location operator of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), or (g). 
(c)  The suspension or revocation of licenses under this section, or other penalties imposed, shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
(1)  No license shall be suspended or revoked pursuant to this section except for due cause and after hearing and upon prior three-day written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charges upon which the hearing shall be held, unless such hearing has been waived pursuant to stipulation as provided under subpart (8) of this subsection. Such notice shall provide the reasons for the suspension or revocation sought and shall be mailed or delivered to the holder of the license. 
(2)  The term "due cause" for the purposes of this section shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Violation by the location owner or location operator of any provision of this division; and/or 
b.  Conviction of the location owner or location operator of a violation of subsection (e), (f), or (g) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35. 
(3)  Notice of suspension or revocation proceedings shall be served on the person named as licensee in the application. Notice shall be in writing. The notice may be served personally or by first class mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the licensee at its address as provided by the licensee to Macon-Bibb County. The burden shall be on the licensee to provide notice, in writing, of any change of address for service of notices and process. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Postal Service. 
(4)  The hearing shall be conducted by a judge of the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County. 
(5)  Hearings shall be only as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. Macon-Bibb County shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to represent itself or be represented by counsel, may cross examine all witnesses offered by Macon-Bibb County, and may call witnesses and present evidence in its own behalf. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to hearings under this section, although the judge shall have the right to exclude evidence which carries no indicia of reliability. All testimony shall be offered under oath or affirmation. 
(6)  The judge shall make his final determination within ten (10) business days of the completion of the hearing. The decision shall be placed in writing and contain the judge's findings of fact, conclusions of law, and decision as to sanction, if any. Such sanction may include one (1) or more of the following: revocation of the license, suspension of the license for no more than twelve (12) months, imposition of a probationary period not to exceed twelve (12) months, and/or a civil monetary penalty as provided in the general penalty section of the Macon-Bibb County charter or code. Progressive sanctions, depending on the severity of the violation, are encouraged but not required. Where the remaining term of the license is less than twelve (12) months, imposition of suspension or probation for a period in excess of the term of the existing license shall be applied to any renewal license. A subsequent violation within a probationary period shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of license renewal. A total of three (3) separate and unrelated violations within twenty-four (24) months, whether or not within a probationary period, shall be grounds for permanent revocation. 
(7)  The judge's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the Macon-Bibb County attorney, within ten (10) business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the judge shall constitute final action by Macon-Bibb County, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the superior court. 
(8)  Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the mayor, in consultation with the sheriff. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and non-appealable. 
Sec. 7-510. - Monthly reports; gross receipts. 
(a)  A location owner or location operator subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(c) is hereby required to provide a copy of the monthly verified report required by such code section to the commission. Such report shall indicate the monthly gross retail receipts for each business location located in Macon-Bibb County and shall be due by the 21st day of each month, subsequent to the month in which the sales have taken place. Macon-Bibb County shall be entitled to conduct an annual audit of such reports and the location owner or location operator shall make its books reasonably available for such purpose upon request of the tax commissioner. 
(b)  No location owner or location operator may derive more than fifty (50) percent of such location owner's or location operator's monthly gross retail receipts for this business location in which the class B machines are situated from such class B machines. 
Sec. 7-511. - Posting of signs. 
Any location owner or location operator with a business location within Macon-Bibb County which offers to the public one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines is hereby required to post prominently a notice, in the vicinity of such coin operated amusement machines, including the following or substantially similar language: 
GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR A WARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY ON THIS MACHINE. 
Any such notice shall be at least 11.5 inches by 17.5 inches in size. Words and letters shall be in bold print and shall be at least one (1) centimeter in size. 
Sec. 7-512. - Minimum distance requirements. 
Any business location which offers to the public one (1) or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines may not be located within one hundred (100) yards of any church building, within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus, within one hundred (100) yards of any alcoholic treatment center, or within one hundred (100) yards of any housing authority property. 
Sec. 7-513. - Disclosure of machine owner. 
Any location owner or location operator seeking to locate a business within the jurisdiction of Macon-Bibb County and offer to the public one (1) or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines must first submit in writing the name, physical address and mailing address of the owner of the bona fide coin operated amusement machine to the tax commissioner before any occupational tax certificate or license granted by Macon-Bibb County is issued or renewed. 
Sec. 7-514. - Location of machines. 
Any location owner or location operator who offers to the public one (1) or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines is required as a condition of doing business in the jurisdiction of Macon-Bibb County to locate each and every bona fide coin operated amusement machine in plain view and accessible to any person who is at the business location. 
Sec. 7-515. - Posting of privilege license or occupation tax certificate. 
Any location owner or location operator who offers to the public one or more bona fide coin operated amusement machines is required as a condition of doing business in the jurisdiction of Macon-Bibb County to post its privilege license and/or occupation tax certificate, whichever it is required by this code to obtain, in a conspicuous place in the location owner or location operator's place of business at which such machine(s) is offered and leave it there at all times. 
Chapter 8 - CEMETERIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Burials. 
It shall be unlawful for any undertaker or any other person to bury or cause to be buried, or to in any manner aid or assist in the burial of the dead body of any human being in any cemetery or location in Macon-Bibb County other than an authorized public cemetery or a private cemetery established and approved pursuant to this chapter. 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cemetery means any land or structure in this state dedicated to and used or intended to be used for interment of human remains. It may be either a burial park for earth interments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments or a combination of one or more thereof. 
EPD means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Marker means a small individual memorial placed at either the head or foot of a grave. This is sometimes referred to as a headstone or footstone. 
Sec. 8-3. - Authority of Macon-Bibb County Engineer. 
The Macon-Bibb County Engineer shall be responsible for issuing permits and ensuring that the requirements of this article are satisfied. Other than maintaining in his office an original of the plat of survey of each cemetery and maintaining an inventory of cemeteries in Macon-Bibb County, the Macon-Bibb County Engineer and Macon-Bibb County shall have no responsibility or duty to supervise the operation of any such cemetery. 
Sec. 8-4. - Records. 
The Macon-Bibb County engineer shall maintain a record and inventory of the locations of all cemeteries established and permitted pursuant to this article. 
Sec. 8-5. - Enforcement officers. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers, certified peace officers, and/or officials of the state, or any code enforcement officer, are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
Sec. 8-6. - Penalties for violation of article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a cemetery in Macon-Bibb County unless done so in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Violators of the provisions of this chapter may be punished for any violation of this chapter not already a violation of the laws of the state up to six months in jail and a fine of $1,000.00, or both, each day's violation constituting a separate offense. 
(2)  In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, Macon-Bibb County may seek injunctive relief to cease and remove any violations of this article in the appropriate court against the appropriate person or entity. 
(3)  Any violation of this article is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction or other proceedings allowed by law in the appropriate court. 
Sec. 8-7. - Operation. 
It shall be the sole responsibility and duty of the owner, creator, trust or other legal entity which shall own, supervise or have control of a cemetery to ensure that the same shall not at any time constitute a health hazard or constitute a nuisance. The owner, creator, trust or other legal entity, which shall own, supervise or have control of a cemetery shall have the right and responsibility of creating rules and regulations necessary to or appropriate for the operation of such cemetery. 
Sec. 8-8. - Creation of nuisances. 
No owner, creator, trust or other legal entity which shall own, supervise or have control of a cemetery shall allow such cemetery to accumulate weeds, trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary or unsafe conditions so as to create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. 
Secs. 8-9—8-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 8-29. - Permits. 
No cemetery shall be allowed in Macon-Bibb County without the owner, creator, trust or other legal entity having first applied for and obtained from the Macon-Bibb County Engineer, a permit approving the operation thereof. In addition to any other requirements set forth in this chapter, no permit will be granted without compliance with the following: 
(1)  Survey. A plat of survey of the cemetery prepared by a state-registered land surveyor shall be submitted to the Macon-Bibb County Engineer along with the application. Upon approval of the survey by the Macon-Bibb County Engineer, the applicant shall file, or cause to have filed, two signed original copies of the survey with the superior court clerk for recording. 
(2)  Minimum area. No cemetery shall be approved unless the survey provided for in this chapter indicates that the cemetery contains not less than two acres to be utilized for burial space. 
(3)  Land use compatibility. The location of the proposed cemetery is to be compatible with adjacent land uses, existing or proposed highways and any other elements or factors deemed by Macon-Bibb County to affect the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the area surrounding the proposed location, including but not limited to the effect on aquifers, wells and ground water, the potential for pollution of nearby streams, lakes and other waters and the suitability of the soil composition for such use. Under no circumstances shall a cemetery be allowed within 1,000 feet from any known well, aquifer, lake or stream which in the determination of EPD requires a stream buffer. 
(4)  Buffer area. The proposed location must contain a buffer area that is landscaped with trees and/or shrubbery on all sides of the site that is identified on the survey and is not less than ten feet in width. 
(5)  Flood prohibition. No cemetery shall lie in whole or in part within a floodplain and certification of the same must be provided upon the survey shown on the latest FEMA flood maps. 
(6)  Identification of boundaries. The boundaries of the proposed cemetery must be clearly marked and delineated by concrete or metal pins or other permanent means of identification. No burials shall be permitted within 500 feet of adjacent property lines. 
(7)  Ingress and egress. Adequate access, ingress and egress to and from the cemetery must be available by public road or private drive. 
Sec. 8-30. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  Fencing shall be installed around the perimeter of the cemetery of sufficient height and strength to keep dogs and wild animals from accessing the cemetery. 
(b)  Any land disturbances in the construction of a cemetery must be subject to all sediment erosion and ground water run-off requirements applicable to other development projects as set forth in the ordinances and regulations of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
(c)  All graves must be marked with an appropriate marker as defined herein that will allow law enforcement authorities to locate graves if necessary for any lawful purposes after interment. 
(d)  All cemeteries shall be subject to the requirements of state law and regulations in effect or as they may exist in the future with regard to perpetual care, reinterment of remains and any such other conditions as may require remediation. 
(e)  All human remains shall be buried in a leak-proof casket or vault to protect against contamination of ground water, wells, and aquifers. 
(f)  No human remains shall be buried less than the depth that is customarily used in the funeral industry in Georgia and in accordance with minimum standards for interment as may be adopted by the Secretary of State. 
(g)  Remains of persons who die from communicable diseases must be buried by and under the supervision of a licensed funeral director in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Funeral Service Board. 
(h)  Human remains must be buried before they begin to decompose as evidenced by odor, or create a danger to the health, safety and welfare of others. 
Sec. 8-31. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to willfully disturb, destroy, deface, mutilate, remove, excavate or expose a burial place without first obtaining a permit pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 72 (O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.), or as amended from time to time, and following the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to report the discovery of human remains or to notify the local authority of the disturbance of a burial ground. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter should any person or entity seeking a permit to disturb a burial place pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 72 (O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq.), as amended from time to time, not follow the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person or entity to fail to comply with the provisions of an approved permit. 
Sec. 8-32. - Health department approval. 
The approval of the proposed cemetery must be obtained from the Macon-Bibb County Health Department and submitted with the application. 
Sec. 8-33. - Appeal from denial. 
Appeals from the denial of a permit authorized by this chapter shall be to the Commission of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 8-34. - Exemption. 
Any cemetery which as of the effective date of this chapter has received all necessary state, local and federal permits, has otherwise met all legal requirements to operate, is fully operational and is lawfully receiving human remains for burial, shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
Secs. 8-35—8-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC CEMETERIES 

Sec. 8-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of health means the Macon-Bibb County Board of Health. 
Department means the department of parks and recreation. 
Director means the director of parks and recreation. 
Secretary or chairman means of the health board. 
Sec. 8-51. - Responsibilities of Department of Parks and Recreation. 
The department of parks and recreation shall take charge of Macon-Bibb County burial grounds and keep the buildings, fences and other appurtenances thereto belonging in proper order and condition, shall be always ready to receive verbal or written application for interments on the said ground, and make, without delay, all interments so applied for. 
Sec. 8-52. - Removal of trees. 
The director of the department of parks and recreation, with approval of the mayor, shall have the right and power to have removed from any owner's lot any tree deemed unsafe and likely to injure any of the improvements in the cemetery. 
Sec. 8-53. - Records. 
(a)  The department of parks and recreation shall keep a cemetery record book of all deaths and burials in Macon-Bibb cemeteries showing names and ages and in which cemetery each person was buried. 
(b)  The department shall also keep a book of record on all material received for carrying on the work in the Macon-Bibb County-owned cemeteries stating the account name, amount and kind of material received and the purposes for which it was used. 
(c)  The department shall also keep a book of record and make true entries therein of all charges made and fees collected for work or material by and for the Macon-Bibb County-owned cemeteries. 
(d)  The department shall render to the mayor, through the county manager, a monthly report on these records. 
Sec. 8-54. - Burial permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone, other than the department of parks and recreation, to bury any person dying within Macon-Bibb County in any of Macon-Bibb County cemeteries, without first obtaining a burial permit from the secretary of the board of health. The secretary shall not be authorized to furnish a burial permit without a certificate from the attending physician setting forth the cause of death, provided that there was a physician in attendance. In case there was no physician in attendance, then the secretary shall comply with the requirements applying to the department under similar circumstances. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the department or any other person to bury any person dying beyond the Macon-Bibb County borders in any of the Macon-Bibb County cemeteries, without first obtaining a burial permit from the secretary of the board of health, nor shall the secretary issue a permit unless there is pasted on the box containing the corpse a certificate from the attending physician giving the full name of the deceased, the date of death and the disease causing death. The secretary shall keep a record of all such cases. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the department to bury any person dying within Macon-Bibb County in any of the Macon-Bibb County cemeteries, without first obtaining from the attending physician, provided there was one, a certificate setting forth cause of death, which certificate shall accompany the order for the grave. The superintendent shall record or cause to be recorded in the secretary's office, the certificate, subject to the inspection of all concerned. In all cases where there was no physician in attendance, the such case shall be at once reported by the superintendent to the chairman of the board of health, who will issue the burial permit, first making due investigation as to the cause of the death, to the end that the mortuary records of the board of health may be complete. 
Sec. 8-55. - Burial of paupers. 
The director of the Department of Parks and Recreation shall bury all paupers, when so directed by the mayor, or in the mayor's absence, the county manager. 
Sec. 8-56. - Graves. 
The Department of Parks and Recreation shall inter all bodies in graves of not less than four feet in depth, when walled up, or four and one-half feet otherwise, or in a vault. In no case shall a body be permitted to remain aboveground enclosed with brick or other materials. Piles of earth, brick, mortar beds, or rubbish of any kind shall not remain on the ground longer than 24 hours after an interment or the completion of any work incident to a burial. 
Sec. 8-57. - Interments and removal of bodies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to inter a body in any of the Macon-Bibb County cemeteries, or remove a body which has been or shall hereafter be interred, in any of the cemeteries, from its place of interment, without the authorization of the director. 
Sec. 8-58. - Disinterments. 
The body of any person buried in any cemetery in Macon-Bibb County shall not be disinterred without first obtaining a permit so to do from the board of health or from the chairman thereof. 
Sec. 8-59. - Duties of undertakers. 
It shall be unlawful for any undertaker or any other person in Macon-Bibb County to furnish a coffin in which to bury anyone who may have died in Macon-Bibb County and is to be buried within or beyond the border of Macon-Bibb County, unless the application for the coffin is accompanied by the permit of the board of health, and that permit alone is authority for the director to bury the body for which the permit is given. 
Sec. 8-60. - Plan of lots. 
The director of the department of parks and recreation shall keep a plan of the grounds of Macon-Bibb County cemeteries for public inspection, which shall be furnished to the public, with all the lots and ranges properly numbered, and with the names of the owners. The director shall see that numbers are kept on all lots. Any lot that may be sold, if the terms are not complied with, shall, if not occupied, revert again to the control of the Macon-Bibb County, or if occupied in part, the remaining portion may be again disposed of by Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 8-61. - Lots for public institutions. 
Lots of suitable sizes may be set apart by the director for the use of public institutions. Ranges shall also be laid out for the burial of strangers and others who may not purchase lots. 
Sec. 8-62. - Proceeds from sale of lots. 
The money collected from the sale of lots shall be paid to the director of finance, who shall faithfully keep a correct account of all receipts and disbursements. 
Sec. 8-63. - Purchase by nonresidents. 
Persons living outside of Macon-Bibb County may purchase lots on the same terms and conditions as resident citizens. 
Sec. 8-64. - Collection of fees. 
The department of parks and recreation shall collect all cemetery fees as are appropriate according to the schedule of cemetery fees adopted in the department regulations. 
Sec. 8-65. - Acceptance of fees prohibited. 
No employee of Macon-Bibb County shall receive any compensation for cleaning lots, but all fees collected by the department for cleaning private lots shall be promptly paid into the Macon-Bibb County treasury. 
Sec. 8-66. - Receipts. 
The department of parks and recreation shall be required to give receipts for all fees, lots sold, work done on lots, for building foundations for monuments, or for any kind of work done by Macon-Bibb County in Macon-Bibb County-owned cemeteries. The stubs of these receipts shall show each amount received, from whom, and for what purpose and the like. These stubs shall be numbered from one, consecutively, and shall correspond with the monthly itemized reports sent to the mayor. All funds received by the department shall be paid weekly into the Macon-Bibb County treasury. 
Sec. 8-67. - Defacing monuments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate or in any manner deface a monument, fence or other enclosure in the cemeteries, or dig up, remove or destroy any shrubbery or trees in the Macon-Bibb County cemeteries, or upon the reserved land around any of the cemeteries, except with permission of the director. 
Sec. 8-68. - Gathering flowers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break down or gather any wild or cultivated flowers in any cemetery, and it shall be the duty of the director to inform persons visiting the grounds of the existence of this section, and report all violations that come to his knowledge. 
Sec. 8-69. - Climbing fences; exit through gates required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to pass over any fence or any part of the enclosure around any Macon-Bibb County cemetery, or to go out from any Macon-Bibb County cemetery on the river by boat, or to pass through a Macon-Bibb County cemetery in any way other than by the gates. 
Sec. 8-70. - Times of admittance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in any of the Macon-Bibb County cemeteries after sundown, nor shall anyone be allowed to enter therein before sunup. 
Chapter 9 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Establishment; Mission statement. 
(a)  The Macon-Bibb County Emergency Management Agency is established as the civil defense and emergency management organization of Macon-Bibb County and its jurisdiction is the entire geographic area of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  The mission of the Macon-Bibb County Emergency Management Agency is coordination of contingency planning for carrying out all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin, caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbances, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill, other water contaminations, or hazardous materials accidents or incidents, requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, to include terroristic activities or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; law enforcement services; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
Sec. 9-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this chapter from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Doing business means any building contractor who has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the limits of the Macon-Bibb County expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto. 
Emergency means a condition resulting from enemy attack, rioting or natural disaster which cannot be handled by normal operating personnel and facilities. 
Emergency management volunteer means any person who serves without compensation in the emergency management organization. 
Exempt individuals means, unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, and building and repair contractors, properly registered according to section 9-10 performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the Macon-Bibb County for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean-up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by Macon-Bibb County on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by Macon-Bibb County pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
Natural disaster means any condition seriously affecting or threatening public health, welfare or security as a result of a severe fire, explosion, flood, tornado, hurricane, electrical failure or similar natural or accidental cause, and which is beyond the control of public or private agencies ordinarily responsible for the control or relief of such conditions. 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three (3) months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
Sec. 9-3. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, rioting, actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency which may affect lives and property, the mayor may announce to the public and the members of the commission that the emergency operations plan has been activated. Thereafter, the mayor shall keep the commissioners informed as to the status of the emergency and any related matters. The mayor may present the commission with emergency ordinances that are necessary or incidental to the carrying out of emergency management functions. 
Sec. 9-4. - Emergency management and disaster control plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management and disaster control plan for Macon-Bibb County shall be adopted by resolution of the commission and approved by the mayor. In preparation of this plan as it pertains to Macon-Bibb County organizations, the services, equipment, facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the fullest extent possible. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions and duties assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a constant state of readiness at all times. 
Sec. 9-5. - Emergency management and disaster control fund. 
An emergency management and disaster control fund is hereby created, and any money as shall be appropriated from time to time for the carrying out of the purposes of this chapter shall be deposited in the fund. Except during a state of emergency as declared by the mayor, the money shall be disbursed in the usual manner for the disbursement of Macon-Bibb County funds. In the event of a declaration of a state of emergency, the mayor may disburse funds within his discretion and without the signature or counter-signature of any officer; provided, however, that the mayor shall be limited to the amount appropriated and set aside in the emergency management and disaster fund. 
Sec. 9-6. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of Macon-Bibb County, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve without compensation under the direction of the emergency management director. Volunteers shall serve with immunity to liability under O.C.G.A. § 51-1-29. 
Sec. 9-7. - Violations; falsely displaying emblem. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or any person wearing, carrying or displaying any emblem or insignia or other means of identification as a member of the emergency management agency without authority of the proper official shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 9-8. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the limits of Macon-Bibb County during a state of emergency, or the subsequent recovery period consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the department of business development services and having paid fees as provided by this chapter. 
(1)  Certification. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the department of building development services with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by Macon-Bibb County. 
(2)  Registration fees. Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this chapter at fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(3)  Transferability. Each certification issued under this chapter is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by Macon-Bibb County or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(4)  Display of registration certification. Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(5)  Revocation; suspension. Each certification granted under this chapter is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The Macon-Bibb County Commission hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this chapter or any other city, county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, Macon-Bibb County desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing in municipal court shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(6)  Effective date; expiration. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all building contractors doing business within the geographic limits of Macon-Bibb County on that date and doing business on any date thereafter. However, this chapter and any certification issued pursuant to it shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
Sec. 9-9. - Curfew. 
(a)  Institution of curfew. 
(1)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the commission, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of Macon-Bibb County. 
(2)  All of the territory of Macon-Bibb County shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(3)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the geographic limits of Macon-Bibb County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
Sec. 9-10. - Authority to waive or suspend ordinances, procedures, other formalities, and fees structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting Georgia or the United States, pursuant to section 19(e)(1) of the charter of Macon-Bibb County, the mayor, the mayor pro tempore, or a majority of the commissioners may convene to enact an emergency ordinance to provide, among other things, that the affairs and business of Macon-Bibb County may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of Macon-Bibb County, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such emergency ordinance is passed and meetings occur outside of Macon-Bibb County, all actions taken by the commission shall be as valid and binding as if performed within Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the commission, its designee or the emergency interim successor may make emergency procurements pursuant to the provisions related to emergency procurement of the Macon-Bibb County Code of Ordinances and may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the commission as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the commission, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of Macon-Bibb County, or any portion thereof, where: 
(1)  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside this Code is required; 
(2)  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(3)  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the commission, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the commission, its designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary permits for mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the Macon-Bibb County Health Department and the Macon-Bibb County Department of Business Development Services. The temporary permit shall not exceed six (6) months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six (6) months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
Sec. 9-11. - Overcharging for goods, materials, services and housing during state of emergency prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which Macon-Bibb County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business therein to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 9-12. - Penalties. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days. For purposes of enforcing the provisions of section 9-8, each day a building contractor does business within Macon-Bibb County without complying with this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 

Sec. 10-1. - State Fire Marshall Rules and Regulations adopted. 
(a)  The State Fire Marshal Rules and Regulations shall be adopted, by reference hereto and incorporated herein as if fully stated, as required by Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Such rules and regulations are published at Ga. Comp. R. and Regs. 120-3-3 et seq. 
(b)  As required by Title 25 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated all existing buildings in Macon-Bibb County, except single family dwellings shall be inspected by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
(c)  The Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department is hereby vested with full authority and power to enforce the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code. The chief and members of that bureau are authorized to administer the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, and to make inspections and to take such action as is necessary, proper and convenient to cause violators of the code to be punished, including the initiation of proceedings in a court of proper jurisdiction whether by summons, citation, warrant or otherwise. 
Sec. 10-2. - Fire Prevention Code adopted. 
(a)  The 2012 edition of the International Fire Prevention Code (IFC) is here by adopted in its entirety, including appendixes A, B, C, D, E, and F, and incorporated herein by reference, and shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. The provisions of the 2012 IFC shall supersede any override any conflicting provisions of existing ordinances or resolutions adopted by the City of Macon, Bibb County, or Macon-Bibb County, but only to the extent where such provisions directly conflict with each other. 
(b)  The 2012 IFC, together with all non-conflicting ordinances previously adopted by the City of Macon or Bibb County governing fire safety shall be known as the Macon-Bibb County Fire Prevention Code, copies of which shall be on file and open for public inspection in the office of the Clerk of Macon-Bibb County. Copies of the Macon-Bibb County Fire Prevention Code shall also be on file and open for inspection in the office of the chief of the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department and the director of the office of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
(c)  Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in the Charter and ordinances of Macon-Bibb County for violation of the ordinances of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 10-2.1. - Amendments to Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(a)  The 2012 International Fire Code, as adopted in section 10-2, is here by amended as by inserting the following definitions in Chapter 2, Section 202: 
Fire District shall mean all those areas within the boundaries of Macon-Bibb County. 
Fire Code Official shall mean the Fire Chief or his/her designee 
(b)  Chapter 3, Section 304.1.1 of the 2012 International Fire Code, as adopted in section 10-2, is here by amended by inserting at the end of the paragraph the following exception: 
"Exception: Land comprising acreage of natural growth may only need safeguarding by cutting fire breaks of sufficient width." 
Sec. 10-3. - Life Safety Code adopted. 
(a)  The 2012 edition of the Life Safety Code, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, is here by adopted by referenced and incorporated herein for enforcement in Macon-Bibb County by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Up to date copies of the Life Safety Code shall be maintained at the office of the clerk of Macon-Bibb County, the office of the fire chief, and the office of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
(b)  Any provision of the Macon-Bibb County Fire Prevention Code which is in conflict with the Life Safety Code shall be controlling over the conflicting provisions of the Life Safety Code. 
(c)  Deletions and additions to, or adoption of the latest edition of or supplements to this code chapter may be adopted by resolution of the Macon-Bibb County Commission, provided that copies of such changes are placed on file with the office of the Clerk of Macon-Bibb County, the office of the fire chief, and the office of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
Sec. 10-4. - Powers and duties of fire chief. 
The fire chief shall: 
(1)  See to the proper and speedy extinguishment of fires which may endanger life or property within Macon-Bibb County; 
(2)  Enforce all regulations of the department and administrative directives of the mayor; 
(3)  Have supreme and absolute command at the scene of a fire over the endangered property, the general area surrounding the property, and all public safety personnel present at such fire, including law enforcement personnel; 
(4)  Issue a report each year in writing to the county manager for presentation to the mayor and to the commissioners on all fires attended by the fire department in the preceding year, with causes thereof, if ascertainable, and the number and description of any buildings destroyed, persons injured and all fire related deaths; 
(5)  Investigate all fires to determine if arson was involved; 
(6)  Examine, in general, all buildings, except single family dwellings, throughout Macon-Bibb County in order to become familiar with the construction and class of business carried on, the class of goods on each floor and whether the goods are highly combustible or noncombustible, to see that entrances, stairways, halls and exits are accessible, to learn the most expedient manner of attack in the case of fire, to make any other observations as may serve the interest of the department, and to make a note of each inspection in a book or other form of record provided for that purpose. A copy of this record shall be kept at each fire station and all members of the department shall familiarize themselves with it; and 
(7)  Have the power to evacuate any buildings or area necessary for the protection of human life during a threat of a bomb, fire, explosion, or similar hazardous condition. 
Sec. 10-5. - Oath of office. 
(a)  Before any fire officers shall assume the duties of office, each shall take substantially the following oath: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully perform all the duties of my office, and that I will faithfully observe all the rules, orders and regulations of the department. I further swear or affirm that I will obey all laws of Macon-Bibb County, the State of Georgia, and any other state, or the United States of America." 
(b)  This oath shall be administered by the fire chief, assistant chief or the mayor. 
Sec. 10-6. - Reports of insurance adjusters. 
Each fire insurance adjuster shall be required to file a report with the fire chief upon settling a fire loss of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more, within ten (10) days following the settlement, and the report shall show the cause of the fire loss, amount of loss, amount of insurance carried by the insured, the amount of settlement and amount of salvage recovery value. 
Sec. 10-7. - Using or tampering with fire hydrants. 
No person shall use water from or tamper with any fire hydrant of Macon-Bibb County, except with the written approval of the fire chief. 
Sec. 10-8. - Obstructing fire stations. 
No person shall obstruct in any manner the entrance to any fire station house. 
Sec. 10-9. - Solicitations. 
(a)  Solicitations, subscription paper circulation, sales of tickets for entertainment, raffles and the like are prohibited in or around fire department facilities except by written permission from the fire chief. 
(b)  Officers and employees of the fire department shall not solicit subscriptions or attempt to sell anything to persons outside the department while on duty, for company or other purposes, without written permission of the fire chief. 
Sec. 10-10. - Downtown fire district. 
There is hereby recreated and re-established a downtown fire district which is defined as embraced within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard and Riverside Drive; extending along Riverside Drive to Spring Street; extending along Spring Street and an extension thereof to Hazel Street; extending along Hazel Street to Fifth Street; extending along Fifth Street and Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard to Riverside Drive, the beginning point, including both sides of segments of the above streets forming such boundaries. 
Sec. 10-11. - Requirements for water mains and fire hydrants in developments. 
(a)  All new residential and commercial developments within Macon-Bibb County shall make adequate provisions for water mains and fire hydrants in compliance with the standards adopted pursuant to this section. The purpose of this section is to ensure that an adequate water supply is available throughout Macon-Bibb County to protect our citizens from the dangers of fire. 
(b)  The following words, where used in this section, shall be deemed to have the following meanings: 
(1)  Residential development shall include, but not be limited to, single-family subdivisions, apartments, condominiums, cooperatives, and zero lot line units. 
(2)  Commercial development means any development related to or connected with trade or commerce. 
(c)  The fire chief is authorized to adopt written standards concerning the installation and maintenance of a system of adequate water mains and fire hydrants throughout Macon-Bibb County. A copy of these standards so adopted by the fire chief shall be kept on file for public inspection and copying at all times in the office of the Macon-Bibb County clerk, the fire chief's office, and the Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
(d)  All developers must submit, in advance, to the Bureau of Fire Prevention a set of detailed plans showing the placement of the proposed mains and hydrants, type of materials to be used, size of proposed mains, nearest existing water mains and hydrants, and all other necessary details of the fire hydrant system. Such plan shall bear the seal of a registered engineer and a certification by the engineer that the plans comply with these regulations. All developers shall be required to post an adequate financial guarantee, which is acceptable to the fire chief to insure the completion of the fire hydrant system. Before construction of the fire hydrant system will be allowed, the fire chief shall have reviewed and approved the plans. 
(e)  These plans shall also be submitted, prior to construction, to the Macon-Bibb County Water and Sewer Authority for a review and approval that an adequate water supply exists for the project. An adequate water supply shall be deemed to exist if there is a water main of sufficient size within five hundred (500) feet of the property line of the proposed development. 
(f)  During installation of the fire hydrant system by the developer, the Department of Business Development Services and the Bureau of Fire Protection will conduct inspections and the building official shall approve that portion of the system on private property. It shall be the duty of the contractor installing the fire hydrant system to call the Department of Business Development Services and Bureau of Fire Prevention for inspections before each section of the system is covered over. 
(g)  No certificates of occupancy may be issued by the building official in such development until such certification of completion of the fire hydrant system has been issued by the building official and accepted by the fire official. Furthermore, the water and sewer authority shall not provide water service to the water mains on private property in such development until such certification of completion has been issued. 
(h)  Also, no streets within the development may be accepted for public maintenance by the Macon-Bibb County engineer until the certification of completion has been issued. 
(i)  The fire chief may waive or modify the provisions of these standards if the Macon-Bibb County Water and Sewer Authority cannot certify that an adequate water supply is available. 
(j)  Any new development which involves a substantial modification of an existing part of Macon-Bibb County's fire hydrant system shall also be required to comply with the standards which are adopted pursuant to this section. 
Sec. 10-12. - Smoking in bed prohibited; signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while an occupant of a hotel, rooming house, tourist court or other commercial establishment in which room accommodations are furnished for hire, to smoke any cigarette, cigar, pipe or other device used for the burning of tobacco or other substance, while such person is in bed. 
(b)  Every operator of a hotel, rooming house, tourist court or other commercial establishment in which rooming accommodations are furnished for hire shall post in a prominent place, in each room let for hire a copy of this section, and cause such notice to be so posted continuously. 
Sec. 10-13. - Parking in fire lane. 
It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in a posted fire lane. Law enforcement officers and members of the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Fire Department may issue citations for violations of this section. 
Sec. 10-14. - Security gates. 
Security gates shall be constructed only with the approval of the fire chief and only if they comply with following provisions: 
(1)  Plans describing the gate width and type of emergency entrance for fire vehicles shall be submitted to the fire department for review and approval; 
(2)  Changes in the security code must be immediately reported to the fire department; 
(3)  All security gates installed must comply at all times with Section 503.6 of the 2012 International Fire Code; 
Sec. 10-15. - Burn permits. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in any type of outdoor burning without the prior approval of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
Sec. 10-16. - Emergency contact telephone numbers. 
(a)  All businesses shall submit to the fire department an emergency contact list of persons to be notified in case of after hour emergencies. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a designated emergency contact person to refuse to respond to an emergency when so notified by the fire department or law enforcement personnel. 
(c)  All changes in designated contact persons or contact information shall be immediately reported to the Bureau of Fire Prevention. 
Chapter 11 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 11-1. - Authorization and findings of fact. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public healthy, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Macon-Bibb County Commission, does ordain as follows: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the trot base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
Sec. 11-2. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
Sec. 11-3. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this ordinance are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
Sec. 11-4. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 11-5. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all Areas of Special Flood Hazard within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 11-6. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The Areas of Special Flood Hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its most recently available flood elevation data provided in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for the consolidate government of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, as prepared and revised by FEMA. The accompanying maps and other supporting data, including any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, declared to be part of this ordinance, and shall have the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this ordinance. 
Areas of Special Flood Hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS or FIRM. 
The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), and any accompanying maps and other supporting data, including any revisions thereto, are located in the office of the Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
( Ord. of 6-6-2017(2), § 1 ) 
Sec. 11-7. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter PRIOR to the commencement of any development activities. 
Sec. 11-8. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
Sec. 11-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
Sec. 11-10. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
Sec. 11-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Macon-Bibb County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
Sec. 11-12. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Trial of such violations shall be brought in the Municipal Court of Macon-Bibb County but the case may be removed to the State Court of Macon-Bibb County upon the motion of either party or upon motion of the judge of Municipal Court. Any person, firm or corporation who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by fines not exceed to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation and/or jail time not to exceed thirty (30) days per violation. Nothing herein contained shall prevent Macon-Bibb County from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0032, § 1, 7-21-2015 ; Ord. No. O-16-0048, § 1, 6-21-2016 ) 
Secs. 11-13, 11-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 11-15. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
The Macon-Bibb County Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. Any reference to the Macon-Bibb County Engineer includes his authorized representatives. 
Sec. 11-16. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit, which shall be accompanied with a fifty dollar ($50.00) application fee, shall be made to the Macon-Bibb County Engineer on forms furnished by the community PRIOR to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of Section 11-21(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage 
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The Macon-Bibb County Engineer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required herein, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
Sec. 11-17. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the Macon-Bibb County Engineer shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits maybe required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the Floodplain Development permit. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 11-6, then the Macon-Bibb County Engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources in order to administer the flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with Section 11-16(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Section 11-16(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Macon-Bibb County Engineer shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with Sections 11-16(1)(c) and Sections 11-21(2) or 11-23(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Macon-Bibb County Engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the Macon-Bibb County Engineer and shall be open for public inspection. 
(13)  Whenever in this section, a verification is required by the Macon-Bibb County Engineer, he may rely upon a certification by an engineer or surveyor registered in the State of Georgia. 
Secs. 11-18, 11-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 11-20. - General standards. 
In ALL Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include ANY fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one-square-inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade; and 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(b)  So as not to violate the "Lowest Floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
(c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; and 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter. 
Sec. 11-21. - Specific standards. 
In ALL Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 11-20(4), "Elevated Buildings". 
(a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to two (2) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in Section 11-17(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
(a)  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
(1)  Individual lots or parcels, 
(2)  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, 
(3)  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or 
(4)  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 
(b)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. Section 11-20(6) above) 
(d)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(i)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(ii)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(iii)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of Section 11-21(3)(a)(c), above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 11-6, are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  ONLY if Section 11-21(4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV. 
Sec. 11-22. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 11-6, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 11-6, then the Macon-Bibb County Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2 & 3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one (1) foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated two (2) feet above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a Limited Detail Study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the- unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 11-20(4) "Elevated Buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The County Engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
Sec. 11-22.1. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in article II, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one-foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with Article IV, subsection (b) [section 11-30]. 
Sec. 11-23. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in Section 11-6, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three (1' — 3') feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 11-20(4), "Elevated Buildings". 
The County Engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus two (2) feet, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in Section 11-16(1)(c) and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
Sec. 11-24. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
Sec. 11-25. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 11-26. - Variance procedures and conditions. 
(A)  The commission shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Macon-Bibb County Engineer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(C)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Bibb County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(D)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic Structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(E)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(F)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if ANY increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(G)  In reviewing such requests, the Macon-Bibb County Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this ordinance. 
(H)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued ONLY when there is: 
(i)  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a Historic Structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The Macon-Bibb County Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(I)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the Macon-Bibb County Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
Secs. 11-27—11-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 11-30. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable application. 
"Accessory Structure" means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
"Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "New Construction". 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the Macon-Bibb County Engineer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
"Area of special flood hazard" is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in Section 11-6. 
"Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
"Base flood elevation" means the computed elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the base flood. Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) are shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and on the flood profiles. 
"Basement" means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
"Building" means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
"Critical Facility" means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(a)  structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(b)  hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(c)  emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(d)  generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
"Elevated building" means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
"Existing construction" means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 17, 1979. 
"Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 17, 1979. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
"Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  the overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, on which FEMA has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, as made available and amended by FEMA. 
"Flood Insurance Study (FIS)" means the compilation and presentation of flood risk data for specific watercourses, lakes, and coastal flood hazard areas within Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, as made available and amended by FEMA. 
"Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
"Flood proofing" means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
"Functionally dependent facility" means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
"Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
"Historic Structure" means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
"Manufactured home" means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
"Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a parcel (or continuous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Mean Sea Level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
"National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
"New construction" means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after August 17, 1979 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after August 17, 1979. 
"North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)" as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle, which is: 
(a)  built on a single chassis; 
(b)  four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)  designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Start of construction" means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank or other man-made facilities or infrastructures. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or 
2.  Any alterations of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Floodplain management requirements for new construction apply to substantial improvements. Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC) coverage does not apply to substantial improvements unless a structure is substantially damaged due to flooding. 
"Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
"Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0048, § 2, 6-21-2016 ; Ord. of 6-6-2017(2), § 2 ) 
Sec. 11-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 11-32. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
Chapter 12 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 12-1. - Title of resolution. 
This Chapter shall be known as the Macon-Bibb County Sanitary Code (hereinafter "Chapter"). 
Sec. 12-2. - Construction of chapter. 
This Chapter shall be liberally construed so as to protect the health of citizens of the Macon-Bibb County. Terms that are not defined in this Chapter shall be given their ordinary signification unless a special meaning is attached to them in the trade or business to which the chapter section applies. Headings are provided throughout this Chapter for the purposes of convenience and assistance with regard to use of this Chapter. Headings do not necessarily reference all items addressed in the particular section which follows that heading. 
Sec. 12-3. - Gender and number. 
The masculine includes the feminine and neuter. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. 
Sec. 12-4. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in this Chapter, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning: 
Board means the Macon-Bibb County Board of Health (or any successor to that board). 
Health department means the Macon-Bibb County Health Department (or any successor to that department) or any employee or representative thereof acting within the scope of his authority. 
Person includes any individual, firm, partnership, business, trust, corporation, municipal corporation, company, estate, or unincorporated association. 
State department means the Georgia Department of Public Health (or any successor to that department) or any employee or representative thereof acting within the scope of his authority. 
Sec. 12-5. - Permits not transferable. 
Permits issued by the health department shall not be transferable with respect to persons or locations. 
Sec. 12-6. - Transfer of premises violating health standards. 
No person who has been ordered by the health department to correct an unsatisfactory health condition which exists in violation of this Chapter on premises he owns or controls shall sell, lease or in any way transfer his interest in the premises or in a business conducted on the premises unless he first corrects the unsatisfactory condition in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
Sec. 12-7. - Effect of partial invalidity. 
If any provision of this Chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of this Chapter, or the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. 
Secs. 12-8—12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWAGE AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS 

Sec. 12-21. - Adoption of state-wide laws. 
(a)  Pursuant to 1997 Georgia Law page 708, 710, as amended, and O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5(b), the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 31-2A-11 are adopted and made a part of this Chapter. Further, the applicable rules and regulations (including the rules and regulations for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Chapter 290-5-26, and the manual for On-Site Sewage Management), as amended, promulgated by the state department pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-2A-11 are hereby adopted for enforcement in this Chapter. 
(b)  The following sections of this article are in addition to the statute and rules and regulations referenced above. The rules and regulations of the state department contain minimum requirements which will be enforced in Macon-Bibb County; however, this article may contain provisions which are more stringent than the requirements of the state department, and these more stringent standards will be enforced by the health department and the City of Macon and Bibb County. To the extent any sections of this article are less restrictive or would authorize violations of the statute or rules and regulations, the statute and rules and regulations shall govern. 
Sec. 12-22. - Condemned on-site sewerage system. 
The health department may condemn any on-site sewerage system which it finds so constructed, operated or maintained as to menace health, and may post on or near the system signs stating that the system has been condemned and is unsafe for use. No person shall operate or use for sewage disposal purposes an on-site sewerage system which has been so condemned. 
Sec. 12-23. - Connecting sewerage system to storm sewer prohibited. 
No person shall connect a sewerage system so that sewage flows into a storm water sewer or into a drain intended exclusively for storm water. No person shall operate or use for sewage disposal purposes a sewerage system which has been so connected in violation of this section. 
Sec. 12-24. - Maintenance of on-site sewerage system. 
The owner and occupant of a house or building shall be responsible for regular maintenance and servicing of an on-site sewerage system servicing the house or building so that the system is maintained in proper working order. 
Sec. 12-25. - Prohibition of discharge of sewage onto ground or into water. 
No person shall discharge sewage onto the surface of the ground or discharge it in a way that permits it to come to the surface of the ground. No person shall discharge sewage into a stream or a body of water. 
Sec. 12-26. - Sanitary sewage disposal system required. 
The owner of every building designed or regularly used for human habitation or congregation shall provide on the premises a sanitary method of sewage disposal for the exclusive use of the persons who regularly use the building and/or of transient members of the public. For such buildings constructed after the adoption of this Chapter and for buildings serviced by on-site systems which fail after the adoption of this Chapter, the owner shall satisfy this requirement by providing connections to a public sewerage system if a public sewerage system is within 200 feet of the property upon which the building is located, or, if a public sewerage system is not so available, by providing an on-site sewerage system. 
Sec. 12-27. - Individual connections to on-site sewerage system. 
No person shall connect the plumbing system of a house or building to an on-site sewerage system except by a direct and individual connection. 
Sec. 12-28. - Responsibility of owner for maintenance of laterals. 
The owner of a house or building from which sewage is carried by a house connection to a public or to an on-site sewerage system shall maintain the house connection in good repair and operating condition. Whenever two or more houses or buildings use the same house connection, each owner shall be individually responsible for the repair of the lateral but may exact contributions from the other owners. 
Sec. 12-29. - General prohibition on use of pit privy. 
No person shall own, operate or construct a pit privy on property where water under pressure exists or is available. 
Sec. 12-30. - Sewage removal permit. 
No person shall remove, transport or dispose of any sewage sludge by portable or mobile container unless he has an unrevoked permit from the health department authorizing him to do so. A permit shall be issued only to a person who is to use equipment that will not permit spillage or exposure of sewage to the outside air and whose equipment also conforms to the following specifications: 
(a)  The container or tank shall hold a volume of at least 1,000 gallons. 
(b)  The pump shall be capable of handling all particles of sewage and sewage sludge, including grease and caked sludge, and shall be capable of lifting such materials to a height of 15 feet. 
(c)  The tank discharge valve shall be so located and placed that it will empty the entire contents of the tank. Said value shall be equipped with a discharge hose at least 20 feet in length. 
(d)  A manhole shall be provided in the top of the container or tank. 
(e)  All equipment shall be maintained in good operating condition and the exterior of such equipment shall be kept clean at all times. 
The firm name, address and permit number of the holder of a sewage removal permit shall at all times be prominently displayed on the side of the vehicle which carries the container or tank. 
The permit may be temporarily suspended by the health department if the holder violates any of the terms of this Chapter, and it may be revoked upon serious or repeated violations after a hearing by the board. 
Sec. 12-31. - Disposal of sewage. 
A holder of a sewage removal permit shall dispose of sewage sludge at a sewage treatment plant. 
Sec. 12-32. - Construction bond. 
No person shall construct, modify or repair or enter into a contract for the construction, modification or repairing of an on-site sewage system until he furnishes to the health department a guaranty bond in the amount of $10,000.00, executed by a licensed bonding company, for the faithful observance of the applicable requirements of this Chapter and conditioned to protect the rights and property of any other person for whom such construction, modification or repairing may be done. A person who constructs, modifies or repairs an on-site sewerage system on premises which he owns and occupies or will occupy immediately upon completion of such work need not comply with this requirement. 
Secs. 12-33—12-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SUPPLIES 

Sec. 12-50. - Adoption of state-wide laws. 
Pursuant to 1985 Georgia Law, the provisions of the Well Water Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq., are adopted and made part of this Chapter. Further, the applicable rules and regulations, as adopted by the state department pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq., are hereby adopted for enforcement in this Chapter. 
Sec. 12-51. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in this case, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning: 
Private water supply means a non-public water well and/or an Individual water well, as those terms are defined in the Water Well Standards Act of 1985, as amended. This definition shall include springs which serve up to 15 water service connections or regularly serves an average of up to 25 people for 60 days per year. 
Safe water means water that meets the requirements of the Georgia Primary Drinking Regulations, as defined in the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977 (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq.) as amended. 
All words used in this Chapter which are defined in the Water Well Standards Act of 1985, as amended, and/or the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977, as amended, shall have the same meaning in this Chapter as stated in those acts. 
Sec. 12-52. - Safe water required. 
The owner of a private water supply shall furnish only safe water for human consumption or for domestic use and shall protect same from pollution. 
Sec. 12-53. - Power to condemn. 
The health department shall have authority to condemn a private water supply if it finds the water unsafe. No person shall operate a condemned private water supply or knowingly use water from it for human consumption or domestic purposes. 
Sec. 12-54. - Location of wells. 
(a)  The location of a well cannot be within a designated flood plain area. 
(b)  No well shall be located within the foundation walls of a dwelling, barn, or any structure other than a pump house. 
(c)  All wells shall be located at a distance greater than these distances from the following objects: 
(1)  Watertight sealed sewer or drain-line—10 feet. 
(2)  Septic tank—50 feet. 
(3)  Seepage pit—100 feet. 
(4)  Septic tank absorption field—100 feet. 
(5)  Open abandoned well—100 feet. 
(6)  Surface water—100 feet. 
(7)  Buildings, homes or structures where chemical treatment to soil has been applied—100 feet. 
(8)  Animal houses and fowl enclosures—100 feet. 
(9)  Lot lines—10 feet. 
(10)  Pit privies—100 feet. 
Sec. 12-55. - Depth of wells. 
No person operating a water system shall obtain water for the system from a well supplied by a water bearing formation less than 20 feet below the natural ground surface. 
Sec. 12-56. - Construction and protection of wells. 
(a)  The construction of a well shall meet the requirements as specified in the Well Water Standards Act of 1985, as amended. 
(b)  Protection of individual and non-public wells from external surface contamination shall be effected by the following: 
(1)  Grouting of annular space at least ten feet below ground; 
(2)  A concrete slab at least four inches, thick, sloping away from the casing for a distance of at least two feet. in all directions; 
(3)  Casing pipe extending at least 12 inches, above the concrete slab; 
(4)  A water tight sanitary seal enclosing the drop pipe entrance into the casing; 
(5)  A screened or insect-proof vent pipe installed on the casing head; and 
(6)  Further sealing as necessary to prohibit insect and water entrance into the well. 
Sec. 12-57. - Springs. 
A spring used or intended for use as a source of a private water supply shall meet the following requirements. 
(a)  The spring shall be enclosed in walls made of water tight concrete or other durable water tight material. The walls shall extend sufficiently far into the earth to protect the water collecting within the enclosure from pollution. 
(b)  The bottom of the enclosure shall be covered with a layer of clean sand at least four inches thick. 
(c)  An overlapping (shoe-box top) water tight cover shall be placed over the walls or a water proof concrete slab shall be placed over and sealed to the walls. 
(d)  A water quality pipe shall be sealed in a water proof manner into one of the walls of the enclosure. This pipe shall penetrate the wall in such a manner as to allow water in the enclosure to flow to the outside. Water shall not be dipped from the enclosure by hand, cup, bucket or other receptacle. 
(e)  The overflow shall be discharged into a concrete or masonry box or splash block and shall be conducted through an impervious drain a distance of at least 30 feet from the spring. 
(f)  A diversion ditch shall be constructed so as to surround the spring on the uphill side in such a manner that all surface water shall be diverted away from the spring. 
Sec. 12-58. - New construction or repair of a water system-necessity of disinfecting system. 
No water system or part thereof shall be used after construction, installation, repair or cleaning, until it has been disinfected. 
Sec. 12-59. - Cross connections and back flow connections. 
A cross connection or back flow connection between a system supplying water for human consumption or domestic use and any drain, sewer, pipe, tank, sump, vat or other structure containing liquids, chemicals, unsafe water, sewage or any other unsafe matter, is prohibited, unless the connection is so installed and protected by an air gap as to prevent such liquids, chemicals, water, sewage or other matter from entering the safe water system. Cross connections made from nonpotable water for emergency fire protection must be eliminated after the emergency, and the water supply systems disinfected before human consumption resumes. 
Sec. 12-60. - Well drillers—License and bond. 
Anyone engaged in the business of constructing water wells shall be in compliance with license and bond provisions and all other sections of the Well Water Standards Act of 1985, as amended, and any rules and regulations adopted thereunder. 
Sec. 12-61. - Macon-Bibb County registration. 
No person shall construct or modify or enter into a contract for the construction or modification of a well, nor shall he undertake construction of a well until he has registered his name and address in a document maintained for that purpose by the health department at its office. 
Sec. 12-62. - Permits. 
No person shall begin to construct a well until he has received a written permit from the health department authorizing the drilling of that particular well. This permit will serve as intent to drill said well. 
Sec. 12-63. - Property owner well construction. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to require licensure of a person constructing a well on his own property for use in a single family residence which is his residence or for use only for farm or irrigation purposes. Said well must produce no more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
Sec. 12-64. - Property owner permit and construction requirements. 
An individual property owner desiring to construct his own well must obtain a permit prior to start of construction in accordance with Section 12-62. Construction or abandonment of the well must meet the legal requirements provided in the Well Water Standards Act of 1985, as amended, and this Chapter. 
Sec. 12-65. - Abandoned and condemned wells. 
The owner of a well no longer used as a source of water shall fill it or cause it to be filled with material suitable to protect the water-bearing formations from pollution in accordance with the applicable requirements and recommendations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
Secs. 12-66—12-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CARNIVALS AND ITINERANT MEETINGS 

Sec. 12-71. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply in this Chapter unless the context clearly requires a different meaning: 
Carnival means a carnival, circus, side show, medicine show, carousel, tent show, menagerie, wild west show, street party, fair, arts and crafts festival, food festival, food cook-off event, any combination of these, or other entertainment, except those held regularly in a theater, at an athletic field, or in establishments permitted under article V of this Chapter. 
Itinerant meeting means a gathering open to the public and held in the open air or in a tent or other temporary structure. This shall not apply to such gatherings of less than six consecutive hours duration. 
Sec. 12-72. - Permit. 
(a)  No person shall locate, establish, set up or operate a carnival or an itinerant meeting unless he has an unrevoked and unexpired permit from the health department authorizing him to do so. The application for such a permit shall be submitted in writing a minimum of 30 days prior to the event and shall contain (in so far as applicable) the following information: 
(1)  Proposed site; 
(2)  Estimated area to be occupied; 
(3)  Number of persons traveling with or employed by the carnival or itinerant meeting; 
(4)  Number of animals carried; 
(5)  Number of days proposed site to be occupied; 
(6)  Number of itinerant restaurants to be established; 
(7)  Number of food handling employees; 
(8)  General layout of food vendors; 
(9)  Location of water and sewer utilities; 
(10)  Any other information the health department may require. 
(b)  This permit may be temporarily suspended by the health department if the holder violates any of the terms of this article, and it may be revoked upon serious or repeated violations after a hearing by the board, or the appropriate committee thereof. 
Sec. 12-73. - Water supply. 
No person operating a carnival or an itinerant meeting shall use, for any purpose, water, other than safe water, from a public water supply or a private water supply as provided in article III of this Chapter. 
Sec. 12-74. - Sewage disposal. 
No person shall operate a carnival or an itinerant meeting unless he conforms to the regulations governing sewage disposal as provided in article II of this Chapter. Toilet facilities on the premises shall be provided in compliance with the minimum requirements published by and on file with the health department. If portable toilets are used, the operator of the carnival or itinerant meeting shall, before abandoning the site, have the portable toilets removed. 
Sec. 12-75. - Restaurants. 
Restaurants operated in conjunction with a carnival or itinerant meeting shall be maintained as provided in article V of this Chapter. 
Sec. 12-76. - Refuse. 
Carnival and itinerant meeting operators shall store or cause to be stored all garbage, waste grease/oil and other refuse in watertight containers with tight fitting lids until disposed of as provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Chapter. Upon termination of their stay at each location, carnival and itinerant meeting operators shall place the premises in a neat and clean condition. 
Secs. 12-77—12-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 12-91. - Adoption of state-wide laws. 
(a)  The provisions of Chapter 290-5-14, as amended, of the State Department's Rules and Regulations are adopted and made a part of this Chapter. 
(b)  The following sections of this article are in addition to the State Department's Rules and Regulations. The provisions of the state department's rules and regulations contain minimum requirements which will be enforced in Macon-Bibb County; however, this article may contain certain provisions which are more stringent than the requirements of the state department, and these more stringent standards will be enforced by the health department in Macon-Bibb County. To the extent any sections of this article are less restrictive or would authorize violations of these rules and regulations, the rules and regulations shall govern. 
Sec. 12-92. - Catering permit. 
Any eating or drinking establishment which engages in catering as governed by article X of this Chapter, shall obtain a catering permit under the provisions of that article. 
Sec. 12-93. - Sanitary facilities and controls—Water supply. 
(a)  If equipment to sanitize with hot water is to be utilized, the minimum sanitizing temperature of hot water to the three compartment sink and the hot water sanitizing dish machine shall be 170 degrees and 180 degrees Fahrenheit respectively at the manifold outlet of these fixtures. 
(b)  The minimum temperature of hot water for cleaning shall be 130 degrees Fahrenheit regardless of the type of sanitizing fixtures used. 
Sec. 12-94. - Sanitary facilities and controls—Toilet facilities. 
In addition to the provisions of Chapter 290-5-14.07(4)(a) of the State Department Rules and Regulations, access to toilet facilities by patrons or the public through a food preparation, utensil washing, food storage, or service area is prohibited for all establishments permitted after the effective date of this Chapter. 
Sec. 12-95. - Sanitary facilities and controls—Lavatory facilities. 
In addition to the provisions of Chapter 290-5-14.07 of the State Department Rules and Regulations, the hot water temperature at lavatories shall not exceed 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Sec. 12-96. - Posting of permit and inspection sheet. 
In addition to the provisions of Chapter 290-5-14.02 and .11 of the State Department Rules and Regulations, permit and inspection sheets must be posted, as near the main entrance as is practicable, in such a manner as they are readable by the general public and in such a manner as the entire document is fully displayed. 
Sec. 12-97. - Sealed concrete floors. 
In addition to the provisions of chapter 290-5-14.08(1)(a), concrete floors which are sealed in a manner intended to comply with the State Department Rules and Regulations shall be sealed with a sealant which shall be durable for a minimum of one-year and such floors shall be resealed annually. 
Sec. 12-98. - Suspension or revocation of permits. 
The health department shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke permits for failure to comply with the provisions of this article. When an application for a permit is denied or the permit previously granted is to be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder thereof shall be afforded notice and hearing as provided in O.C.G.A. Title 31, Chapter 5, Article 1. If an application is denied or a permit is suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit must be notified in writing, specifically stating any and all reasons why the action was taken. The purpose of these procedures is to state the minimum actions to be taken to fulfill the obligation of the health department in assuring compliance with the regulations when the continued operation of a restaurant presents a substantial and imminent health hazard to the public or when a food service establishment is in flagrant or continuing violation of this Chapter. Suspension is effective upon service of a written notice thereof, and food service must cease immediately. The notice must state the basis for the suspension and advise the permit holder of the right to a preliminary hearing on request within eight working hours. If requested, the preliminary hearing will be held by an experienced supervisory level employee of the health department not directly involved in the suspension. The rules of evidence will not apply, but both the health department and the permit holder may present witnesses, records and argument. The hearing official will be authorized immediately to rescind or modify the suspension or to continue the suspension with or without conditions. If the suspension is not rescinded, the permit holder will have the right, upon written request, to an evidentiary hearing. If a hearing is not requested, upon correction of all violations, owner may request an inspection to reinstate permit. The health department shall perform such a reinspection on the next health department business day following the date of its receipt of the request. 
Secs. 12-99—12-110. - Reserved 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-14-0038, § 1, adopted July 1, 2014 , repealed art. VI, §§ 12-111—12-116, in its entirety. Former art. VI pertained to kindergartens, and was derived from original Code. 

Secs. 12-111—12-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PEST CONTROL 

Sec. 12-131. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply in this article unless the context clearly requires a different meaning: 
Occupant means a person who uses or occupies a building structure, whether as owner or tenant. A tenant who uses a part of a building structure shall be deemed the occupant of that part of which he has actual or constructive possession. The owner, agent, or other person having custody or control of a building structure shall be deemed occupant of the part that is vacant. 
Owner includes the agent operating and managing the building structure as well as the legal owner. 
Rat harborage means a place that provides shelter or protection for rats and favorable conditions for their breeding. 
Tire is defined as a hollow ring, made of rubber or other material, which is designed for placement on the wheel or rim of a motor vehicle to facilitate its operation. In this article, the word applies to used or discarded tires. 
Sec. 12-132. - Duty of occupant of a building to keep it rat-free. 
The owner and occupant of a building shall maintain it in a rat-free condition. 
Sec. 12-133. - Notice to eradicate rats. 
Whenever the health department finds that a premises is infested with rats, the health department shall notify the owner and occupant of the building in writing of that condition and state the time allowed for the eradication of the rats. The time allowed shall not be less than 15 days. 
Sec. 12-134. - Power of the health department to eradicate rats. 
If the owner or occupant fails to eradicate the rats within the time allowed, the health department may cause the rats to be eradicated and charge the cost to the owner or occupant. The cost of eradicating the rats shall constitute a lien on property. 
Sec. 12-135. - Mosquito control. 
No person owning or occupying premises shall cause or permit thereon any standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed unless the water has been effectively treated by one or more of the following methods: 
(a)  Screening with 16 mesh wire netting or with material approved by the health department; 
(b)  Application of mosquito larvicide every 30 days; 
(c)  Keeping free of vegetative growth and stocking with mosquito larvae-destroying fish; 
(d)  Complete emptying and drying or cleaning of water containers every seven days; or 
(e)  Any other method the health department approves after taking into consideration: 
(1)  Distance from the nearest habitation; 
(2)  Direction and velocity of prevailing winds; 
(3)  Population within flight range of mosquitoes under local conditions; and 
(4)  Species of mosquitoes found to be breeding. 
Sec. 12-136. - Artificially created water detention facilities. 
Artificially created water detention facilities shall be maintained by the owner so as not to promote or facilitate the breeding and harborage of mosquitoes. 
Sec. 12-137. - Fly control. 
No person who owns or occupies premises shall permit thereon any storage, accumulation or stockpiling of manure or other organic-type fertilizer, or of any materials in which flies are breeding unless the same is treated with a residual-type fly larvicide in such a manner that the breeding of flies is effectively and in fact halted. 
Sec. 12-138. - Outside or uncovered storage of used or discarded tires prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the area of Macon-Bibb County, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, agent or otherwise, to store or permit the storage of used or discarded tires in the open or in an uncovered condition. 
Sec. 12-139. - Covered storage of used or discarded tires prohibited; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the area of Macon-Bibb County, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or agent or otherwise, to store or permit the storage of used or discarded tires in a covered area unless the same is protected from the elements and prior to storage, all water has been drained therefrom. 
Sec. 12-140. - New storage. 
Any person desiring to store more than 25 used or discarded tires on property in Macon-Bibb County shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  All used or discarded tires must be stored dry to prevent mosquito breeding. 
(2)  Upon request, owner/occupant shall demonstrate to the health department how the intended storage will thereafter prevent the accumulation of water in the stored tires. 
Sec. 12-141. - Application to existing storage site of used or discarded tires. 
The owners or occupants of existing storage sites of used or discarded tires shall, immediately upon the passage of the ordinance comply with the standards therein set forth; provided, however, that the owners or occupants of existing sites shall be allowed a period of six months in which to bring existing storage into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 12-142. - Planning and zoning regulations unaffected. 
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to authorize any outside storage when it is prohibited by regulations of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Secs. 12-143—12-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 12-161. - Definitions. 
Public swimming pool. Any structure, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water used by the public for swimming, diving, wading, recreation, or therapy, together with buildings, appurtenances, and equipment used in connection with the body of water, regardless of whether a fee is charged for its use. The term includes municipal, school, hotel, or motel pools and any pool to which access is granted in exchange for payment of a daily fee. The term shall also include pools and spas operated by or serving camps, churches, day care centers, group home facilities of 12 or more clients, institutions, parks, state agencies, subdivisions, apartment complexes, country clubs, condominiums, mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks, associations, health clubs, special purpose pools, and recreational water park attractions. 
Closed pool. A pool, including all areas within the pool enclosure, that is inaccessible to bathers by closing and securing all entry points into the pool enclosure, and is posted "Pool Closed" at each entry point, "as ordered by the health department." 
Sec. 12-162. - Adoption of state-wide laws. 
The applicable provisions of the State Department's Rules and Regulations regarding swimming pools are adopted and made a part of this Chapter, except that the definition stated in Section 12-161 shall be utilized as the definition of public swimming pool wherever it appears in the State Department's Rules and Regulations. If the State Department has issued no rules and regulations regarding swimming pools at the time of the adoption of this Chapter, then the provisions of the previous sanitation codes for the City of Macon and Bibb County shall continue in force and effect until such time as the State Department adopts rules and regulations regarding swimming pools. 
Secs. 12-163—12-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TOURIST ACCOMMODATIONS 

Sec. 12-181. - Adoption of state law. 
The provisions of Chapter 290-5-18, as amended, of the State Department's Rules and Regulations are adopted and made a part of this Chapter. 
Secs. 12-182—12-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CATERING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 12-201. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply in this Chapter unless the context clearly requires a different meaning: 
Caterer means any person who prepares and/or serves food at any remote location, including, but not limited to, wedding receptions, graduations, anniversaries or other functions by whatever name called. 
Full caterer means a person or establishment permitted under article V of this Chapter but who is also a caterer. 
Limited caterer means a person or establishment that is not permitted under article V of this Chapter but who performs as a caterer. 
Employee means any person who handles food or drink during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with eating or drinking utensils, or who assists in a room where food or drink is prepared or served. 
Utensils means kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers, serviceware, or other equipment with which food or drink have contact during storage, preparation or serving. 
Sec. 12-202. - Permits. 
No person shall prepare or serve food as a caterer at any location, unless he has a valid catering permit issued by the health department under the terms of this Chapter which authorizes him to do so in the manner which he intends. This permit shall be posted where it is readily visible to all patrons. 
Sec. 12-203. - Approval of proposed catering operations. 
No person shall construct or modify or enter into a contract to construct or modify a kitchen for use in catering until plans and specifications, including a description of the location and a generalized menu of types of foods to be offered, have been submitted to the health department and approved by it as complying with the requirements of this Chapter. 
Sec. 12-204. - Sanitation requirements for full caterers. 
(a)  Every full caterer must meet the requirements set forth in article V of this Chapter and the State of Georgia Food Service Rules and Regulations set forth in Chapter 290-5-14, as amended. 
(b)  In addition to those requirements the following shall also apply to full caterers: 
(1)  Transport vehicle(s). The transport vehicle(s) must be constructed so as to be easily cleanable. Any vehicles used to transport food or food service equipment must be kept clean and in good repair to eliminate any possible contamination of the food or equipment being transported. 
(2)  Temperature maintenance equipment. Adequate portable equipment must be available to maintain proper, accepted temperatures of all potentially hazardous foods during transport and service. 
(3)  Hand washing at point of service. Acceptable hand wash facilities must be available at the site of service. If a typical hand sink supplied with hot and cold water through a mixing faucet and proper supplies, soap and sanitary towels are not available, the caterer must provide a temporary hand wash setup approved by the Health Department. Such a temporary setup will consist of: 
a.  A closed container of warm water equipped with a spigot; 
b.  A container to capture the wastewater; and 
c.  Sanitary towels and hand soap. 
Sec. 12-205. - Limitations upon limited caterers. 
(a)  The following limitations are imposed upon operations by limited caterers. Limited caterers must: 
(1)  Purchase food from an approved source. 
(2)  Have food delivered directly to the point of service. 
(3)  Use disposable tableware and serviceware, or use tableware and serviceware provided by the client. 
(4)  Keep invoices documenting the sources of food served at catered events. 
(5)  Keep a listing of all events catered which shall reflect the client name, menu, and phone number of the client. 
(6)  Provide a signed statement of the owner or manager of the caterer acknowledging the limitations contained in this Chapter upon limited caterers and further acknowledging that any catering activity beyond these limitations shall first require that the caterer obtain a permit to act as a full caterer. 
(b)  Limited caterers shall be subject to quarterly verification with regard to the type of services which they are performing and the sources of food which they are serving. 
Sec. 12-206. - Suspension or revocation of permits. 
The health department shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke permits for failure to comply with the provisions of this article. When an application for a permit is denied or the permit previously granted is to be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder thereof shall be afforded notice and hearing as provided in O.C.G.A. Title 31, Chapter 5, Article 1. If an application is denied or a permit is suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit must be notified in writing, specifically stating any and all reasons why the action was taken. The purpose of these procedures is to state the minimum actions to be taken to fulfill the obligation of the health department in assuring compliance with the regulations when the continued operation of a caterer presents a substantial and imminent health hazard to the public or when a caterer is in flagrant or continuing violation of this Chapter. Suspension is effective upon service of a written notice thereof, and catering must cease immediately. The notice must state the basis for the suspension and advise the permit holder of the right to a preliminary hearing on request within eight working hours. If requested, the preliminary hearing will be held by an experienced supervisory level employee of the health department not directly involved in the suspension. The rules of evidence will not apply, but both the health department and the permit holder may present witnesses, records and argument. The hearing official will be authorized immediately to rescind or modify the suspension or to continue the suspension with or without conditions. If the suspension is not rescinded, the permit holder will have the right on request to an evidentiary hearing. If a hearing is not requested, upon correction of all violations, owner may request an inspection to reinstate permit. The health department shall perform such a reinspection on the next health department business day following the date of its receipt of the request. 
Secs. 12-207—12-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - KEEPING OF ANIMALS 

Sec. 12-221. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply in this chapter unless the context clearly requires a different meaning: 
Farm animal includes, but is not limited to, cattle, horses, ponies, donkeys, mules, goats, sheep, swine, rabbits, and pet Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs. 
Domestic animals shall include, but is not limited to, dogs and cats. 
Fowl shall include birds of any kind, excluding birds of the psittacine family. 
Swine means any of the various animals that constitute the family of Suidae; however, for the purposes of this Chapter, "swine" shall not include pet Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs. 
Sec. 12-222. - Distance of animals from dwelling house or business establishment of another. 
(a)  No person shall raise, keep or permit to be raised or kept on the premises that he owns or controls any farm animal or fowl unless each part of the premises to which such an animal or fowl has access is at least 100 feet from the nearest property line; however, this minimum distance from the property line can be reduced for so long as no part of the premises to which such an animal or fowl has access is less than 100 feet from the nearest occupied dwelling house or business establishment of another person. 
(b)  No person shall raise, keep or permit to raise or be kept on the premises that he owns or controls any swine, unless each part of the premises to which such swine has access is at least 300 feet from the nearest property line; however, this minimum distance from the property line can be reduced for so long as no part of the premises to which such swine has access is less than 300 feet from the nearest occupied dwelling house or business establishment of another person. 
Sec. 12-223. - Condition of stables, coops, cages, pens or other shelters. 
The condition of stables, coups, cages, pens or other shelters for farm animals, domestic animals, and fowl must be maintained as follows: 
(a)  Stables, coops, cages, pens or other shelters must be: 
(1)  Cleaned at least once each day; 
(2)  Sprayed on the walls and ceilings every month with residual insecticide approved by the health department; and 
(3)  Well drained. 
(b)  Droppings must be disposed of at least once every four days by: 
a.  Scattering on a field or lawn in a manner approved by the health department for animals other than domestic animals; 
b.  Sealing in a container or plastic bag and placing for collection by Macon-Bibb County; 
c.  Sealing in a container or plastic bag and placing for collection by a collection agency authorized by the health department; or 
d.  Disposal at a Macon-Bibb County sanitary landfill or at a sanitary landfill permitted by the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 12-224. - Number of farm animals. 
No person shall raise, keep or permit to be raised or kept on premises which he owns or controls more than one farm animal without written authorization from the board, unless the premises is part of a bona fide farm. If authorization is granted, such individual shall continue to be obligated to comply with all provisions contained the above sections. 
Sec. 12-225. - Exception. 
The limitations contained in this article with regard to minimum distance requirements and number of animals to be kept shall not apply to the keeping of animals for a period not to exceed ten days at stock yards, fairs, or other temporary animal displays. 
Secs. 12-226—12-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 12-241. - Acts or conditions endangering health prohibited. 
No person shall commit any act that creates a substantial or unreasonable risk of injury to the health of any person. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on premises he owns or controls any condition that injures the health of any person or creates a substantial or unreasonable risk of injury to the health of any person. 
Sec. 12-242. - Annoyances that are not threats to health. 
The health department shall not attempt to correct conditions which, because of their odor, sound or appearance, may annoy persons on nearby premises or members of the public, if in the judgment of the health department the conditions have no substantial relation to health or the spread of disease. 
Sec. 12-243. - Health department's authority to post signs on rental housing. 
Upon violation of any provision of this Chapter relating to sanitation of rented housing, the health department shall have authority to post a conspicuous sign on the premises advising that the premises must not be occupied for dwelling purposes. No person other than the health department shall remove or deface a sign posted under the authority of this section. 
Sec. 12-244. - Authority to enter, inspect, condemn, confiscate, quarantine, take samples and collect specimens. 
The authority of the health department shall include authority to: 
(1)  Enter properties, establishments, carnivals and other operations subject to this Chapter; 
(2)  Inspect properties establishments, carnivals and other operations subject to this Chapter; 
(3)  Condemn and confiscate food, milk, water and other substances the condition of which may endanger health or which violates the requirements for labeling as established by this Chapter; 
(4)  Quarantine persons or premises to prevent the spread of infectious disease; 
(5)  Take samples of food, milk, water or other substances the condition of which may affect health or sanitation and require any person who has such substance in his possession or under his control to furnish samples; and 
(6)  Go on the premises of any person to inspect and/or secure such samples and to capture specimen insects, rodents or other pests, or to determine whether health, sanitation, garbage or plumbing regulations are being observed. 
Sec. 12-245. - Lien—Correction of menace to public health. 
Whenever the health department has determined that a private sewerage system is constructed, operated or maintained so as to constitute a menace to public health or that a violation of this Chapter is occurring so as to constitute a menace to public health, and after the health department has notified the owner of the premises of the existence of this condition and the steps necessary to correct it, the health department is authorized, if the condition has not been remedied within 15 days after notice mailed to the owner of the premises or to his resident agent, to have the necessary installation, repair or modification made. The cost of the work shall be borne by the owner and shall be a lien upon the property involved. This remedy is intended to be cumulative and not to relieve the owner of such penalties as may be applicable under the provisions of this Chapter. 
Sec. 12-246. - Authority to institute legal proceedings. 
The health department shall have power to institute and maintain whatever legal proceedings are necessary or appropriate to enforce compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, including the power to seek injunctive relief. 
Sec. 12-247. - Suspension or revocation of permits; hearings. 
(a)  The health department shall have the power and authority to suspend or revoke permits for failure to comply with the provisions of this article. When an application for a permit is denied or the permit previously granted is to be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder thereof shall be afforded notice and hearing as provided in O.C.G.A. Title 31, Chapter 5, Article 1. If an application is denied or a permit is suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit must be notified in writing, specifically stating any and all reasons why the action was taken. The purpose of these procedures is to state the minimum actions to be taken to fulfill the obligation of the health department in assuring compliance with the regulations when the continued operation of an entity permitted under this Chapter presents a substantial and imminent health hazard to the public or when the entity is in flagrant or continuing violation of this Chapter. Suspension is effective upon service of a written notice thereof, and the entity's violative activity must cease immediately. The notice must state the basis for the suspension and advise the permit holder of the right to a preliminary hearing on request within eight (8) working hours. If requested, the preliminary hearing will be held by an experienced supervisory level employee of the health department not directly involved in the suspension. The rules of evidence will not apply, but both the health department and the permit holder may present witnesses, records and argument. The hearing official will be authorized immediately to rescind or modify the suspension or to continue the suspension with or without conditions. If the suspension is not rescinded, the permit holder will have the right on request to an evidentiary hearing. If a hearing is not requested, upon correction of all violations, owner may request an inspection to reinstate permit. The health department shall perform such a reinspection on the next health department business day following the date of its receipt of the request. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, hearings by the board shall be held upon the written request of any person who may be aggrieved by any action or order of the health department issued to or against him in connection with the enforcement of this Chapter. Hearings shall be held as promptly as possible and in no event more than thirty (30) days following receipt of the request by the health department. The board of health, upon completion of the hearing, shall within three days issue a final order in the matter. A person aggrieved by any such final order may secure review thereof by appeal to the Superior Court of Bibb County as provided by Georgia law. 
Sec. 12-248. - Powers of health director. 
The director of the health department shall have the power, whenever in his judgment Macon-Bibb County is threatened by an epidemic of communicable disease, to issue or cause to be issued such orders or regulations as he may deem effective and necessary to prevent and halt the spread of such disease. Said orders or regulations shall remain in full force and effect until revoked or modified by the said health director and no person shall fail or refuse to obey such orders or regulations. 
Sec. 12-249. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates, disobeys or disregards a provision of this Chapter or a lawful order of the health department or board shall, upon conviction in the municipal court or state court of Macon-Bibb County, be liable for a penalty not to exceed $300.00, 60 days in jail, or both, for each separate offense. Each day a provision of this Chapter or a lawful order of the health department is violated, disobeyed or disregarded shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 12-250. - Failure to pay fines or fees. 
For the purpose of defraying all or part of the costs of administration of this Chapter and applicable federal and state laws and regulations, the health department may establish a schedule of fees payable upon submission of the application for a permit and for the annual, semi-annual, or other inspections associated with any permit granted by the health department. Failure to pay by the established deadline any fines imposed for violations of this Chapter or fees imposed by this Chapter or fees otherwise set for the issuance or continuance of a permit issued by the health department shall be cause for denial, suspension or revocation of any permit or application for a permit. 
Chapter 13 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall do any act prohibited hereby or shall fail to do any act required hereby shall be deemed to be guilty of a violation hereof and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by Section 1-6. Each separate day's violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
Secs. 13-2—13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOMES 

Sec. 13-21. - Findings, purpose and intent. 
Macon-Bibb County finds that promotion and maintenance of property values within the area that formerly comprised unincorporated Bibb County and the health and general welfare of the citizens of Macon-Bibb County are furthered when standards for the condition of structures, including manufactured homes, mobile homes and pre-owned manufactured homes, are established and enforced. 
The purposes and intent of the commission in enacting Sections 13-21 through 13-35 are as follows, and to these ends the said regulations are hereby adopted: 
(1)  To advance the fundamental goal of protecting the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of Macon-Bibb County. 
(2)  To provide for standards, conditions, and an inspection program for manufactured homes, mobile homes or pre-owned manufactured homes which are initially located or relocated within the area that formerly comprised unincorporated Bibb County pursuant to the authority of the Constitution of the state and O.C.G.A. § 8-12-70 et seq.; and 
(3)  To comply with the General Assembly of the State of Georgia in its declaration that no county shall impose any health or safety standards or conditions based upon the age or date of manufacture of a manufactured home. 
Sec. 13-22. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of sections 13-21 through 13-35, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Applicant means any person seeking to initially locate or relocate any manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home in that area of Macon-Bibb County that formerly comprised unincorporated Bibb County. 
Board of tax assessors means the board of tax assessors heretofore established by joint ordinance and resolution of the City of Macon and Bibb County on May 6, 1969. 
Building inspector means the director of the Macon-Bibb County Business Development Services Department. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the department of business development services for Macon-Bibb County certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this article, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Guarantee of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by this article reasonably portray or represent the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the county. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means that area of Macon-Bibb County that formerly comprised unincorporated Bibb County. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this chapter except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
Mobile or manufactured home park means a subdivision of plots designed for siting of mobile homes wherein plots are generally leased to owners of manufactured and mobile homes and may include utilities, parking space, access to utility roads and other amenities. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
Sec. 13-22.1. - Conditions. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes located within the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying that it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
Sec. 13-23. - Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. A permit shall be required to initially locate or relocate a manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home within the jurisdiction, if such mobile home is to be used as a residence by the owner thereof, as a residence for other persons, or for any other purpose. 
(b)  A manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home which is located within the jurisdiction may not be relocated within the territorial boundaries of Macon-Bibb County without first obtaining a permit from the Board of Tax Assessors authorizing such relocation. 
(c)  No person shall hereafter initially locate any manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home within the jurisdiction without having made application for and obtained a permit as provided by this Chapter. 
(d)  No person shall occupy any manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home as a residence, nor permit any other person to occupy the same as a residence unless a permit has first been obtained as provided by this Chapter. 
(e)  Application for the required permit shall be made to the Board of Tax Assessors. All permits shall be issued within ten days of receipt of the items listed in subsections (f)(1)—(5). 
(f)  To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide the following items to the Board of Tax Assessors: 
(1)  Proof that all state and county taxes theretofore accruing and payable with respect to such manufactured home, mobile home or pre-owned manufactured home have in fact been paid; and if the home which is to be located or relocated within any portion of Macon-Bibb County that lies within the limits of any municipality therein, then proof that all applicable municipal taxes have been paid; 
(2)  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home meets the health and safety standards required by this article; 
(3)  Photographs of the interior and exterior of any pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that said home meets the minimum health and safety standards of Section 13-24. 
(4)  A $200.00 refundable cash deposit; and 
(5)  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (i) of this section. 
(g)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may initially locate or relocate the manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home is complete. 
(h)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the Board of Tax Assessors certifies that the requirements of this chapter have been met and the Department of Business Development services for Macon-Bibb County certifies that all requirements for issuance of a certificate of occupancy have been met. 
(i)  Fees for permit and/or inspection. Each application for a permit required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $5.00, which shall be paid to the Board of Tax Assessors before such permit shall be issued. For applications for location or relocation of any pre-owned manufactured home, an additional inspection fee of $30.00 shall also accompany the permit application. These fees will cover the cost to Macon-Bibb County to process the permit application and to inspect any pre-owned manufactured home. The inspection fee shall cover an initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The applicant shall be charged $15.00 for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. All sums collected by the Board of Tax Assessors pursuant to this Chapter shall be covered into the Macon-Bibb County treasury. 
(j)  Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the Board of Tax Assessors may, at their discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the jurisdiction. 
Sec. 13-24. - Minimum health and safety standards. 
All manufactured homes, mobile homes, and pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the department of business development services for Macon-Bibb County: 
(1)  HUD Code. Every manufactured home, mobile home, and pre-owned manufactured home located within the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. § 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(2)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of any manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all manufactured homes, mobile homes, or pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(4)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of any manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure that they are in good working condition. 
(5)  Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Electrical systems. Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
(7)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(8)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of any manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(9)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(10)  Smoke detectors. Each manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
Sec. 13-25. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the Department of Business Development Services has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  The owner of any manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have his or her permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at his or her own expense. 
(c)  The cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension of time has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
Sec. 13-26. - Reports by dealers. 
All dealers in mobile homes shall furnish to the joint board of tax assessors a list of all mobile homes in their possession, whether owned by them or not, on January 1 of each calendar year. 
Sec. 13-27. - Decal. 
Any owner of a manufactured home, mobile home or pre-owned manufactured home who has made application for the initial location or relocation of such home and whose application meets the qualifications of this chapter shall be issued a permit and shall likewise be issued a decal. The decal to be issued with a permit authorizing initial location of a manufactured home, mobile home or pre-owned manufactured home within the jurisdiction shall be green in color and shall be affixed to the home at all times it is being used as a residence within the confines of Macon-Bibb County. The decal issued with the permit authorizing relocation of a manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home shall be red in color and shall be affixed to the home at all times such home is being transported within the confines of the state. Such decals shall be designed in such manner and affixed to mobile homes in such manner as to cause them to be easily visible for inspection. 
Sec. 13-28. - Forms. 
The Board of Tax Assessors is hereby authorized and empowered, subject to the specific provisions of this chapter, to prescribe application, permit and decal forms and thereafter to alter and change the same. 
Sec. 13-29. - Planning and zoning commission. 
(a)  The Board of Tax Assessors shall periodically, but at least monthly, furnish to the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission a list of all permits issued by the board for the location or relocation of any manufactured home, mobile home or pre-owned manufactured home. 
(b)  The issuance of any permit under the provisions of this article shall in no wise be construed as superseding the requirement for the location of manufactured homes, mobile homes, or pre-owned manufactured homes as the same may be contained within appropriate resolutions or other actions of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission, and the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this article shall not prohibit the planning and zoning commission from requiring a relocation of the manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home to a place where such home is permitted by the regulations of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission. In such case, the owner of such home shall apply for and obtain a permit for such relocation as if such relocation were the result of his own initiative. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to amend or supersede any regulation of the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission with respect to manufactured homes, mobile homes, pre-owned manufactured homes, or any relocatable homes. 
Sec. 13-30. - Notification of tax assessors. 
Whenever a permit authorizing the relocation of a manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home is issued and such home is to be relocated within the confines of another county in the state, the board of tax assessors shall notify the tax assessors of such other county of the date of the issuance of such permit. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 

Sec. 13-31. - Location in mobile home park. 
No owner or operator of a mobile or manufactured home park shall permit any manufactured home, mobile home or pre-owned manufactured home to be located or relocated within the confines of such park for residential use unless the permit required by Article II shall have been obtained. No owner or operator of any mobile or manufactured home park shall permit any manufactured home, mobile home, or pre-owned manufactured home presently located within the limits of such park owned or operated by him to remain in such park after the date of this article unless a permit authorizing such continued location as required by Article II shall have been obtained. 
Sec. 13-32. - Records—Operator to maintain. 
Every operator of a mobile or manufactured home park within the limits of the jurisdiction shall maintain records showing the given name and last name of each adult occupant of any manufactured home or mobile home located within the mobile or manufactured home park so operated, and such operator shall maintain such records in a current manner so that at all times such records shall accurately reflect the name of each such actual adult occupant. 
Sec. 13-33. - Same—Description. 
The records required by Section 13-32 may be maintained in one or more alternative fashions, as follows: 
(1)  If the mobile or manufactured home park has an office located at the site of the park, the records prescribed may be maintained in such office, provided that the records shall be available for reference by any person legitimately entitled thereto including, but not limited to, law enforcement officers, 24 hours a day. 
(2)  If the mobile or manufactured home park does not have an office open 24 hours a day, then and in such event, the records required hereby shall be maintained in the office of the sheriff of the county. 
(3)  The records need not be maintained in any particular form so long as they disclose the information required hereby. The records may consist of a plat of the mobile or manufactured home park showing the lots by number upon which are listed the names of the adults occupying such lot, or the records may consist of a list of the names of the occupants of the mobile or manufactured home park alphabetically with an indication of the lot number upon which the manufactured home or mobile home occupied by them may be found or it may be a listing of lots by number showing the names of the adult occupants thereof. At a minimum, however, the records shall be such as will enable one inspecting them to determine the given and last names of every adult occupant of every mobile or manufactured home in the park with a reference to the number of the lot upon which the manufactured home or mobile home occupied by them is located. 
Sec. 13-34. - Lot numbers. 
To make the provisions of this article effective, every operator of every mobile or manufactured home park within the limits of Macon-Bibb County shall devise a system of numbering the lots in the mobile or manufactured home park operated by him in such manner that the lots are consecutively numbered in such fashion as will permit one seeking the location of a lot to find it with relative ease, and through means of a sign on each lot or other similar device, each lot shall be identified by number so that a person traversing the thoroughfares of the mobile or manufactured home park by automobile will be able to identify any lot by number. 
Sec. 13-35. - Other records to be maintained; disposition. 
In addition to the records required to be kept by this article, each operator of a mobile, or manufactured home park within Macon-Bibb County shall maintain records showing, as of January 1 in each calendar year, the name of the owner of each manufactured home or mobile home located in the mobile home or manufactured home park under the control of such operator, together with a brief description of the manufactured home or mobile home and the lot on which the same is located. Not later than January 15 in each calendar year, each operator of a mobile or manufactured home park required to maintain the records described in this section shall mail a true copy hereof to the county tax commissioner and a copy to the Macon-Bibb County Board of Tax Assessors. 
Chapter 14 - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 14-1. - Judges and judicial authority. 
(a)  The chief municipal judge may propose written regulations, or amendments thereto, to organize and operate the municipal court in the most efficient manner reasonably possible consistent with state law, the Uniform Rules of Municipal Court approved by the Georgia Supreme Court, the Charter and this Code. 
(b)  All municipal judges shall be members in good standing of the state bar. 
(c)  The chief judge shall not maintain a private practice of law. 
Sec. 14-2. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The Municipal Court shall have the authority to try any case of alleged violation of any provision of this Code committed within Macon-Bibb County, unless otherwise provided in this Code, and, after conviction, punish any person found to be in violation as alleged. 
(b)  The Municipal Court may likewise try, convict and punish any person for violation of any state law where jurisdiction has been granted or allowed by general state law or the Charter. 
(c)  Every person charged with a violation in Macon-Bibb County of any other state law may be brought before the municipal judge as soon as is reasonably possible for a finding of probable cause, and upon such a finding the person shall be bound over for prosecution by the state. 
(d)  The Municipal Court shall also have any other powers and duties allowed under state law for such courts. 
Sec. 14-3. - Summons; notice to appear; subpoena; failure to appear. 
(a)  Any person charged with a violation of this Code or any state law under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court and who has been served with a written summons, citation or notice to appear before the municipal judge at a given time, place and date shall be required to so appear and, upon failure to so appear, the municipal judge may order that person's immediate arrest for an appearance before the judge on a day and time certain to show cause why the person should not be held in contempt and on the original charges. 
(b)  Any person who may be able to provide evidence of any kind on a matter before the Municipal Court and who has been served by any law enforcement officer with a written subpoena issued by the court clerk or a municipal judge which orders the person to be present at the municipal court and testify at a given time, place and date shall be required to be present and, upon failure to be present, may be held in contempt of court and the municipal judge may order that person's immediate arrest for an appearance before the judge on contempt charges. 
Sec. 14-4. - Court sessions; opening announcement. 
(a)  A regular session of the Municipal Court shall be held each week at a fixed hour of a fixed day or days, as may be determined by the chief municipal judge, provided that the chief municipal judge proposes a specific schedule of court sessions in a written regulation that is approved pursuant to this chapter. Notwithstanding the above, any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. 
(b)  The general form of opening announcement may contain the following: 
(1)  A command that attention by all is required; 
(2)  The name of the court; 
(3)  A declaration that court is in session; and 
(4)  The name of the judge presiding. 
Sec. 14-5. - Special sessions. 
The chief municipal judge may order special sessions when, in his judgment, it is necessary, or there is urgent cause for the trial of accused persons, before the next regular sitting of the court. The necessity or urgency of the cause shall be presumed from the fact of a session being held. All defendants shall have at least six (6) hours' notice of the session. 
Sec. 14-6. - Law enforcement attendance. 
It shall be the duty of the Sheriff, or some sworn member of the Office of Sheriff designated by the Sheriff, to attend each session of the court to act as court liaison officer. It shall be the duty of each deputy making the arrest or having knowledge of the case for or against the defendant, to attend the trial of any person brought before the Municipal Court. 
Sec. 14-7. - Appearance bond; procedure for accepting. 
Offenses against the ordinances of Macon-Bibb County shall be bailable as follows: 
(1)  The arresting officer, Sheriff, a municipal judge, or any other officer designated by the Sheriff, may accept bond of the accused payable to Macon-Bibb County conditioned upon the appearance of the accused at the next session or any subsequent session of the Municipal Court as stated in the bond, to answer the charge. 
(2)  The bond shall be in writing in an amount established in a schedule adopted by the chief municipal judge and approved by the mayor. 
(3)  In lieu of an appearance bond, a person arrested for violation of a Macon-Bibb County ordinance may be released on his own recognizance or may deposit, his driver's license with the arresting officer, the Sheriff or a municipal judge if, in any of these officials' determinations, the person will appear at the time set for the court appearance in view of the following considerations: 
a.  The seriousness of the offense charged; 
b.  The penalty provided by law; 
c.  The number of charges pending against the defendant; 
d.  The criminal record of the defendant; 
e.  The residence of the defendant and the length of time of residence; 
f.  The defendant's age; 
g.  Marital status and number of children; 
h.  Residency of the relatives of the defendant; 
i.  Employment of defendant (by whom, nature of work and how long employed); 
j.  Former employment; 
k.  Amount of earnings; 
l.  The defendant's character, reputation and previous criminal history; 
m.  The defendant's mental condition; and 
n.  Whether the defendant has membership in any clubs or societies; church affiliation and other things which could show that he is a responsible member of the community with established community ties. 
(4)  Any person released under subsection (3) above shall receive a receipt for any driver's license deposited or, if released on the person's own recognizance, shall sign and receive a copy of the citation or ticket describing the violation for which the person was arrested. 
(5)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
(6)  All sureties who sign bonds for the release of principals for offenses against Macon-Bibb County shall at all times be governed and comply with O.C.G.A. § 17-6-1 et seq. 
(7)  Any person engaged in the bonding business that fails to deposit the required bond amount into the court registry after a bond forfeiture has occurred, as required by O.C.G.A. § 17-6-71 shall be summoned to the Municipal Court, after having been given ten (10) days' notice, to show cause why their privilege of signing bonds for municipal offenses should not be suspended by the court. 
Sec. 14-8. - Continuance of cases. 
Continuances shall be made only for good cause shown. Prior to the scheduled court appearance the Clerk of Court or the presiding judge may grant continuations of a case. 
Sec. 14-9. - Forfeiture of witness and appearance bonds. 
(a)  The presiding municipal judge shall call the case in its regular order, and, if the accused or any subpoenaed witness is not in court and does not answer the call, and if no good and sufficient reason is given for the nonappearance, the judge shall enter on the docket where the case is stated, "bond forfeited," or similar words, if there was any bond or cash posted, and issue an arrest warrant for that person, in the judge's discretion. 
(b)  Upon forfeiture of any bond, the cash deposited as security shall be paid to Macon-Bibb County treasury, and it shall become the property of Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Upon the forfeiture of any bond signed by a person as surety, Macon-Bibb County may collect the sum as delinquent revenues are collected. 
(d)  Each bond forfeited under the terms of this section, unless extended by the court for good cause shown, shall be due and payable six (6) months from the date that said bond is forfeited. If any forfeiture is not paid within thirty (30) days of the due date for payment of such forfeiture, Macon-Bibb County will no longer accept any bonds signed by the same person acting as the surety on the forfeited bond. 
Sec. 14-10. - Acceptance of pleas. 
Before accepting a plea to an offense charged, the court shall in all cases, in language which the defendant can understand, inform the defendant of the nature of the charge and the penalty which may be imposed upon conviction. 
Sec. 14-11. - Pleas. 
(a)  The defendant shall enter one of the following pleas: 
(1)  Guilty; 
(2)  Not guilty; 
(3)  Nolo contendere (with the permission of the court); or 
(4)  A former judgment of conviction or acquittal of the offense charged. 
(b)  If the defendant refuses to enter a plea, the court shall enter a plea of not guilty and set the case down for trial. 
Sec. 14-12. - Fines; collections; payment in advance of court date. 
(a)  For fines that may be due by any defendant, collection may be made by Macon-Bibb County as for delinquent taxes due Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  Persons charged with violations of this Code may, prior to the time for their court appearance, plead guilty in writing and pay to Macon-Bibb County as their fine the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged, except as may be provided otherwise in the appearance bond schedule. 
Sec. 14-13. - Appearance of complaining witnesses; bond. 
(a)  A material or complaining witness in any contested prosecution shall appear at the session at which the prosecution is docketed. The prosecution may be dismissed if the material witness fails to appear. 
(b)  Any person who has been subpoenaed as a witness before the Municipal Court, may, in the discretion of the Sheriff, be required to give bond or be released on their own recognizance with good security or a cash bond or collateral, conditioned to appear and testify before the municipal court in the case in which the witness has been subpoenaed. 
Sec. 14-14. - Rules of evidence. 
The general rules of evidence applicable to the Superior Court of Bibb County shall be applicable in the trial of all cases in the Municipal Court. 
Sec. 14-15. - Judgment and sentences. 
Upon a judgment or plea of guilty the court shall impose sentence. The court may: 
(1)  Impose a fine, with or without a commitment for compulsory work, confinement or both; 
(2)  Commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(3)  Suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; or 
(4)  Defer the execution of the sentence or any portion or portions thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future. 
Sec. 14-16. - Court costs—Collection. 
(a)  The Municipal Court may collect costs in cases involving violations of the penal statutes of the state in the same manner as are now provided by law in cases where criminal warrants are issued, and proceeding thereon had before a magistrate. 
(b)  In all cases in the Municipal Court involving a violation of the penal statutes of the state, where the accused is bound over to the Superior Court or the State Court of Bibb County to await trial, Macon-Bibb County shall be allowed costs in the same amounts as is provided by general state law for a magistrate. 
(c)  Such costs shall be collected and paid to Macon-Bibb County in the same manner and at the same time as costs are now collected and paid by the State court of Bibb County to the Sheriff, clerk, and solicitor of the state court for the benefit of Macon-Bibb County and the board of education of Macon-Bibb County; provided, however, that the insolvent cost bill of Macon-Bibb County shall participate in the distribution of fines and forfeitures arising only in cases committed from the Municipal Court. 
Sec. 14-17. - Prosecuting attorney of Municipal Court. 
The Office of Solicitor-General for Bibb County will prosecute criminal cases in Municipal Court. Code violations that are civil in nature will be prosecuted by the County Attorney's Office. Any prosecutors are authorized to file, at their election, accusations as charging instruments in Municipal Court. 
Sec. 14-18. - Municipal court clerk. 
The office of municipal court clerk is hereby established in and for Macon-Bibb County. The office of the municipal court clerk shall be composed of the municipal court clerk who shall serve as the department head and such other employees as may be necessary. The municipal court clerk, under the direction of the mayor, shall be responsible for the administration, supervision, and control of the office of the municipal court clerk. The duties of the municipal court clerk shall be as follows: 
(1)  Assist the municipal court judge in the operation of the municipal court by maintaining a court calendar and records on all cases before the court, including arrests, subpoenas, case dispositions, bonds and the like; 
(2)  Prepare the budgeting and fiscal reports and documents as may be necessary and proper for the operation and maintenance of the municipal court; 
(3)  Collect and compile data, including cases filed and disposed of, and information on the expenditures and receipts of the municipal court; 
(4)  Enforce all regulations of the office and administrative directives of the mayor; 
(5)  Issue any witness subpoena necessary; 
(6)  Attend, or have a designee attend, every session of the municipal court and perform any clerical duties necessary during the session; and 
(7)  Otherwise assist the municipal court judge in administration of the municipal court. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0001, § 1, 1-5-2016 ) 
Chapter 15 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-1. - Conditions constituting nuisance. 
The following conditions are hereby declared to constitute nuisances when any of them endangers the health, welfare or good order of the community and shall be abated, although this section shall not be construed to be limiting with regard to its enumeration of nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises. 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation, or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises, which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of Macon-Bibb County. 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of Macon-Bibb County. 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewerage system which would be damaging thereto. 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl. 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit. 
(6.1)  Playing basketball or other sports in the street. 
(6.2)  Placement of basketball goals or other sports equipment in the street or sidewalk, or adjacent to the street in such a manner that use of such equipment as placed will cause persons to play in the street. 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limiting the foregoing, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas, and any noises in violation of Article II. 
(8)  All walls, trees, and buildings that may endanger persons or property. 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent such activities. 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed. 
(11)  All rubbish, litter, or debris, including but not limited to combustible and noncombustible waste materials, garbage, wood, coal, coke, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and the residue from burning such items that may endanger the health, welfare, good order, or beauty of the community. 
(12)  Shrubbery or tree limbs on private property which protrude or hang so as to obstruct the safe passage of pedestrians or motor vehicles. This section shall not apply to the removal of fallen trees, dead trees, shrubbery, bushes, etc. on private property where such do not protrude into the pedestrian/motor vehicle passageway. 
(13)  Any method of human excretion disposal that does not conform to the provisions of local ordinances, or state or federal law. 
(14)  The abandonment of living animals on any property in Macon-Bibb County. 
(15)  Allowing any dog not on a leash, not under restraint, to run loose on the property or premises of another without permission of the owner of the property or the owner of the animal being in possession thereof. 
(16)  Riding off-road vehicles on public roads or upon property of another without permission of the property owner. 
(17)  Maintaining noisome odors in violation of Section 15-10 of this Chapter. 
(18)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
Sec. 15-2. - Nuisance prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership or other entity to cause, permit, maintain, or allow the creation or maintenance, of a nuisance, as defined or more specifically described in this chapter. 
Sec. 15-3. - Complaint of nuisance. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of Macon-Bibb County may direct a complaint of nuisance to the Sheriff's Office. Any complaint of nuisance shall be investigated by the sheriff's office and may be placed on either the municipal court or state court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The Sheriff's Office may forward such complaints to the appropriate office for investigation and placement on the court docket. 
(b)  After five days' notice to both the complainant and the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession of the property involved, the municipal court or state court shall hold a hearing on the complaint. Upon finding that a nuisance in violation of this chapter does exist, the court shall issue an order and notice to abate nuisance to the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession of the property, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(c)  The Macon-Bibb County Engineer, animal control officers, building and license inspectors, health inspectors, public works inspectors, and the fire prevention bureau of the fire department of the county may also receive complaints, investigate the same, and may place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as the sheriff or sheriff's deputies. 
Sec. 15-4. - Order and notice to abate. 
Whenever a nuisance in violation of this chapter is found to exist within the jurisdiction of Macon-Bibb County, the municipal court or state court shall issue a written order and notice to abate to the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance, to abate the nuisance. 
Sec. 15-5. - Contents of order and notice to abate. 
The order and notice to abate nuisance issued by the municipal court or state court under the provisions of this chapter shall contain the following: 
(1)  A statement that a nuisance in violation of this chapter has been found to exist on the property involved; 
(2)  An order to abate the nuisance, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances, given the nature of the nuisance, its effect on the public, and the immediacy of the need for corrective action; 
(3)  The location of the nuisance, if the nuisance is stationary; 
(4)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance; and 
(5)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance. 
Sec. 15-6. - Abatement by Macon-Bibb County. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession of the property cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such that, in the opinion of the municipal court judge or state court judge, the nuisance must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the appropriate office directing the nuisance to be abated. 
(b)  The office receiving such order of abatement, in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating said nuisance, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession of the property for collection as for Macon-Bibb County revenues generally and shall become a lien on the property of such persons. 
Sec. 15-7. - Compliance with other laws; conflicting provisions. 
(a)  The provisions of all other applicable Macon-Bibb County, state, and federal laws shall apply. This chapter shall not be construed or interpreted to repeal or to be in conflict with any other provisions of this Code relating to nuisance, including but not limited to Chapter 15, Nuisances and Chapter 22, Article III, Litter Control. 
(b)  The procedures for enforcement and abatement under this chapter shall be independent of those procedures for enforcement and abatement delineated in Chapter 15, Nuisances and Chapter 22, Article III, Litter Control. 
(c)  If any provision of this chapter is in genuine conflict with any state or federal law or requirement, the conflict shall be resolved in accordance with law. 
Sec. 15-8. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates an order of the municipal court or state court to abate a nuisance after the initial hearing and issuance of an order and notice to abate provided for above shall be punished as provided in the general penalty section of this Code. 
Sec. 15-9. - Mayor may abate nuisance per se. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from, summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger, and the mayor is hereby authorized to exercise such authority in conformance with state law. 
Sec. 15-10. - Noisome odors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or individual in control of any property within the boundaries of Macon-Bibb County to: 
(1)  Allow the accumulation of animal body wastes; 
(2)  Boil offal, bone, fat, tallow; 
(3)  Manufacture glue, varnish or oil; 
(4)  Make lamp black, turpentine or tar; 
(5)  Render or dry out dead animals; or 
(6)  Conduct any other activity, business or trade not specifically enumerated in this Code whereby noisome stenches and odors arise, or noxious gases are generated or circulated within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 15-11. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEEDS, DEBRIS AND INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 15-12. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this division shall have the following meanings: 
Building means any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering any occupancy. 
Debris, for the purpose of this division, shall include residue from the burning of wood, coal, or other combustible material, as well as paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, fallen, broken or destroyed trees or tree limbs or other material or objects not a part of the land and constituting a health or safety hazard. 
Inoperable motor vehicles means any motor vehicle as defined herein which is in a state of disrepair, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. The term inoperable shall include a motor vehicle that is incapable of being moved under its own power. 
Lot, for the purposes of this division, shall mean one (1) or any one or more of several contiguous parcels of land making up a block, measured and set apart for use or occupancy. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designated to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go carts, golf carts, campers and trailers. 
Weeds shall be defined as all objectionable growth, including weeds and grasses which serve as a breeding place for mosquitoes and other unhealthy or undesirable insects, or as a refuge for snakes, rats or other rodents, or that create a fire or traffic hazard or provide a hiding place for persons. Provided, however, that flowers, shrubbery, trees and other growth used as a part of landscaping shall not be included in this definition. 
Wooded areas shall be defined as those portions of lots consisting of a dense growth of trees, which exceed three (3) inches in diameter. 
Sec. 15-13. - Weeds, debris, inoperable motor vehicles; prohibition; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any lot of land or premises in Macon-Bibb County, or the owner of any lot of land or premises in Macon-Bibb County, or any agent or representative of such owner or occupant, to permit or maintain on such lot the growth thereon of objectionable weeds, the accumulation of debris or the harborage of inoperable motor vehicles, as defined in this division, which distracts from the community aesthetics, and endangers the public health, safety or welfare. The following conditions shall constitute a nuisance as it relates to the growth of objectionable weeds: 
(1)  Any lot on which a residential structure is built shall be deemed a nuisance if the growth of weeds as defined herein is twelve (12) inches or more in height. 
(2)  Any vacant lot located within a residential district or area shall be deemed a nuisance if the growth of weeds as defined herein exceeds eighteen (18) inches or more in height. 
(3)  Any lot or property other than those described above shall be deemed a nuisance if the growth of weeds as defined herein exceeds eighteen (18) inches in height. 
Exception: For the purpose of this division, wooded areas as defined herein shall be exempt from the above requirements and agricultural areas as defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-1-7 shall also be exempt. 
(b)  This division defines and establishes procedures for abating inoperable motor vehicles. For definitions and enforcement procedures pertaining to abandoned vehicles, refer to Article III. 
Sec. 15-14. - Notice of violations. 
(a)  When any objectionable condition as defined in section 15-1 is being permitted or maintained on any lot of land or premises in Macon-Bibb County in violation of section 15-1, the Director of Business Development Services or the Director of Economic and Community Development, as applicable, or their designee (the "official"), shall notify in writing the occupant of such lot, or the owner thereof or their agents or representatives, that the conditions existing upon the property constitute a nuisance, and setting forth the actions to be taken to eliminate the objectionable conditions within fifteen (15) days or within thirty (30) days if the property is zoned industrial or exceeds two (2) acres in size. Failure of the owner or occupant to eliminate the conditions constituting a nuisance within the allotted time period, shall constitute an offense of this Code. An official may grant a written extension upon a showing of reasonable cause, not to exceed an additional fifteen (15) days. Upon the expiration of the fifteen (15) days plus any extension, if any, the official shall issue a summons so charging the party notified and requiring such party to appear in the municipal court or state court for a hearing at a given time, place and date. 
(b)  Notices shall be in writing and delivered in person or by certified mail to the occupant and/or owner or its agents or representatives. If the official, following due diligence, is unable to serve such notice, the official shall cause such notice to be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the news publication of general distribution of the court, prior to taking any steps to abate said nuisance and prior to the running of the fifteen (15) day period for abatement of the nuisance. 
(c)  Any department, agency or individual charged with the enforcement of these regulations shall establish procedures for the tracking, monitoring and the enforcement thereof not inconsistent with these regulations. 
Sec. 15-15. - Summary abatement. 
In all cases where the owner, occupant or agent of a lot cannot be found, or if found and notified, neglects or refuses to abate said nuisance within the time specified by court order or fails to appear in court when summoned, it shall be lawful for Macon-Bibb County to abate the same and remove the objectionable conditions from the property. In such cases, the official shall notify the public works director who shall cause the nuisance to be abated and the objectionable conditions to be removed from the property and shall assess the costs associated with said removal and charge all costs thereof to the owner or representative. Said costs may constitute a lien against the property and be collected pursuant to section 26-2. Provided, however, that this shall not preclude other remedies available to the official for abating said nuisance or Macon-Bibb County's use of other legal means of collecting the cost therefor. 
Sec. 15-16. - Complaint, trial, order, failure to comply, assessment, collection. 
(a)  When it becomes necessary to summons an owner or occupant of lands subject to the provisions of this division, said summons shall be in the form of a written complaint in the municipal or state court setting forth, particularly, the nature and location of the nuisance and the identity of the person complained against. If the court determines that the conditions do in fact constitute a nuisance, the court shall issue an order specifying the time within which such nuisance must be abated. In addition, the court may impose a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the offense of failure to abate the nuisance within the period provided for in section 15-14 if the court determines that the owner or occupant unreasonably failed to abate the nuisance during that time period or prior to the court hearing. 
(b)  The failure of the owner or occupant to comply with the court's order to abate the nuisance shall constitute an offense and shall subject the person to prosecution and penalties as provided in the general penalty section of this Code, including: 
(1)  Fines not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. 
(2)  Imprisonment, not to exceed fifty (50) days. 
(3)  Community service to be performed with any private, non-profit community service organization or any public agency willing to participate and approved by municipal court or any other court ordering the abatement. Violators shall not be used for any purpose resulting in private gain to any person, except in accordance with state law. The role of Macon-Bibb County in the supervision of violators performing community service shall be a governmental function. 
(4)  Any or all of these penalties in the discretion of the judge. 
(5)  Payment of the cost of abatement incurred by the public works or other department of Macon-Bibb County, upon order of the court. 
DIVISION 3. - OBSTRUCTIONS TO CROSS-VISIBILITY 

Sec. 15-17. - Obstructions to cross-visibility at intersections deemed nuisance; abatement procedures. 
(a)  In order to promote and conserve the public health and safety and pursuant to the police powers of Macon-Bibb County and the power to prevent and abate public nuisances as conferred upon Macon-Bibb County by the laws of the State of Georgia, it is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for a person owning and/or having the legal control of any land within the corporate limits of Macon-Bibb County to maintain or permit upon any such land any fence, sign, billboard, shrubbery, bush, tree, mailbox or other object, or any combination thereof, which obstructs the view of motorists using any street or approach to any street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard or a condition dangerous to the public safety. 
(b)  The restrictions set forth in this section shall apply to both of the following triangles of land: 
(1)  That triangle bounded by the curb edges (or edges of pavement where there is no curb), measured along the curb edge (or edge of pavement where there is no curb) twenty (20) feet from the midpoint of the radius of the curb edge (or edge of pavement where there is no curb) in each direction and the diagonal line connecting the further ends of such twenty-foot lengths; and 
(2)  That triangle bounded by the right-of-way lines measured fifteen (15) feet from the point of their intersection in each direction and the diagonal line connecting the further ends of such fifteen-foot lengths. 
(c)  Within said triangles, and except as provided in subsection (d), it shall be unlawful to install, set out or maintain, or allow the installation, setting out, or maintenance of, any sign, hedge, shrubbery, tree, natural growth, earthen berm, or other object of any kind which obstructs cross-visibility at a level between thirty (30) inches and seventy-two (72) inches above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection, which obstructs the view of motorists using any street or approach to any street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard or a condition dangerous to the public safety. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions of subsection (c) shall not apply to: 
(1)  Permanent buildings and permanent additions thereto. 
(2)  Existing natural grades which, by reason of natural topography, rise thirty (30) or more inches above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection. 
(3)  Trees having limbs and foliage trimmed in such manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the area between thirty (30) inches and seventy-two (72) inches above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection. 
(4)  Fire hydrants, public utility poles, street markers, governmental signs, and traffic-control devices. 
(e)  Where compliance with this section in the foregoing described triangles or at the heights described alone is insufficient to prevent a dangerous condition, the Macon-Bibb County traffic engineer may designate further measures which must be taken by the owner or other responsible person to eliminate such dangerous condition. Such measures shall be designed to provide an adequate sight and stopping distance for persons approaching the intersection at prevailing speeds and may include the removal of obstructions at different heights or in areas outside the triangles established in subsection (b) above. 
(f)  If the provisions of any other law, ordinance or regulation of Macon-Bibb County or of the state shall be in conflict with the provisions of this section, the more stringent provision shall control. 
(g)  The administration of this section shall be under the direction of the Macon-Bibb County traffic engineer who shall investigate violations, issue such notices and orders as are required herein, and perform such other duties as may be necessary to the enforcement hereof. 
(h)  Any obstruction to cross-visibility maintained in violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance inconsistent with and detrimental to the public safety and shall be abated in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The Macon-Bibb County traffic engineer shall cause to be served by certified mail a written notice and order of abatement upon the owner, tenant and/or person having legal control of the premises upon which such obstruction exists. 
(2)  Such obstruction shall be removed within ten (10) days from the date of receipt of such notice and order. 
(3)  Any person receiving such notice and order may, within ten (10) days from receipt thereof, request, in writing, a hearing before the municipal court or state court judge hearing housing code violations. Macon-Bibb County traffic engineer shall notify the person upon whom the notice and order has been served of the time and place of such hearing. If, after such hearing, the municipal court judge or the judge of any other court hearing such violation finds that the obstruction in question does in fact constitute a public nuisance, the judge shall order that such nuisance be abated within ten (10) days from the date of such order. Upon failure by any person to comply with such order of the judge, the traffic engineer shall cause the removal of such obstruction by city forces and/or an independent contractor. The cost of such removal shall be billed to the owner and/or person having legal control of the land. If unpaid for more than thirty (30) days, such cost shall become a lien against the property from which such obstruction is removed. Macon-Bibb County clerk shall have authority to file the lien on the public records of Bibb County and to cancel the lien when paid. 
(i)  In addition to the other remedies provided herein, Macon-Bibb County shall be entitled to seek a judicial injunction and order of abatement or other equitable remedy to secure the enforcement of this article. 
Secs. 15-18—15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE 

Sec. 15-26. - Prohibited noises specified. 
(a)  The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the limits of Macon-Bibb County is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare is prohibited. In addition, at any time between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and 11:00 p.m. Friday night and Saturday night and 9:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday, it shall be deemed a violation of this section if any noise regulated or prohibited under the provisions of this section is readily audible in another home, residence, apartment or building in which the usual openings such as windows and doors are closed. The person causing the noise, or the owner, lessee or other person in control of the property from which the noise is emanating shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle, while not in motion except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the sounding of such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television, or other audio device or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity, except this section shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. The provisions of this section shall also apply to voices or other noise originating within a building or residence and to noise produced by animals such as dogs, cats or others, whether housed in a building or an open enclosure, and if the noise continues steadily or intermittently during a period in excess of ten minutes in any one day or night. In the case of animals, the owner or person in immediate control of the property on which the animal is housed shall be deemed responsible. In the case of noise emanating from a residence or apartment, the owner, lessee, renter or other person deemed to be in immediate control of the home, apartment or building shall be deemed to be responsible. It shall be deemed a violation of this section if the noise, caused by persons or animals is readily audible in any nearby home, apartment, building or other structure when its natural openings such as doors and windows are closed. 
(4)  Noisy vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding or rattling, or other noise. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authority. 
(6)  Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Construction work. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section; the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the cases of urgent necessity and then only when a permit from the Macon-Bibb County Engineer or Director of Business Development Services or his designee, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. If the Macon-Bibb County Engineer or the Director of Development Services should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the Macon-Bibb County Engineer or the Director of Business Development Services may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(8)  On streets of institutions requiring quiet. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while they are in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof. 
(9)  Loudspeakers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes, except that this section shall not prohibit their use between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(10)  Garbage dumpsters. The loading, unloading, opening, closing, lifting or otherwise handling of dumpsters or other garbage containers between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when the sound therefrom disturbs the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any house, apartment, hotel or other type of property used for human habitation. 
(11)  Fireworks. With the exception of the issuance of a special use permit, and the dates of January 1, July 3, July 4, and December 31, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or the like to use, ignite, explode, or cause to be detonated any consumer fireworks as defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 during the hours of 9:00 pm and 11:59 pm. On January 1, July 3, July 4, and December 31, pursuant to state law, the use of consumer fireworks shall be authorized during the hours of 10:00 am to 11:59 pm. In addition, on January 1, pursuant to state law, the use of fireworks shall be authorized from 12:00 midnight to 1:00 am. All use of consumer fireworks must be done accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia (see Title 25 Chapter 10 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated). 
(c)  None of the foregoing terms or prohibitions shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of Macon-Bibb County while engaged upon necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of Macon-Bibb County, State of Georgia, United States of America, during the night season, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; nor shall such prohibitions apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor; 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(d)  The prohibitions shall not be applicable to any parade, celebration, or performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the Macon-Bibb County Sheriff. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound, upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of Macon-Bibb County before 7:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m., provided, that nothing in this section shall apply to the United States of America, the state, Macon-Bibb County, or to public agencies. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0062, § 1, 7-19-2016 ) 
Secs. 15-27—15-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 15-51. - Unlawful to abandon vehicle. 
(a)  As used in this article, the term "abandoned vehicle" means a discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, junked motor vehicle, or the parts thereof. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to abandon any vehicle of any type within Macon-Bibb County, nor shall any vehicle be left at any place within Macon-Bibb County for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
Sec. 15-52. - Leaving wrecked, nonoperating vehicle on streets prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street, lane or highway within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 15-53. - Keeping, storage of nonoperating vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within Macon-Bibb County, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent thereof, to permit or allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle of any kind or character to remain on the property within Macon-Bibb County longer than fifteen (15) days unless the vehicle is stored in an enclosed building or located on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place or manner, when necessary or incidental to the operation of the business enterprise. 
Sec. 15-54. - Removal procedure. 
When any vehicle is thus abandoned, stored, parked or left on any vacant lot, property, or premises within Macon-Bibb County for a period of more than fifteen (15) days, notice shall be served personally by the Office of the Sheriff, or other authorized official designated by the mayor, to the owner or person in charge of the property or premises if occupied, or if unoccupied by certified U.S. mail to the owner or person in charge of the property or premises, with an additional notice posted on the vehicle to remove, store or dispose of the vehicle within ten (10) days from the date of the notice. Provided that, in the case of vehicles left on private property (owned by the vehicle's owner or with permission of the owner of such property), the vehicle shall not be removed except by court order. The notice shall set forth the fact that the vehicle is abandoned, stored or parked in violation of this chapter and that upon failure to remove, properly store, house or otherwise dispose of such vehicle, or to show cause why it should not be, if applicable, that it will be removed, sold or disposed of by Macon-Bibb County procurement agent and that any proceeds arising from the sale thereof will be applied first to payment of expenses incurred in connection with the removal and sale of the vehicle and any remaining balance paid to the owner thereof. 
Sec. 15-55. - Authority of Macon-Bibb County to remove, impound. 
Upon violation of any provision of this chapter, the sheriff or other appropriate official designated by the mayor shall be authorized to have any vehicle abandoned on the streets or lanes of Macon-Bibb County removed, impounded and stored immediately pending the sale or other disposition thereof as provided in this article. 
Sec. 15-56. - Advertisement, sale of impounded vehicle. 
Upon failure of the owner to claim the vehicle within thirty (30) days after it has been impounded by the office of the sheriff or other authorized official, it shall be advertised and sold by Macon-Bibb County purchasing agent. The advertisement shall be published on three (3) consecutive days in the newspaper in which official notices are published and shall describe and identify the vehicle to be sold, the fact that it has been impounded by the sheriff as an abandoned vehicle and will be sold at the place where stored to the highest bidder for cash on a date certain ten (10) days after the publication of the last notice unless the vehicle shall have been claimed by the owner and all costs incurred in connection with the removal, storage and advertisement thereof are paid prior thereto. 
Sec. 15-57. - Removal of vehicle from streets; redemption by owner. 
Any vehicle removed from the streets or lanes of Macon-Bibb County pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be similarly posted with the notice as provided in this article and a copy thereof sent by certified mail to the owner of the vehicle if known or capable of ascertainment. Any owner claiming a vehicle removed and stored prior to the disposition thereof by Macon-Bibb County procurement agent shall present proof of ownership and pay all charges and costs incurred in connection with removal and storage thereof before the vehicle shall be returned to owner. 
Secs. 15-58—15-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTIES WHICH ARE PUBLIC NUISANCES 

Sec. 15-75. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
It is found and declared that there exist in Macon-Bibb dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties which: 
(i)  Are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(ii)  Which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(iii)  Which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(iv)  In which other conditions exist rending such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of Macon-Bibb County; or 
(v)  Which are vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties in which drug crimes are being committed. 
Sec. 15-76. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. Tit. 8, Ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. Tit. 25, Ch. 2; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Tit. 8, Ch. 2 after October 1, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Close means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Tit. 16, Ch. 13, Art. 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building, or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of Macon-Bibb County or records maintained in the Macon-Bibb County courthouse or by the Clerk of the Court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of Macon-Bibb County, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in Macon-Bibb County. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in Macon-Bibb County and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, structure or property. 
Resident means any person residing in Macon-Bibb County on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
Sec. 15-77. - Duties of property owners. 
The owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within Macon-Bibb County has the duty to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with all current codes adopted and enforced by Macon-Bibb County and all ordinances which regulate or prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
Sec. 15-78. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Director of Business Development Services (hereinafter "housing official"), is designated to exercise the powers prescribed in this article. 
(b)  Whenever a request is filed with the housing official by a public authority or by at least five residents of Macon-Bibb County charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug or other crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the housing official shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(c)  If the housing official's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug or other crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the housing official may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause a summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the housing official to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court or state court at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, structure, or property in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug or other crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary conditions, the court shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with commission of drug or other crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. Tit. 43, Ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(f)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the housing official may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within two hundred seventy (270) days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court ordered injunction or any other equitable relief granted by the court shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action must commence. The housing official shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(g)  If the housing official has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(6), the housing official as well as Macon-Bibb County and any agencies, departments, agents, or officials thereof are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; and 
(h)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
Sec. 15-79. - Liens on nuisance property. 
(a)  The lien provided for in section 15-78(h) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The Clerk of Superior Court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(b)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the housing official shall transmit to the county tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the housing official shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b)(2), it shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically, but not limited to, judicial in rem tax foreclosure proceedings as set forth in O.C.G.A. Tit. 48, Ch. 4, Art. 5; provided however, the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing tax foreclosure shall not apply. As provided in the O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9, it shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this section in accordance with the O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this section. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this section. 
(d)  Liens placed on properties prior to the enactment of this article resulting from the abatement of violations of the Standard Housing Code, Unsafe Building Abatement Code, or any other ordinance under chapter 6 constituting a nuisance, shall also be enforced pursuant to this article. 
(e)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this section shall be the full amount of costs as finally determined in accordance with this section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by Macon-Bibb County or the tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of the O.C.G.A. § 48-4-81. 
(f)  Macon-Bibb County may waive and release any such lien imposed on a property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the housing official on behalf of Macon-Bibb County agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(g)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
Sec. 15-80. - Standards for determining unfitness for habitation. 
(a)  The housing official may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of Macon-Bibb County. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(b)  The housing official may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, structure, or property is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
Sec. 15-81. - Housing official's powers of enforcement. 
The housing official may exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article to include: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in Macon-Bibb County in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, structures, or property therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
Sec. 15-82. - Service of complaints and orders. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a housing official pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the housing official shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identifies and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the local newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court in the county in which the dwelling, building, structure, or property is located at the time of the filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
Sec. 15-83. - Injunctions. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the housing official may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the housing official from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the housing official pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within fifteen (15) days of the posting and service of the order of the housing official. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within twenty (20) days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
Sec. 15-84. - Compensation for property. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner or owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
Sec. 15-85. - Appropriations; grants; donations. 
Macon-Bibb County is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of ordinances adopted in connection with the exercise of the powers granted under this article. 
Sec. 15-86. - Powers supplemental to other laws. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of Macon-Bibb County to enforce any provisions of its local enabling act, its charter, or its ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES 

Sec. 16-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person commits any of the following: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words;" or 
(4)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
(b)  Any person who commits the offense of disorderly conduct shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed $500.00; 
(2)  Imprisonment for a period of not more than 50 days; 
(3)  Community service for a period of not more than 60 days; or 
(4)  Any one or combination of the foregoing. 
(c)  Any person who commits the offense of disorderly conduct at a youth sports event on city property shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  As provided in subsection (b); and 
(2)  A mandatory period of probation of 50 days, less any days served in jail. The judge shall ban the defendant from all youth sports events on city property as a term and condition of probation. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, "youth sports event" means a sports competition, or sports practice, involving one or more teams of persons under the age of 18, including, but not limited to, little league games. 
Sec. 16-2. - Flying kites prohibited in certain areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fly a kite in the area of Macon-Bibb County embraced within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard and Riverside Drive; extending along Spring Street and an extension thereof to Hazel Street; extending along Hazel Street to Fifth Street; extending along Fifth Street and Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard to Riverside Drive, including both sides of the segments of the above streets forming said boundaries. 
Sec. 16-3. - Tampering with stakes of Macon-Bibb County Engineer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper, interfere with, remove or drive below the surface of the ground any peg or stake driven in any street, sidewalk, park or reserve by the Macon-Bibb County Engineer, his assistants or employees. 
Sec. 16-4. - Parking regulated around boat ramps, landings and dock areas. 
No person shall park any vehicle on or in such a manner as to block any ramp, landing or dock area, or the approaches thereto, located on the Ocmulgee River within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 16-5. - Placing property on premises of another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any property, including but not limited to motor vehicles, upon the premises of another without permission of the person lawfully in possession of the premises. 
Sec. 16-6. - Sleeping on private premises. 
It shall be unlawful to be found sleeping on or at the foot of the stairway of any building in Macon-Bibb County, or sleeping in or on boxes or other things in the streets, sidewalks or alleys or public grounds, or on the streets, private premises or grounds of another without the consent of the person in control of any such premises or grounds. 
Secs. 16-7—16-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-10. - Illegal drugs; unlawful to be present where used or kept. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to be present in any building or on any premises at any location in Macon-Bibb County where illegal drugs are being used or kept. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to be present in any vehicle, at any location in Macon-Bibb County, wherein illegal drugs are being used or kept. 
(c)  The term "knowingly" is defined as having actual or constructive knowledge which a reasonable person would have acquired or determined from the use of physical senses. 
Sec. 16-11. - Posting signs on bridges or poles without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
Sec. 16-12. - Placarding automobiles without consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to paint, paste or in any other manner attach to any automobile or other vehicle any notice, placard or any other sign, within Macon-Bibb County, unless the automobile or other vehicle shall be the property of the party so placarding same. The provisions of this section shall not apply in any case or cases when and where the consent of the owner has been obtained by the party so placarding the vehicle prior to the time that same is placarded. Consent to such action obtained subsequent to the act shall in no manner justify or excuse a violation of this section. 
Sec. 16-13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-14. - Curfew after 12:00 midnight for persons at the age of 16 years or younger. 
(a)  Authorized. It is unlawful for any minor sixteen (16) years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity or entertainment, school sponsored or school related sports event, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above referenced places during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel, with interstate travel through Macon-Bibb County excepted in all cases from the curfew. 
(7)  When the minor is on the property of or the sidewalk adjacent to the building in which he or she resides. 
Any acts made unlawful by the provisions of this section shall be subject to the juvenile code of this state. 
(b)  Responsibility of parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child sixteen (16) years of age or younger to permit or by insufficient control to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in subsection (a) within Macon-Bibb County between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsections (a)(1) through (7). Upon conviction of this section for the first time, a person shall be given a warning by the court. Such warning shall be entered on the court record for computer filing. Upon further convictions, a person shall be subject to such punishment as the Municipal Court of Macon-Bibb County may impose, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Quarterly report by law enforcement. The law enforcement agency responsible for enforcement under these provisions shall be required to submit a quarterly report for up to one (1) year after the effective date of this section to the appropriate committee to monitor the continuing need, and effectiveness of this section. 
Sec. 16-15. - Dive defined; prohibited; frequenting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons or organization to have, keep, operate, or allow to be operated at a place or building owned by same, a dive. 
(b)  A "dive" is defined as any place or establishment where: 
(1)  Legal alcoholic beverages are sold without a proper license or permit; or illegal alcoholic beverages, or other illegal drugs are found, possessed, kept or sold; or illegal gambling activities are being conducted; or 
(2)  Any person is permitted to: 
a.  Come and purchase or consume any otherwise legal alcoholic liquid sold without a proper permit or license, or 
b.  Come and purchase or consume any illegal alcoholic beverages, or 
c.  Possess or use any illegal drugs, or 
d.  Conduct or participate in illegal gambling activities; or 
(3)  Any person consumes or uses: 
a.  Any legal alcoholic beverages sold without a proper license permit, or 
b.  Illegal alcoholic beverages, or 
c.  Illegal drugs, or 
(4)  Any person participates in any illegal gambling activities; or 
(5)  Illegal transactions occur involving: 
a.  Any alcoholic beverages, legal or illegal, including the provision of alcoholic beverages to, or consumption by, any person under the legal drinking age of 21 years; or 
b.  Illegal drugs; or 
c.  Illegal gambling activities. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, visit or be present in a "dive" as defined in this section, for purposes of: 
(1)  Selling, purchasing or consuming any legal alcoholic beverage sold without a proper permit or license; or 
(2)  Selling, purchasing or consuming any illegal alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs; or 
(3)  Participating in any illegal gambling activities. 
(d)  When violators are charged under this section, arresting officers may, consistent with state law, seize all evidence of the violation, including money, alcoholic beverages, drugs, or evidence of illegal gambling activities, and impound such evidence pending trial of the case, after which the evidence shall be disposed of in a manner prescribed by state law and/or federal law. 
Sec. 16-16. - Violating posted rule of conduct unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate a posted rule of conduct upon any Macon-Bibb County property, common or reserve. Any person refusing to leave such property because of a violation of a posted rule of conduct when requested by a proper authority will be considered a trespasser. The term "proper authority" as used in this section is defined to include the mayor, manager, a law enforcement officer, or any other Macon-Bibb County employee who has supervisory control over the property involved. 
Sec. 16-17. - Disfiguring public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way molest, injure or damage any property in or any other thing belonging to Macon-Bibb County, or to cut, carve, injure or damage property of any religious or charitable society or association or any improvement made by any person for the ornament of the streets or other places. 
Sec. 16-18. - Defacing sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, mark, print or in any manner to deface or to paste advertising matter of any kind on any of the sidewalks within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 16-19. - Objects in streets, alleys, sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or throw or to leave or abandon on any street, sidewalk or alley in Macon-Bibb County any glass or crockery of any kind, nails, tacks, brick bats or any article or object liable to injure the bare feet of children walking on the streets, sidewalks or alleys, or to injure or puncture the tires of automobiles, motorcycles, bicycles or the rubber tires of other vehicles. 
Sec. 16-20. - Destroying street signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or destroy the boards, signs or markers upon which the names of the streets are printed or posted. 
Sec. 16-21. - Burning grass, leaves and the like. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to or burn, on any street, park or railroad embankments of Macon-Bibb County, any grass, leaves or other trash for any purpose. 
Sec. 16-22. - Resisting or interfering with an officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to interfere with, obstruct or hinder a code enforcement officer of Macon-Bibb County, in the discharge of his official duty. 
Sec. 16-23. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  Offense defined. A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when one is in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Flight; obligations of law enforcement officer. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer fails to comply with the foregoing procedure, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  Penalty. A person convicted of the offense of loitering or prowling shall be guilty of a violation of this section and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in the general penalty section of this Code. 
Sec. 16-24. - Acts prohibited on board of public education and orphanage property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages. Bring, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on property owned by the Board of Public Education and orphanage for Macon-Bibb County. 
(2)  Parking in no parking areas. Park on any property owned by the Board of Public Education and orphanage for Macon-Bibb County wherever any sign designating said area as a "no parking" area shall exist. 
(3)  Littering. Deposit or leave any trash or other litter on property owned by the Board of Public Education and orphanage for Macon-Bibb County except in receptacles designed for the collection of such trash and litter. 
Sec. 16-25. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms, such as pistols, shotguns, rifles or machine guns, within the limits of the former City of Macon, Georgia as they existed as of December 31, 2013, unless: 
(1)  In defense of person, habitation or any other property to the extent such defense would constitute legal justification under state law; 
(2)  By an officer engaged in the discharge of his official duties; 
(3)  By persons engaged in military duties; 
(4)  With permission of the mayor; 
(5)  At an indoor commercial shooting range licensed by Macon-Bibb County; 
(6)  At a Macon-Bibb County shooting range; 
(7)  At an indoor, private, noncommercial shooting range that has safety features comparable to those required of an indoor commercial shooting range or otherwise adequate to protect persons inside and outside the range from injury; or 
(8)  Within areas delineated by resolution of the commission as being appropriate for the safe and lawful discharge of firearms. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any BB or pellet pistol or rifle from or into any public property, including but not limited to, public parks, streets or alleys. Also, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a BB or pellet pistol or rifle from or into the property of another person without the expressed permission of such property owner. 
Sec. 16-26. - Possession of certain weapons unlawful; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess or carry upon any of the streets, alleys, or sidewalks of Macon-Bibb County, or in any hotel lobby, theater, railroad depot, bus station or terminal, poolroom, billiard parlor or room, dance hall, beer parlor, nightclub, tap room, baseball park, fair grounds, bus, taxicab, or in any other public place in Macon-Bibb County, or in any place or business establishment in Macon-Bibb County which is patronized or frequented by the public, any of the following implements unless such implements are securely wrapped and packaged so as not to be readily available for any harmful use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure being applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle more than two inches is so prohibited. 
(2)  Any knife which has an obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle more than two inches is so prohibited. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle more than three inches is so prohibited. This provision includes all knives such as butcher knives and other knives which do not close. However, this provision shall not apply to butcher knives and other knives which do not close when the same are in use or are held or possessed for use in the performance of the lawful business or practice of business and professional establishments and offices duly licensed by Macon-Bibb County or otherwise lawfully authorized to transact business or practice professions in Macon-Bibb County. 
(4)  Any razor is so prohibited, but this provision shall not apply to barbers, beauticians, and similar artisans when actually engaged in the practice of their respective vocations or trades, or when held or possessed for such purposes. 
(5)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point is so prohibited but this provision shall not apply to any person actually engaged in delivering ice or in the actual performance of his lawful trade or other vocation. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the implements, described in this section, when such implements are held or possessed for purposes of sale by business establishments or individuals duly licensed by Macon-Bibb County to sell such implements, but shall apply to business establishments and individuals who hold or possess any of these implements for sale and who are not duly licensed by Macon-Bibb County to sell such implements. 
(c)  The municipal judge shall have power and authority, and it shall be his duty upon finding that any of the devices and implements described in this section have been unlawfully held, possessed or carried in violation of the provisions of this section, unless the devices or implements are required as evidence in state courts, to condemn the same as a nuisance, being contrary to the peace and good order of Macon-Bibb County and the safety of its citizens. The judge shall order the destruction of the implements and the order shall immediately be executed by the clerk of the municipal court. 
Sec. 16-27. - Protection of embankments. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company having its tracks within Macon-Bibb County below the street level to maintain embankments on either side thereof, unfenced or unprotected. It shall be the duty of the Macon-Bibb County Engineer to notify the railroad companies to build and maintain in safe condition suitable wire or wooden fencing at the top of the embankments, and along the entire length thereof. 
Sec. 16-28. - Injuring railroad property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, injure in any way or destroy any fencing, whether of wood, iron or other material, placed by and belonging to any railroad company on or around any bridge, embankment or other place in Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 16-29. - Boarding cars in motion. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to get on or off any railroad car in Macon-Bibb County while the car is in motion, except employees of the railroad company. 
Sec. 16-30. - Trespassers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an employee of any railroad company, or who is not on bona fide business with the company, or some officer, agent or employee thereof, to go or enter upon the railroad company's yard or freight depot premises within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 16-31. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-32. - Kicking cars. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to switch, transfer, or otherwise move a car upon, over or across any street in Macon-Bibb County unless the car is attached to an engine. Kicking cars over any street crossing in Macon-Bibb County is hereby expressly prohibited. 
Sec. 16-33. - Blocking crossings. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to permit any car, train or engine to stand upon or block any street or crossing in Macon-Bibb County for a time longer than four minutes between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., or six minutes between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Sec. 16-34. - Photo-Monitoring Systems to Enforce Passing Stopped School Buses. 
(a)  Bibb County School District is hereby authorized to install and operate a video-monitoring system in or on the school buses operated by the school system or may contract with a private vendor to do so on behalf of the school system for the purpose of recording violations of Title 40, Chapter 6, Article 8 of the Georgia Code. 
(b)  "Video-monitoring system " means a system with one or more camera sensors and computers installed and operated on a school bus that produces live (analog or digital) and recorded video of motor vehicles being operated in violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-163. All such video-monitoring systems installed shall, at a minimum, produce a recorded image of the license plate and shall record the activation status of at least one warning device as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-111 and § 40-8-115, and the time, date, and location of the vehicle when the image is recorded. 
(c)  The Owner (for purposes of this ordinance, the Owner shall be the registered owner of the vehicle according to the motor vehicles department of the state in which the car is registered and may include an individual or a company) of a vehicle shall be liable for a civil penalty of $300 for the first offense, $750 for the second and $1,000 for the third and later offenses imposed in accordance with this ordinance, if such owner is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a video monitoring system, to have failed to comply with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-163. 
(d)  Any person who receives a summons or notice of violation from a law enforcement officer pursuant to this ordinance may waive his right to appear and be formally tried for the offense. The waiver shall be effective when the person pays $300 to the Bibb County Treasurer's office within 15 business days after receipt of the summons or notice of the violation. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the exception in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-163, twenty percent (20%) all fines imposed for violation of this ordinance, shall be distributed to the Macon-Bibb County General Fund on behalf of public safety related to the Pedestrian Safety Review Board (10%) and Bibb County Office of the Solicitor General (10%). Ten percent (10%) of all fines imposed for violation of this ordinance shall be distributed to the Bibb County Board of Education. 
( Ord. of 3-21-2017(1), § 1 ; Ord. of 6-20-2017(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 16-35. - Unlawful use of services; injury to and interference with property of utilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Intentionally and without authority and permission from the owner thereof to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, pole, post, lamp, manhole cover, fireplug, other apparatus, or any accessories thereto belonging to Macon-Bibb County, the Macon-Bibb County Water and Sewerage Authority or any other public or private utility (hereinafter called owner) engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, the furnishing of sanitary sewer service, or other public services without the intent to pay the fair cost of repair or replacement thereof; 
(2)  Intentionally and without authority and permission from the owner utilize any such service or consume any such product with intent to not pay the regular charge therefor to the owner, but with the intent to deprive the owner thereof; 
(3)  Intentionally and without authority prevent a meter from registering the quantity of such service or product supplied with the intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefor; 
(4)  In any way interfere with the proper action of any such owner with intent to divert any service or product so as to deprive the owner of the regular charge therefor; or 
(5)  Otherwise intentionally and without authority use or cause to be used, without the consent of such owner, any product or service furnished, manufactured, sold or distributed by such owner with intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefor. 
(b)  Proof that a person performed any of the acts set forth in subsection (a) or proof that a person knowingly received the benefits of such acts or proof that any of the acts specified in subsection (a) were done on the premises in possession of a person, with that person's knowledge, shall be prima facie evidence that such person is responsible for such prohibited acts. 
(c)  Every person convicted in the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County of a violation of any provision of subsection (a) or (b) shall be punished as provided by the general penalty section of this Code. 
Sec. 16-36. - Acts involving government directed search and rescue efforts; prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any potentially life-threatening act which, by its nature, causes government directed search and rescue efforts to be launched and fail to immediately make his or her survival and presence known to proper law enforcement or search and rescue personnel. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall pay a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and perform not less than two hundred forty (240) hours of community service or both, in addition to any other punishment imposed by the court. 
Sec. 16-37. - False E-911 calls; punishment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make a false emergency telephone call to Macon-Bibb County's E-911 communications division, knowing at the time that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such emergency exists. 
(b)  An emergency call includes, but is not limited to a call that the caller terminates without first speaking or relaying an emergency message. 
(c)  To the extent that this section is preempted by state law, only state law shall apply. 
(d)  Every person concerned in the violation of this section is a party thereto and may be issued a citation for and convicted of violating this section. A person is concerned in the violation of this section if the person: 
(1)  Directly violates this section; 
(2)  Causes some other person to violate this section under such circumstances that the other person is not guilty of any crime either in fact or because of legal incapacity; 
(3)  Aids or abets in the violation of this section; or 
(4)  Advises, encourages, hires, counsels, or procures another to violate this section. 
(e)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a minimum one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine in addition to any other punishment that the municipal court may impose. 
Sec. 16-38. - Commercial solicitation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solicitation or to commercially solicit is any request made in person on a street, sidewalk, other public place, or any other place designated in subsection (b), without a permit, asking for an immediate donation of money or other thing of value, including the purchase of an item or service for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is a donation. Commercial solicitation shall not include passively standing or sitting with a sign or other indication that one is seeking donations without addressing the request to any specific person. 
Outreach service officer means an individual or officer authorized and designated by the sheriff to provide referral for access to community outreach services for individuals with mental health diagnoses and or drug and alcohol complications, or other medical or social services needs. The outreach service officer may make recommendations that an individual receive community outreach services, and may take reasonable steps toward directing the person to the appropriate community outreach program service provider, including but not limited to offering transportation to such provider. An outreach service officer shall not have the authority to compel an individual to receive community outreach services. 
Community outreach services means a public or private services provider that offers residential and/or rehabilitative medical or social services assistance, including but not limited to mental health treatment, drug or alcohol rehabilitation, or homeless assistance services for individuals in need thereof. The sheriff shall determine what service providers constitute a community outreach service provider for purposes of the section. 
Evaluation means the written assessment of an individual's mental health, the presence of drug or alcohol complications, or other medical or social services needs by visual analysis and/or by verbal communication with the individual. Evaluation may be performed by the designated outreach service officer or the law enforcement officer. The evaluation shall not serve as medical diagnosis or otherwise of the condition of the individual. An evaluation shall not serve to compel an individual to receive community outreach services. 
(b)  Commercial solicitation in certain areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to commercially solicit when the person solicited is in any of the following places within Macon-Bibb County, unless otherwise provided for in this section: 
(1)  On private property if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility, which includes any temporary use site (port-a-toilet); 
(3)  Within fifteen (15) feet of an automatic teller machine (ATM), provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of any parking lot pay box; 
(5)  Within fifteen (15) feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(6)  In any public transportation vehicle, or in any bus or subway station, or within fifteen (15) feet of any bus stop or taxi stand; 
(7)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(8)  In a parking lot or garage owned or operated by Macon-Bibb County, including entryways or exits and pay stations connected therewith; 
(9)  Within 15 feet of any valid vendor location, as defined in the Macon City Code Section 7-390. 
(c)  Nighttime commercial solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person to commercially solicit in Macon-Bibb County after sunset and before sunrise. 
(d)  Aggressive solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person to commercially solicit in Macon-Bibb County in any of the following manners: 
(1)  By blocking the path of the person solicited; or 
(2)  By following or walking alongside the person solicited; or 
(3)  By using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following refusal; or 
(4)  By accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another; or 
(5)  By any statement, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat. 
(e)  False or misleading solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false or misleading representation in the course of soliciting a donation. False or misleading representations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and stranded when such is not true; 
(2)  Stating or suggesting falsely that the solicitor is either a present or former member of the armed service indicated; 
(3)  Wearing or displaying an indication of physical disability, when the solicitor does not suffer the disability indicated; 
(4)  Use of any makeup or device to simulate a deformity; or 
(5)  Stating that the solicitor is homeless, when he or she is not. 
(f)  Penalties. Penalties for violations of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  First violation. Upon a first violation, the person accused of violating this section shall be issued a warning ticket, which shall not include a summons to appear before a court of proper jurisdiction or shall be issued a written citation, including a summons to appear before a court of proper jurisdiction for disposition of the case and the law enforcement officer issuing the citation may request an outreach service officer to make an onsite evaluation of the violator. 
a.  The outreach service officer or the law enforcement officer issuing the warning ticket or written citation may offer immediate referral and direction to community outreach services programs to each and every person issued a warning ticket or written citation. 
b.  In the event an outreach service officer is not available for any reason, the citation may note the law enforcement officer issuing the written warning or written citation violator evaluation of the violator. 
(2)  Second violation. Upon a second violation, the person accused of violating this section shall be issued a written citation, including a summons to appear before a court of proper jurisdiction for disposition of the case, and the law enforcement officer issuing the citation may request an outreach service officer to make an onsite evaluation of the violator. 
a.  The outreach service officer or the law enforcement officer issuing the warning ticket or written citation may offer immediate referral and direction to community outreach services programs to each and every person issued a warning ticket or written citation. 
b.  In the event an outreach service officer is not available for any reason, the citation may note the law enforcement officer issuing the written warning or written citation violator evaluation of the violator. 
c.  Upon conviction for a second violation, the violator may be sentenced to perform up to thirty (30) days of community service. 
(3)  Third violation, and subsequent violations. Upon a third violation, and subsequent violation, the person accused of violating this section shall be issued a citation, including a summons to appear before a court of proper jurisdiction for disposition of the case, and the law enforcement officer may request an outreach service officer to make an onsite evaluation of the violator. 
a.  The outreach service officer or the law enforcement officer issuing the warning ticket or written citation may offer immediate referral and direction to community outreach services programs to each and every person issued a warning ticket or written citation. 
b.  In the event an outreach service officer is not available for any reason, the citation may note the law enforcement officer issuing the written warning or written citation violator evaluation of the violator. 
c.  Upon conviction for a third violation, and subsequent violations, the violator may be sentenced to one (1) or more of the following: mandatory direction to a community outreach services program; the performance of up to thirty (30) days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and/or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(4)  To the extent permitted by state and federal law, information regarding citations noting the mental health of the violator pursuant to this section shall only be kept in Macon-Bibb County files and databases. 
(5)  To the extent permitted by state and federal law, records related to persons whom a citation has been issued which notes the mental health of the violator pursuant to this section shall be automatically expunged one (1) year after issuance of said citation. 
Sec. 16-39. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
(a)  Restrictions; exemptions. Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., provided, however, that this section shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the department to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
(6)  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  Enforcement. No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(c)  Penalties. Any violation of this section shall be enforced as a violation of the Macon-Bibb County Code of Ordinances and subject to the general penalty section of this Code. 
Sec. 16-40. - Failure to record foreclosure deeds. 
It shall be unlawful for the holder of a deed under power to fail to record such deed, as required by O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160, with the Clerk of Superior Court within ninety (90) days of a foreclosure sale of real property located within Macon-Bibb County. For each day the deed is unrecorded after the ninetieth day following the foreclosure sale, the holder of such unrecorded deeds under power for real property located within Macon-Bibb County shall be subject to a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) per day. Each day after the ninetieth day following the foreclosure sale that such deeds remain unrecorded shall be a separate violation of this section. Each individual deed under power that remains unrecorded shall be a separate violation of this section. 
Sec. 16-41. - Driving, parking of motor vehicles in public parks. 
(a)  In order to regulate the driving and parking of motor vehicles in public parks in Macon-Bibb County, it is hereby provided that it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park any motor vehicle of any kind at any time in any public park in Macon-Bibb County, except upon any streets, roadways and parking areas as may be constructed therein for the driving and parking of motor vehicles. 
(b)  A person driving or parking a motor vehicle in a public park as part of, or in connection with, an officially sanctioned festival or special event, or after having obtained written permission from the government department or agency operating the public park prominently displayed on the vehicle, shall not be a violation of this section. 
(c)  A person convicted of an offense of this section shall be punished by a fine of no less than two hundred ten dollars ($210.00). 
Sec. 16-42. - Reserved. 
Sec. 16-43. - Pedestrian, wheelchair, and powered mobility device violations of traffic rules and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian or a person in a wheelchair or a powered mobility device to violate any provision of the Uniform Rules of the Road, codified at O.C.G.A. § 40-6-90 et seq. or Chapter 28, Traffic and Parking. 
(b)  For the first violation of this section, or sections 28-32 through 28-34, in a period of two (2) years, a person found or pleading guilty shall be punishable by a maximum penalty of a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), provided that the municipal court judge may exercise his discretion in levying fines based upon the circumstances surrounding the violation. For subsequent violations within a two-year period, the maximum penalty shall be a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
(c)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to violations of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-95 or any other violation relating to a pedestrian under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(d)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-320, it shall not be a violation of this section for a person using a motorized wheelchair, also known as an electric personal assistive mobility device or as a powered mobility device, from operating such a device on a roadway with a speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less, or in a separately striped bicycle lane, in the same direction of travel authorized for motor vehicle traffic on that roadway. 
Chapter 17 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Board of health means the Macon-Bibb County board of health. 
Department means the department of parks and recreation. 
Director means the director of parks and recreation. 
Secretary or chairman means the secretary or chairman of the health board. 
Sec. 17-2. - Schedule of rates for use of golf courses required; location. 
(a)  A schedule of rates shall be established in the proper department regulations for the use and rental of any Macon-Bibb County golf courses. 
(b)  A copy of these rate schedules shall be kept on file and available to interested parties at the office of the Clerk of Commission as well as at the manager's office of each such facility. 
Sec. 17-3. - Commission to approve change in recreation areas; notice. 
No park, playground or other recreation area, owned by Macon-Bibb County, may be reduced in size, altered in any manner or diverted from its present use without the prior approval of the commission given at a regular meeting. No action may be taken by the commission upon any request or proposal to reduce in size, alter or divert from its present use any such park, playground or other recreation area until notice of the request or proposal has been published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in Macon-Bibb County. The form and contents of the notice shall be that specified by the commission. The Clerk of Commission shall be charged with the responsibility of causing the notice to be published and the cost of publication shall be borne by Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 17-4. - Prohibited hours. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized personnel of Macon-Bibb County, to be present on the premises any public park or recreation facility in Macon-Bibb County at any time from 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than authorized personnel of Macon-Bibb County to be on the premises of any public playground in Macon-Bibb County at any time from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. during the period of May 1 through October 31, and from 7:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. during the period from November 1 of any year through April 30 of the succeeding year. 
(c)  The prohibition stated above shall not apply to school playgrounds which are under the control of the county board of education or to any public park or playground in Macon-Bibb County where activities are being conducted by or under the sponsorship of the Macon-Bibb County recreation department or to Central City Park during the period of the of an approved festival, fair, or carnival. 
Sec. 17-5. - Youth sports events. 
The director of the parks and recreation department shall propose written regulations, or amendments thereto, governing youth sports events on Macon-Bibb County property, including, but not limited to the establishment of a code of conduct, a leadership training program, and a youths sports conduct committee. Regulations are subject to mayor and commission approval in accordance with the administration chapter of this Code. 
Sec. 17-6. - Tobesofkee recreation area exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the Tobesofkee Recreation Area whenever the specific provisions of article III are in conflict with this article. 
Sec. 17-7. - Prohibited activities with regard to park and recreation areas. 
The following activities are prohibited in any Macon-Bibb County park or recreation area: 
(1)  Climb or lie upon any tree, shrub, fence, statue, monument, art, or fountain which has not been expressly designated for that purpose. 
(2)  Enter or leave any park except through established entrances or exits and within established time periods. 
(3)  Gain or attempt to gain admittance to any park or facility in any park where a charge is made, without paying that charge. 
(4)  Use any area for changing clothing, other than an area designated for that purpose. 
(5)  Disregard the notices, prohibitions or directions on any park sign. 
(6)  Disobey the lawful order of a law enforcement officer. 
(7)  Place or display any sign or advertisement, except that this rule shall not apply to any signs or advertisements regarding any County sponsored or County authorized program, festival, or other event that occurs in the park. Signs or advertisements regarding County sponsored or County authorized programs, festivals or other events may be placed or displayed only with written permission by the Director of Recreation and Director of Parks & Beautification or their individual designee, and only at the locations and during the times authorized in writing by the Director of Recreation and Director of Parks & Beautification or their respective designee. 
(8)  Play, practice or otherwise participate in any game, sport or other recreational activity that is destructive to the lawn, plants, walls, road, or other infrastructure of a park, except at or upon places designated for that game, sport or recreational activity. 
(9)  Knowingly, or through reckless behavior, destroy or damage the lawn, plants, walls, road, or other infrastructure of a park, except by written permission from the Director of Recreation and Director of Parks & Beautification, or their respective designee. 
(10)  Drive stakes, posts, poles or any other device or dig holes for the purpose of securing stakes, posts, poles or any other device for any reason, including to erect a tent, stage or other structure, except by written permission from the Director of Recreation and Director of Parks & Beautification or their respective designee. 
(11)  Bring in, erect, or permit a minor child in one's custody to bring in and/or erect any inflatable amusements, amusements requiring water, or any amusements requiring an independent power source, except during permitted special events and festivals. This rule shall not apply to County pools and lakes where inflatables such as floats, tubes, water wings, etc. shall be permissible. For purposes of this subsection, inflatable amusements shall not include balls or balloons, and amusements requiring water shall not include water pistols. 
(12)  Bring in and abandon any animal in a park, including but not limited to cats, ducks, raccoons, opossums, fish and dogs, without the written permission of the Director of Recreation and Director of Parks & Beautification or their respective designee. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0093, § 1, 8-16-2016 ) 
Sec. 17-8. - Rosa Parks Square. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, to consume, sell and/or use any alcoholic beverage in Rosa Parks Square at any time, provided, however, that these prohibitions shall not become effective until the completion of Poplar Street Commons. Rosa Parks Square shall be designated as place of reflection for purposes of honoring Rosa Park's legacy upon completion of Poplar Street Commons, provided, however, that community concerts, dance classes, movie nights, and other community related activities shall continue to be allowed. The existing monuments, memorials, and historical markers located in Rosa Parks Square shall not be relocated or moved without the approval of the Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
( Ord. of 7-5-2017(1), § 1 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. of 7-5-2017(1), § 1 , set out provisions for use herein as § 17-7. Inasmuch as § 17-7 existed at the time of codification, those provisions have been included herein as § 17-8. 
Secs. 17-9—17-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREE PRESERVATION, PROTECTION AND REPLACEMENT 

Sec. 17-30. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote and protect the public health, safety, the environment, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees on Macon-Bibb County-owned property and public rights-of-way within the limits of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  Intent. It is the intent of the mayor and the commission that the terms of this article shall be construed so as to promote: 
(1)  The planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of desirable trees within the public rights-of-way and on Macon-Bibb County-owned property within Macon-Bibb County; and 
(2)  The protection of community residents from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the Macon-Bibb County from property damage, caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees located in the public rights-of-way and on Macon-Bibb County-owned property. 
(3)  An increase in holding capacity of water in the land, the reduction of air pollutants and carbon monoxide levels in the air, the minimization of increased temperature on lands with tree cover, the aesthetic qualities of the community, the maintenance or increase of property values, the prevention of siltation of the rivers, canals, ditches, and other waterways, the aesthetic quality provided by the natural tree cover on tracts of land being converted to urban development, and the prevention of soil erosion. 
Sec. 17-31. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all public rights-of-way, and Macon-Bibb County-owned property within the limits of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 17-32. - Definitions. 
As used within this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice for Macon-Bibb County (hereinafter, "Arboricultural Specifications Manual, or abbreviated as, ASM") means the ASM is a manual prepared by the Forester pursuant to this article containing regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance, protection, and removal of trees upon the public rights-of-way and Macon-Bibb County-owned property. 
Caliper means the diameter or thickness of the main stem of a young tree or sapling as measured at six inches above the ground level. This measurement is used for nursery grown trees having a diameter of four inches or less. 
Clearing means the removal of woody vegetation of two inches diameter or greater. 
Diameter means the diameter or width of the main stem of a tree as measured four and one-half feet above the natural grade at the base of a tree. Whenever a branch, split in the main trunk, limb, defect or abnormal swelling of the trunk occurs at this height, the diameter shall be measured at the nearest point above or below four and one-half feet at which a normal diameter occurs. 
Drip line means a vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree's branch tips down to the ground. 
Forester means the agent of Macon-Bibb County who is responsible for the administration of these standards and having the primary responsibilities of administration and enforcement of the Macon-Bibb County Tree Preservation, Protection, and Replacement Ordinance. 
Imminent danger means an appearance of threatened and impending injury or loss of property as would put a reasonable and prudent man to his instant defense. 
Land disturbing activity means excavation or construction work within the drip line of any tree in or upon any public property and/or change in natural drainage, excavation of any ditches, tunnels, trenches or laying of any drive within the root protection zone of any tree having all or any portion of its trunk in or upon any Macon-Bibb County property. 
Macon-Bibb County-owned property means property within the limits of Macon-Bibb County or Macon-Bibb County-owned property, and 
(1)  Owned by Macon-Bibb County in fee simple absolute, or 
(2)  Implied or expressly delegated or dedicated to the public for present or future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or for public easements. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind, including public utilities and governmental entities. 
Protective barrier means the minimum tree protection device shall be as described in the ASM. 
Property owner means the record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land. 
Responsible person means the person who removes a tree from Macon-Bibb County-owned property or a public right-of-way which must be replaced and maintained pursuant to section 17-35. 
Specimen tree means a tree which has been determined by the forester to be of high value because of its type, size, age or other professional criteria, and has been so designated in the official records of Macon-Bibb County. 
Tree means any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter of two inches or more when measured at a point six inches above the ground level and which normally attains an overall height of at least ten feet at maturity, usually with one main stem or trunk, but may have multiple trunks at the base, and many branches which contains lignin (wood) in the stems and limbs. 
Tree protection zone means the area surrounding a preserved or planted tree that is essential to that tree's health and survival, protected within the guidelines of this article, and is regulated and illustrated by the ASM. 
Tree commission means the entity created and described in section 17-33. 
Sec. 17-33. - Tree commission; establishment; composition; appointment of members; duties. 
(a)  The establishment, composition, and appointment of members. There shall be created a commission to be known and designated as the "tree commission" composed of fourteen (14) people. Seven (7) of said members shall be appointed by the mayor with the confirmation of the commission. Of the seven (7) members appointed by the mayor, one (1) shall be a representative of any of the historic districts of Macon, three (3) shall be citizens at large, one (1) shall be a contractor or developer, and two (2) shall be persons professionally trained in the field(s) such as urban forestry/arboriculture, botany, horticulture, or landscape architecture. The eighth member shall be the director of the department of parks and beautification, or his or her designee, who shall be an ex-officio member; the ninth member shall be the forester who shall be an ex-officio member; the tenth member shall be a member of the state forestry commission, or a designee, who shall be an ex-officio member; the eleventh member shall be the director of the Keep Macon-Bibb Beautiful Commission, or a designee, who shall be an ex-officio member; the twelfth member shall be a representative of the Georgia Power Company who shall be an ex-officio member; the thirteenth member shall be the director of the county extension service, or a designee, who shall be an ex-officio member; and the fourteenth member shall be the director of the Macon-Bibb County planning and zoning commission, or a designee, who shall be an ex-officio member. No ex-officio member shall have the right to vote on commission matters. All members of the commission shall serve without pay. The seven (7) members appointed by the mayor shall be appointed as follows: two (2) for two (2) years, three (3) for three (3) years, and two (2) for four (4) years, and shall serve until their successors are duly appointed and confirmed by council. Successors to those members appointed by the mayor shall thereafter be appointed for terms of four (4) years. Vacancies caused by death, resignation, or otherwise, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointments are made. The mayor may recommend removal or replacement of a member of the commission for nonperformance of duty. 
Nonperformance of duty is defined herein to mean three consecutive unexcused absences from commission meetings. 
(b)  Duties of the tree commission. The duties of said "tree commission" shall be as follows: 
(1)  To study the problems and determine the needs of Macon-Bibb County in connection with its tree planting, maintenance and removal programs and the urban forestry management plan. 
(2)  The tree commission shall provide consultation and assistance to the forester on any matter pertaining to the "Macon-Bibb County Tree Preservation, Protection, and Replacement Ordinance" and its enforcement. The topics under which this advice and consultation may be given may include, but are not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Amendments to the Macon-Bibb County Tree Preservation, Protection, and Replacement Ordinance, and alterations or revisions to the ASM and alterations or revisions of the urban forestry management plan; 
b.  Policy concerning selection, planting, maintenance, and removal of trees within Macon-Bibb County, on Macon-Bibb County-owned property or public rights-of-way; 
c.  Establishment of educational and informational programs to encourage proper maintenance of trees. 
(3)  The tree commission, upon receipt of a written appeal from any person who disagrees with a decision of the forester shall hear all issues of the disputes which arise between the forester and any such person whenever those issues involve matters of the interpretation or enforcement of the ASM, the urban forestry management plan, or of the interpretation or enforcement of this article. The decision of a majority of the appointed members of the tree commission with regard to such dispute shall be final. Any person who disagrees with the decision of the tree commission may appeal said decision to municipal court as set forth in section 17-41. 
(4)  To assist the administration of Macon-Bibb County, as well as the commission members and citizens of Macon-Bibb County, in the dissemination of news and information regarding the protection, maintenance, removal and planting of trees on Macon-Bibb County-owned property or public rights-of-way, and to make such recommendations from time to time to the mayor and commission as to desirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for Macon-Bibb County. 
(5)  To provide at least quarterly meetings and special meetings at which the subject of trees may be discussed by a quorum of the members of the commission, officers, and personnel of Macon-Bibb County, and all other persons interested in the tree program. 
(6)  That within a reasonable time after the appointment of said commission and the approval of the members thereof, upon call of the mayor, said commission shall meet and organize by the election of a chairperson and the appointment of a secretary. The said commission shall then provide for the adoption of rules and procedures and for the holding of regular and special meetings as said commission shall deem advisable and necessary in order to perform the duties set forth. 
(7)  To assist the planning and zoning commission in the enforcement of regulations and procedures adopted by the planning and zoning commission for the purpose of regulating trees on private property. The provisions of this article shall not be binding on or affect the commission's regulations and procedures. 
( Ord. of 2-21-2017(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 17-34. - Forester; duties; authority. 
(a)  Duties. 
(1)  The forester is hereby charged with the duty to enforce this section. 
(2)  The forester, with the assistance of the tree commission, shall develop, and each subsequent year, update, the urban forestry management plan. The plan shall outline the urban forestry program activities for a minimum of the next five (5) years. This plan shall describe the urban forestry activities to be undertaken by Macon-Bibb County, the reasons for those activities, the possible funding source(s), the means of accomplishing the activities, the alternatives available to Macon-Bibb County to fund or accomplish the activities, the projected date of completion, and the impact if the activities are not completed. Activities may include but are not limited to street tree inventory, planting, tree removal, personnel training, beautification projects, and educational projects. 
(3)  The forester, with the assistance of the tree commission, shall develop and periodically review and revise, as necessary, the ASM. This manual shall contain regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance, tree protection zones, and removal of trees upon Macon-Bibb County-owned property, and the public rights-of-way. 
(4)  The forester shall cause the urban forestry management plan and the ASM, and all revisions and amendment to it, to be published and promulgated and shall cause one (1) copy of the ASM, and all revisions and amendments to it, to be available for public inspection at the office of the county clerk. Notice that such information is available for public inspection shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within Macon-Bibb County at least one (1) weekday of each of four (4) consecutive weeks immediately following the initial availability of the ASM, or revisions or amendments thereto. The ASM, and any revisions and amendments thereto, shall become effective upon approval by the mayor and commission. The most recent version of the ASM used by the City of Macon shall remain in effect until such time as a new ASM is adopted by the commission. The ASM, once passed by the commission, becomes effective upon the mayor signing the same. Copies shall also be made available to the Macon-Bibb County planning and zoning commission and engineering department of Macon-Bibb County. 
(5)  The forester shall maintain on file in the office of the Clerk of Commission for any interested persons, copies of the tree ordinance, information about the activities of the tree commission, copies of the ASM, and copies of the urban forestry management plan. 
(6)  The forester shall administer the urban forestry management plan, the Macon-Bibb County Tree Preservation, Protection, and Replacement Ordinance, and the provisions of the ASM. 
(7)  The forester shall perform whatever acts are necessary, including the planting and maintenance of trees and the removal of undesirable trees located on public rights-of-way or Macon-Bibb County-owned property to conform to the urban forestry management plan, the ASM, and this article. Pursuant to this duty, the forester, in accordance with normal Macon-Bibb County procedures regarding contracts, may arrange contractual agreements. 
(8)  The forester shall review and issue a written decision on all requests for tree removal as are required by this chapter. The forester shall obtain, as a condition precedent to the issuance of an approval, the written plan and agreement of each person who applies that he or she will comply with the requirements of this chapter, the urban forestry management plan, and the tree replacement requirements. The plan and agreement shall include a completion date. The forester shall have the right to inspect all work performed in public rights-of-way or Macon-Bibb County-owned property. 
(9)  The forester shall establish a program of public information and education that will encourage the planting, maintenance, protection, or removal of trees on private property in furtherance of the goals of the urban forestry management plan. 
(10)  The forester shall assist the Macon-Bibb County planning and zoning commission on any actions affecting the planting, maintenance, protection, or removal of trees in Macon-Bibb County under the commission's jurisdiction. 
(11)  No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere with the forester or his agents while engaged in the execution or enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. The forester shall have the authority to regulate the protection, maintenance, removal and planting of trees on streets, parks, public places and other tree protection zones, on public rights-of-way and Macon-Bibb County-owned property within the limits or on any Macon-Bibb County-owned property. Such authority shall include the assurance that this article is enforced and the issuance of citations for the violation of these provisions. 
Sec. 17-35. - General protection and regulation of trees on Macon-Bibb County-owned property and public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Prior to any land disturbing activity within the tree protection zone, as defined in section 17-32, a person who owns property adjacent to Macon-Bibb County-owned property or the public rights-of-way shall obtain approval of the forester. The property owner shall consult with and obtain approval from the forester prior to removing, transporting, destroying, breaking, cutting, spraying, defacing, or otherwise disturbing any tree located on adjacent Macon-Bibb County-owned property or in the tree protection zone. The forester shall respond to such request as expeditiously as possible, but in any event within sixty (60) days. If the forester has not responded within sixty (60) days, the forester will be presumed to have approved such request, unless otherwise informed. The property owner shall not allow any gaseous, liquid, chemical or solid substance which is harmful to trees to come into contact with, set fire to, or burn any tree on the adjacent Macon-Bibb County-owned property or any adjacent public rights-of-way. 
(b)  No person shall cut, damage, carve, top, attach or place any rope, wire, sign, poster, handbill, or any other thing on any tree or woody shrubs growing in the public right-of-way or on Macon-Bibb County-owned property without consulting and obtaining approval from the forester. 
(c)  No person shall directly or indirectly place stone, cement, or any substance in or about the tree(s) growing in public rights-of-way or on Macon-Bibb County-owned property which will impede the free entrance of water or air to the root system of such trees without consulting and obtaining approval from the forester. 
(d)  No person shall attach or place any rope, wire, sign, poster, handbill, or any other thing on any tree or woody shrub growing in the public right-of-way or on Macon-Bibb County-owned property without consulting and obtaining approval from the forester. 
(e)  All actions required to preserve and protect trees, and to prevent soil erosion affected by this chapter shall be performed in accordance with the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice Manual, or ASM. 
(f)  This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit Macon-Bibb County, utility companies (such as gas, electricity, cable, and telephone) and such other service providers from constructing and maintaining easements, safe clearances and/or rights-of-way for utility lines. All utilities and service providers shall notify the forester in writing of any land-disturbing activity affecting trees covered by this article prior to conducting such activity, except in cases of an emergency. All companies, suppliers and/or agencies removing trees shall execute an agreement recognizing the need to minimize the cutting, trimming or removal of trees which do not frustrate or substantially interfere with the supply of service. 
(g)  The forester's permission must be obtained prior to planting any trees in public rights-of-way or on any Macon-Bibb County-owned property. Certain types of trees are inappropriate for planting along public rights-of-way. Trees placed on such property without the permission of the forester shall be subject to removal at the expense of the person who planted such trees. 
Sec. 17-36. - Tree replacement requirements. 
(a)  Street rights-of-way trees that are in sound condition but are to be removed to facilitate construction of driveways, utilities, curbs, sidewalks, or street widening must be replaced using the caliper and/or diameter as the replacement factor as specified in the ASM. Upon the removal of each tree, whether approved by request or unlawful, this article requires mitigation for trees removed with replacement trees of equal value and at least two-inch caliper. The aggregate or combined caliper inches of replacement trees shall equal the total diameter inches (dbh) of the tree(s) removed. Where the forester cannot determine the dbh because of prior removal of a tree, the forester shall determine the dbh in accordance with the latest revision of "Estimating DBH from stump diameter for 15 Southern Species" as published by the U.S. Forestry Service. Where the species removed is not included in the above publication, the forester shall select a species closest to the type removed. 
(b)  Any person responsible for replacing removed tree(s) shall also be responsible for maintaining the health of all replacement trees for a period of one (1) year from the date of planting. The person shall replace any tree that dies during this time period. 
(c)  Any person who violates the tree replacement requirements or who fails to comply shall be charged the cost of replacement of said tree or at least five hundred dollars ($500.00), whichever is greater. The replacement value of trees shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of "Guide for Plant Appraisal" as published by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(d)  Replacement tree species and number shall be determined by the forester. Replacement shall be reasonably confined to the area from which Macon-Bibb County's tree was removed. Acceptable replacement could include planting on public rights-of-way, Macon-Bibb County-owned property, or private property with the approval of the forester. 
(e)  Where the forester has determined that irreparable damage has occurred to tree(s) on public rights-of-way, on Macon-Bibb County owned property or within a tree protection zone, the tree(s) must be removed and replaced by the responsible person(s) in accordance with the tree replacement requirements. 
Sec. 17-37. - Public nuisances. 
(a)  The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this article: any tree or portion thereof whether located on Macon-Bibb County-owned property, public rights-of-way or on private property which: 
(1)  By reason of location or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public; 
(2)  Obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street light or street sign; 
(3)  Dangerously obstructs the view of motorists as such may be determined by the traffic engineer pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Right to inspect. The forester shall have the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located a tree or portions thereof, that is reasonably suspected to pose an imminent danger or a public nuisance. 
(c)  Abatement. All nuisances described within this article shall be abated pursuant to nuisance chapter of this Code. When a dead or diseased tree which is alleged to constitute a nuisance is brought to the attention of the forester, the forester, in his or her discretion, may submit a written opinion to the director of the parks and recreation department or the director the department of business development services, whichever department has appropriate code enforcement jurisdiction over the property upon which such nuisance is located. Upon receiving a written opinion from the forester that any tree or part thereof is a nuisance, the director, or his or her designee, shall commence nuisance abatement proceedings pursuant to the nuisance chapter of this Code. In such cases where danger to the public is imminent, the director shall have the right, but not the obligation, to enter the property and abate the nuisance. 
Sec. 17-38. - Notice, violation and civil penalty. 
(a)  If any person violates this article or fails to comply with any provision of this article, the forester, or his designee, shall notify the person of the violation in writing. Said notice shall be delivered in person or by certified mail. The notice shall set forth the actions to be taken to correct the violation within fifteen (15) days. Failure of any person to correct the violation shall constitute an offense of this code. The forester may grant a written extension not to exceed sixty (60) days. Any person who disagrees with the finding of the forester may, prior to the expiration of the fifteen (15) period, or any extension, file a written appeal with the tree commission. An appeal shall be considered filed if delivered in person or certified mail to the tree commission. 
(b)  If the person notified fails to correct the violation or file an appeal with the tree commission within the allowable time period, the forester shall issue a summons so charging the person notified and requiring such person to appear in court for a hearing at a given time, place and date. Said summons shall be in the form of a written complaint setting forth the violation and the identity of the person complained against. Said summons shall be delivered in person or by certified mail. Municipal court, state court, and magistrate court shall have concurrent jurisdiction over violations of this article. 
(c)  If the court determines that the person summoned did violate this chapter, the court shall order mitigation as prescribed by subsection (d). In addition to mitigation, the court may impose a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation of the article. Each day during which any violation of the provisions of this article shall occur or continue shall be a separate violation. 
(d)  If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this article, the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree located on Macon-Bibb County-owned property or public rights-of-way is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the tree replacement requirements. 
Sec. 17-39. - Emergencies. 
In case of official emergencies, such as windstorms, ice storms, or other disasters, the requirements of this division shall be waived so that the requirements of this article would in no way hinder private or public work to restore order in Macon-Bibb County. This work shall follow maintenance standards as outlined by the forester. 
Sec. 17-40. - Moving large objects. 
No person shall move any building or other large object which may injure trees or parts thereof in public rights-of-way or on Macon-Bibb County-owned property, without first having obtained the approval of the forester. 
Sec. 17-41. - Appeals. 
An appeal of a decision of the tree commission shall be taken to the municipal court. The municipal court, upon receipt of an appeal, shall have the authority and duty to consider and act upon the application. 
Secs. 17-42—17-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TOBESOFKEE RECREATION AREA 

Sec. 17-50. - Established. 
There is hereby established the "Tobesofkee Recreation Area," which is defined to mean that geographical area of Macon-Bibb County, title to which was acquired by the Bibb County pursuant to an agreement with the United States of America for the Tobesofkee project, including, but not limited to, the lake area, recreational areas, the dam, easements and other rights in land and property acquired for the project. 
Sec. 17-51. - Manager. 
There shall be a Manager of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area who shall be a representative of the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County to operate, maintain and supervise the Tobesofkee Recreation Area, and to enforce the regulations hereby enacted, together with such other regulations as may hereafter be adopted. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Director of Parks and Recreation, and shall have such compensation and other emoluments as from time to time shall be fixed. He or she shall make statistical and progress reports to the governing authority as it shall direct with respect to the operation of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area, and shall account to the governing authority for all sums collected as fees or charges as well as for other public funds coming into his or her hands, at such intervals and in such manner as the governing authority may from time to time determine. He or she and his or her assistants and employees who handle public funds shall give such bond payable to Macon-Bibb County as from time to time shall be required. He or she may from time to time delegate duties to rangers and other recreation area personnel as he or she may determine. 
Sec. 17-52. - Violations of regulations. 
The Tobesofkee Recreation Area is hereby declared to be closed to any person or member of the public who violates the regulations specified in Article I of this Chapter. 
Sec. 17-53. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person who does any act prohibited by this article or who fails to do any act required by this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), by sentence to work on the streets or public works for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifty (50) days, any or all of these penalties in the discretion of the judge. Municipal court, state court, and magistrate court shall have concurrent jurisdiction over violations of this article. 
Sec. 17-54. - Annual permit; when available; privileges obtained. 
(a)  The governing authority of Macon-Bibb County may from time to time establish a fee and costs for the issuance of annual permits. 
(b)  Persons desiring to purchase an annual permit may do so upon payment of the fee currently in effect plus $1.00 as administrative costs subject to the following terms: 
(1)  Purchase of an annual permit will entitle the holder thereof, the holder's spouse, minor children and children over the age of 18 who reside with their parents and who are students or who are not wage earners to access to the parks and the lake in the Tobesofkee Recreation Area for general purposes. 
(2)  For the fee of $1.00, only one card per family will be issued. Upon payment of $2.00 per card, up to two additional cards may be issued to members of the immediate family of the person who purchased the initial card, but no card will be issued to any person under the age of 16 years. Each card shall show the name of the person to whom issued and shall contain such other information as the park superintendent may determine to be appropriate to provide a reasonable identification. 
(3)  Payment of the fee does not entitle the holder to engage in commercial activity. 
(4)  An annual permit will be valid for a period of 12 months without any limitation as to the number of days during the 12-month period upon which it may be used unless the same is previously revoked. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, annual permits will not be recognized as valid unless the bearer has on his or her person a driver's license or other document to demonstrate that the bearer and persons in the bearer's company are persons who are authorized to make use of the annual permit. 
(6)  The annual permit may be revoked for violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area. 
(7)  In addition to the foregoing, the following rules and regulations apply to property abutting the 369-foot line around the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area or otherwise abutting property of Macon-Bibb County around the lake and to the owners of such property: 
a.  Persons who own property abutting the aforesaid 369-foot contour line on Macon-Bibb County property and who maintain docks or boathouses, either or both, below the 369-foot contour line or on Macon-Bibb County property are required, in addition to procuring the construction permit otherwise required, to obtain an annual permit as a condition to the construction and to the continued use of the area below the 369-foot contour line or Macon-Bibb County property for such docks or boathouses, either or both, and to pay the fee for such permit. 
b.  Such annual permits shall, upon payment of the fee prescribed therefore, be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of purchase and each such property owner shall, on or before such expiration date, renew such permit by paying the annual fee then currently prescribed so that permits will be continuously in force. 
c.  Any property owner who fails or refuses to renew the annual permit and pay the fee therefor as prescribed in this section on or before the due date therefore, shall be deemed delinquent and such fee shall thereupon bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from its due date until paid. 
d.  In the event any property owner shall fail to pay the Macon-Bibb County the fee for the annual permit, such fee being hereby levied, within 90 days from its due date, then and in such event, the tax commissioner shall issue in the name of said board an execution against such delinquent property owner for the amount due and unpaid together with all costs thereon which costs are hereby fixed at $10.00, and each execution shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof, the fraction of a month being charged as a full month. 
e.  The execution so issued shall bind and be a lien upon all real property of such delinquent property owner abutting the 369-foot contour line around the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area and shall be a special lien superior to all other liens except liens for ad valorem taxes upon such property. Such execution shall be collectible and defenses thereto may be made in the manner provided by law with respect to ad valorem taxes. 
f.  In the event a property owner has failed to pay the fees hereby levied for annual permits for two consecutive calendar years, and the second of such fees shall been delinquent for 12 months, Macon-Bibb County shall notify, by certified mail, return receipt requested, the property owner of such delinquency, and such notice shall contain a statement to the effect that the property owner is directed to remove the dock, boathouse, and other improvements placed upon the property at such property owner's expense within a period of 30 days from the date of such notice which shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the property owner fails to remove such improvements within such 30-day period, Macon-Bibb County may remove the same, and charge the cost thereof to the property owner. The cost of such removal shall be evidenced by an execution to be issued by the commission which execution shall have the same rank, dignity and lien upon the real property of the owner abutting Macon-Bibb County property as that provided above for annual permit fees. 
g.  Liability for payment of the annual permit fees shall not be affected or abated by a change in ownership of property abutting the 369-foot contour line or otherwise abutting Macon-Bibb County property, but each purchaser of such property is hereby charged with notice that is such purchaser's responsibility to pay any accumulated an unpaid annual permit fees which may have accrued prior to his or her purchase of the property. The property so purchased shall be subject to the same lien as that above described, it being the intent hereof that a purchaser of property shall have the same obligations with respect to the payment of annual permit fees as such purchaser would have with the payment of ad valorem taxes. 
Sec. 17-55. - Docks, boathouses and seawalls. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Boathouse, as used in this article, a boathouse is an enclosed structure along the shoreline in which a boat is kept. 
Dock, as used in this article, a dock means a wooden-decked structure, supported on piles and used to give passengers access to vessels. 
(b)  General. Any proposed land disturbance above the 360-foot contour line (normal water elevation) within 25 feet of said line may require a buffer variance. The determination as to whether or not a buffer variance will be required is to be made by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division or it's designee. This includes the construction of docks, boat launching facilities and seawalls. (O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1, DNR/EPD Rules and Regulations 391-3-7.) 
Persons who at the time of application thereof own property abutting 369-foot contour line of the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area and who hold current, valid, permits as described in section 17-54 and this section may construct a dock and/or boathouse at the 360-foot contour level upon the following conditions. 
(c)  Application. 
(1)  A person desiring to construct a dock or boathouse, either or both shall first make application to the Manager of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area on application forms provided by the same. In addition to the following, the applicant shall submit information prescribed by the Tobesofkee Recreation Area and the department of business development services. 
a.  A statement of the proposed location and length of a dock or boathouse as well as the height thereof which may not exceed the length and height hereinafter specified. 
b.  The plans and specifications by which the dock or boathouse, either or both are to be constructed shall be in such reasonable detail as may be prescribed by the department of business development services and shall be such as to make adequate provision for the safety of those using the dock or boathouse. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the application, plans and specifications by the Manager of Tobesofkee Recreation Area who shall forward same said documents to the Macon-Bibb County engineering Department; and they shall examine the same and visit the proposed site with the applicant. If they find that the application does not meet the location requirements or other requirements herein specified; they shall reject the same, stating in writing the reasons why it was rejected. 
(3)  Once the application is approved by the Macon-Bibb County engineering department, the applicant shall be forwarded to the business development services who shall examine the same together with the accompanying plans and specifications for compliance with applicable construction codes enforced in Macon-Bibb County. The department of business development services shall confer with the applicant if after the examination additional details or information is necessary to assure that the completed structure if built in accordance therewith will comply with such codes. Once the department approves the application, a construction permit shall be issued subject to fees as prescribed by the department of business development services and in accordance with the department's administrative procedures. 
(d)  Requirements. 
(1)  Any such dock or boathouse shall be located in front of the property or the person desiring to construct the same at a point which would place the entire structure between the sidelines of his or her property if such sidelines were extended to the nearest points on the 360-foot contour line and intersected with such contour line as nearly as possible at right angles. 
(2)  A dock or boathouse shall not be constructed where there is less than 100 feet of frontage at the 360-foot contour line. The shoreline will be measured from pin to pin. 
(3)  Docks or boathouses may have located thereon an enclosed area for recreational purposes, provided that it not exceed the maximum allotted boathouse dimensions. The total structure, including pilings, dock, boathouse and roof, shall extend no higher than 20 feet above the 360-foot contour line. Except for the installation of one water line to aid in the cleaning of fish and for similar purposes, there shall be no plumbing installed. Such area shall not be used for sleeping quarters or other human habitation, nor shall it contain bath or toilet facilities. No additional enclosed boathouses will be permitted. Open-sided boathouses will be permitted as long as they meet all other requirements and specification as set forth herein. Only one enclosed storage area may be located on open-sided boathouses. 
(4)  No dock shall be constructed any longer than is necessary to reach from the 360-foot contour line to a horizontal length of 40 feet, nor longer than is necessary to reach a ten-foot depth of water vertically, whichever is the shorter distance. As an additional limitation, no dock shall be constructed in such manner as to occupy in length or breadth more than 25 percent of the width of a slough or cove. 
(5)  Flotation docks and boathouses are not permitted. 
(6)  Whenever an existing dock or boathouse is to be replaced (or remodeled or repaired to an extent which exceeds in cost 50 percent of the value thereof), a new application shall be made in accordance with the procedures established in this section and such replacement, remodeling or reconstruction shall not occur until such time as all required approvals have been obtained. Existing boathouses may be repaired or replaced but not expanded. If an enclosed boathouse is torn down, destroyed or removed for any reason, any replacement shall be constructed in accordance with all current regulations and requirements of this section. 
(7)  If construction is not substantially commenced within six months after the final approval of an application, whether the same be for a new dock or boathouse, either or both, or for the repair, replacement or reconstruction of either or both, the permit shall expire, and the applicant shall not proceed until after having filed a new application and obtained approval thereof as provided in subsection (b). 
(8)  The annual permit required under section 17-54 and issued under the provisions of this section shall remain from its date as long as the dock and/or boathouse are properly constructed and maintained in a safe and presentable condition and for so long as the holder thereof is the owner of the property which enabled him to apply for the permit in the first instance. A permit issued under the provisions of this subsection will be transferred to a successor in title of such abutting land if there are no changes in the conditions which permitted the initial authorization and so long as the dock and/or boathouse are maintained in a presentable and safe condition. 
(9)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain docks and boathouses in a safe condition. All docks and boathouses are subject to periodic inspections by representatives of Tobesofkee Recreation Area. If a structure is found to be dilapidated or unsafe, the department of business development services shall be notified to inspect the same and to notify the responsible party of any repairs needed for continued use of the dock or boathouse. Failure to comply with such directions shall be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(10)  Nevertheless it is a condition of the issuance of the permit that the holder thereof, or his or her successor in title, will nevertheless remove at his or her sole cost and expense any dock or boathouse and restore the area to its original condition upon 60 days written notice from the director of the department of business development services. This provision is made in view of the fact that the location of the dock and/or boathouse are upon public property and the owner of the abutting property acquires no vested right to continue to use and occupy such public property. 
(11)  Any person holding a permit for the construction, replacement, reconstruction or repair of a dock or boathouse shall be deemed to have a agreed to comply with all reasonable rules and regulations now or hereafter promulgated by Macon-Bibb County and the directions of the Manager of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area and the department of business development services with respect to the construction, maintenance or use of such dock or boathouse as well as with respect to the use of the lake or other areas of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area. 
(12)  No recreation area constructed in connection with a dock or boathouse shall at any time be used for human habitation. Recreational uses which generate noise, odors or other practices which constitute a nuisance shall be grounds for revocation of the permit herein granted and for ordering the owner to remove the facility. 
(13)  Reserved. 
(14)  The terms "owner," "responsible party," "applicant," "holder of the permit" and similar words and phrases shall be construed to mean the person owning private property abutting the 369-foot contour line and the Tobesofkee Recreation Area, and are not intended to import any ownership by anyone of the area between the 360- and 369-foot contour lines. "Owner" also designated the person for compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(15)  Any person aggrieved by action of the Manager, Tobesofkee Recreation Area, or the department of business development services under the provisions of this section may appeal in writing to the commission within 30 days after receipt of such written notice of a decision of either official and the commission shall hold a hearing upon the appeal at which the appellant shall be entitled to be present and present evidence to support the appeal. The decision of the commission on the appeal shall be final. 
(16)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, and notwithstanding any limitation in the building code of Macon-Bibb County, the department of business development services is constituted as the agency for the enforcement of the Tobesofkee regulations to the extent that they relate to electrical installations to and from docks and boathouses and as they relate to regulations respecting the potable water systems for docks and boathouses. The director of the department of business development services, or his or her designee, is hereby vested with full authority and power to enforce the provisions of the building code including the power to issue summonses or citations for violations of such codes. The director, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to administer the provisions of the building code, to make inspections and to take such action as necessary, proper and convenient to cause violators of the code to be punished. 
(e)  Specific requirements for docks or boathouses. 
(1)  Only one boat dock or boathouse is permitted on each lot. Permanent structures shall be a minimum of 15 feet from side property lines. 
(2)  Boat docks or boathouses shall extend no further than 40 feet from the 360-foot contour line. A shorter length may be required where a narrow cove is involved or if the dock would extend in front of an adjacent lot. Under no circumstances will a dock be permitted where access of adjacent property owners would be limited. Overall concerns for safety shall dictate the location and length of docks which will be approved by the Lake Tobesofkee Manager or his or her designated agent. 
(3)  Docks shall be stationary. (No floating docks will be permitted.) 
(4)  Docks or boathouses shall comply with the following: 
a.  Maximum of six-foot wide cat walk. 
b.  Maximum platform size shall be 12 feet by 20 feet. 
c.  If a dock (walkway) and boathouse are constructed as a single unit the width shall be no greater than 30 feet. 
d.  Maximum interior dimension of the boathouse shall be 24 feet by 26 feet. 
e.  Maximum extension into the lake is 40 feet. 
f.  Maximum roof height is 20 feet above the 360-foot contour line (normal elevation). 
g.  Minimum size of water line is one-inch and must be used only for cleaning fish. 
h.  No sanitary plumbing is permitted, nor can recreation area be used for sleeping purposes or human habitation. 
(5)  Boat lifts attached to docks must be approved prior to installation. A maximum of two full-sized boat lifts will be allowed per dock as long as the overall length is within the required guidelines and is approved by the Manager of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area or his or her designee. The boat lift cannot be placed closer than 15 feet from the adjoining property line. Each full-sized lift may have a matching canopy frame. The frame must be dome-shaped. No pitch frame canopy will be allowed. The color and type of material must be approved by the Manager of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area or his or her designee prior to installation. Natural colors are recommended (dark blue or dark green). 
(6)  Personal watercraft (PWC) ramps must be approved prior to installation. A maximum of two PWC ramps may be attached to a dock or boathouse as long as the overall length is within the required guidelines and is approved by the Manager of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area or his or her designee. The PWC ramp may be constructed of wood or high-density polyethylene and must be maintained in a safe and presentable condition. 
(f)  Requirements for seawalls. Persons who at the time of application thereof own property abutting the 369-foot contour line of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area and who hold current, valid permits as described in section 17-54 may construct a seawall at the 360-foot contour level upon the following conditions: The construction of a new seawall may require a buffer variance permit from the department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(1)  A person desiring to construct a seawall shall first make application to the Manager of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area. In addition to the following, the applicant shall submit information prescribed by the Tobesofkee Recreation Area and the department of business development services. 
(2)  Seawall construction will require proper erosion and sedimentation controls. After completion of the seawall and until the vegetative buffer is restored, a silt fence must be installed and maintained just behind the new seawall at ground level. 
(3)  Seawall construction plans should show the following: 
a.  The length of shoreline to be fronted by the seawall. 
b.  The type of foundation to be installed and depth below ground level. 
c.  The type of materials to be used for construction of the seawall. 
d.  The height of the seawall should be no higher than necessary to stabilize shoreline. 
(4)  The distance between the proposed seawall and the existing shoreline shall not exceed two feet. 
(5)  The location of the proposed seawall must be staked at 25-foot intervals in order for inspectors to assure the original contour is adhered to as close as possible. For very irregular shoreline, stakes shall be no more than ten feet apart. 
(6)  Creosote timbers are prohibited for new seawall construction. 
Any variance from the requirements as set forth in this section must be approved by the commission. 
Sec. 17-56. - Launching facilities and community boat docks to serve subdivisions and apartments. 
Where there are subdivisions or apartment properties whose boundaries abut the 369-foot contour line at Lake Tobesofkee, the property owners' association of the subdivision or the apartment owner or a tenants' association may make application to the commission for approval to construct boat launching facilities and/or community boat docks. In determining whether a permit will be granted, the commission shall be authorized to take into account all relevant facts affecting the lake, the revenues derived therefrom, impact on other property owners, as well as other relevant considerations. If approved, board launching facilities and/or community boat docks may be established under the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant shall be fully responsible for the maintenance of the boat-launching facilities and/or community boat docks and preservation of safety and cleanliness. 
(2)  The applicant agrees to abide by all rules and regulations as set forth by this Code and the Manager of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area. 
(3)  Upon failure of the applicant or successor to maintain the facility or boat dock in a clean, safe and aesthetically satisfactory condition, the permit may be revoked by Macon-Bibb County. 
(4)  In determining whether to issue a permit, the governing authority may take into consideration this entire article, and particularly subsection 17-55(d)(10). 
(5)  Approval of such a facility and/or boat dock and its subsequent operation by the applicant or a successor to the applicant shall entitle the residents of the subdivision or apartment complex to use the lake for swimming, fishing, boating or skiing purposes but only if such users hold a current valid annual permit as described in subsection 17-54(b). 
Sec. 17-57. - Rights granted to property owners; reservations. 
(a)  Persons owning property abutting the 369-foot contour line around Lake Tobesofkee are hereby authorized to use so much of the Tobesofkee Park property as lies between the 369-foot contour line and the 360-foot contour line and between the sidelines of the property of such persons which would exist if the property line began at the present terminus of such property lines at the 369-foot contour line and extended to the 360-foot contour line so that such extended side property lines would intersect with the 360-foot contour line at the nearest point so that such extended sideline will be the shortest distance between the 369-foot contour line and 360-foot contour line. If, by reason of physical circumstances such as land contours, the application of the foregoing rule would deny a person owning property abutting the 369-foot contour line reasonable access to the 360-foot contour line, or would otherwise produce a manifest absurdity, the Manager of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area is authorized, with due consideration to the effects on adjoining property owners, to specify how the sidelines of the property of such owner will be extended so as to afford some access to the 360-foot contour line. However, in order to construct a dock or boathouse there must be a minimum width of 100 feet of water frontage at the 360-foot contour line. 
(b)  The use and occupancy which may be made by abutting property owners shall be in common with that of the general public and shall be such as is afforded to the public with respect to other Macon-Bibb County property and rights-of-way. 
(c)  Notwithstanding, Macon-Bibb County reserves the full and complete right to flood at will such area, and to install therein public utilities, including, but not limited to, water and sewer lines and to maintain the same or to permit the Macon-Bibb County water and sewerage authority to do so. Macon-Bibb County further reserves full right to make such use of the area as it shall deem necessary or convenient in the maintenance of the lake itself. 
(d)  Macon-Bibb County shall have no liability to property owners or third parties by any use made of the above-described area by owners of abutting property. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as granting any right to cut trees, dig ditches, channels or otherwise make cuts, fill, excavate or otherwise alter the natural elevation or to erect and maintain fences in the area below the 369-foot contour line, but on the contrary, all of such activities are specifically prohibited except with the specific approval of Macon-Bibb County after written application therefor giving adequate justification; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the removal of any fences which were in existence and which were used for the enclosure of cattle at the time the Tobesofkee Recreation Area was acquired by Bibb County; and, provided further, that if at any time the land formerly used for the grazing of cattle has changed in its use, then and at that time, the fences shall be removed and shall not thereafter be maintained. 
(f)  Tree removal. 
(1)  To protect the vegetative buffer surrounding the lake, the removal of any trees with a diameter of more than three inches is prohibited without prior written approval of the commission. 
(2)  Native ornamental trees such as dogwoods, magnolias, flowering fruit trees, etc. of any size, may not be removed without prior written approval of the commission. 
(3)  Tree removal requests must include a tree survey performed by a registered forester, professional landscape architect or arborist, which shows all trees in the proposed area, the specific trees to be removed, the total number of trees to be removed, the value of the trees to be removed and the process by which they will be removed. 
(4)  If tree removal involves significant earth disturbance, proper erosion and sedimentation controls must be followed, including installing a silt fence to protect the shoreline and re-vegetative plan. 
(5)  All portions of the tree/s (limbs, stumps, etc.) must be properly removed from the lot. Dumping, burying, or otherwise disposing of any portion of the tree on Macon-Bibb County property, lease lots, or lake is prohibited. 
(g)  Dredging. 
(1)  Dredging will be permitted up to 500 cubic yards per lot. Greater amounts will require approval from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and additional agencies. 
(2)  Dredging plans must be submitted and approved before work begins. A dredging permit must be obtained prior to any dredging activity. 
(3)  By obtaining a dredging permit from Macon-Bibb County the permittee agrees to: 
a.  Abide by all governmental rules, laws, regulations, directives and statutes. 
b.  Acquire all necessary governmental permits or licenses, which may include, but shall not be limited to, a soil distributing activity permit. 
(4)  Applicants must provide the volume of material to be removed. A qualified engineer or surveyor should determine this information (especially for large projects over 100 cubic yards). An estimate sheet is to be attached to the permit request. 
(5)  Removal of original lake bottom is prohibited. The sole purpose for dredging is to remove silt or sedimentation that has accumulated over time. 
(6)  The material removed from the lake shall be disposed of in upland area so as to avoid re-entry into the lake. 
(h)  Macon-Bibb County grants only such use of the area described in this section as it may lawfully grant. 
Sec. 17-58. - No vested interests. 
No person shall have or acquire any rights in land or any vested interest to the continuance of any access permit or a permit for the construction and maintenance of a dock or boathouse nor to the continuance of these regulations in their present form. This provision is necessary for the protection of the public property and all permits for any such purposes are expressly made subject to this section. 
Sec. 17-59. - Authority vested in superintendent, rangers and staff. 
In addition to such other powers and authority as they may have, the superintendent of the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area, the rangers and other members of the staff (including, but not limited to, lifeguards) are hereby expressly authorized and empowered to issue citations to person violating any of the rules and regulations of the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area contained in this Code. Immediately after issuing the citation, the person issuing the same shall forward a copy to the appropriate prosecuting official of Macon-Bibb County for appropriate further action. Municipal court, state court, and magistrate court shall have concurrent jurisdiction over violations of this article. 
Sec. 17-60. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The rules and regulations applicable to the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area are as follows: 
General. 
(1)  The cardinal rule of conduct for all persons utilizing the Lake Tobesofkee Recreation Area ("the area") is that of common courtesy and respect for the rights of others. Most problems can be avoided if this rule is recognized. 
(2)  No person may be admitted to or use the facilities of Lake Tobesofkee without payment of the appropriate fee. Evidence of fee payment shall be retained by every person admitted on a daily basis and shall be produced upon request of area personnel or other authorized individual. 
(3)  All persons using the Tobesofkee Recreation Area are expected to comply with all of the laws of the state regulating parks, recreation areas, camping, boating, skiing and fishing, as well as with the applicable rules of the state department of natural resources and of Macon-Bibb County. 
(4)  Hunting, trapping or otherwise pursuing or catching any wildlife within the Tobesofkee Recreation Area is strictly prohibited. 
(5)  Persons having boats in the water at the marina and at the apartment complexes on the lake must possess a current valid annual permit. All boats entering the marina for the purpose of boating will be required to purchase tickets at a gate house prior to entry, or must be the holder of a current annual permit. 
(6)  All children under 16 years of age must wear a helmet when riding a bicycle anywhere inside parks. 
(7)  Claystone and Arrowhead Parks open at 6:00 a.m. and close at 9:30 p.m. throughout the year. Sandy Beach Park hours vary from time to time according to the season. Area office hours are from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Sandy Beach Waterpark shall operate 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday during the water park season which shall be from Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day weekend. 
(8)  Off-road vehicles (ATVs, dirt bikes, go carts, motorized scooters, etc.) are prohibited. Golf carts are likewise prohibited with the exception of those utilized by disabled individuals and displaying a valid handicap sticker. 
(9)  The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages within the Tobesofkee Recreation Area is prohibited, except under special circumstances approved by the commission and within areas designated by the Manager. 
(10)  Discharge of any firearm within the Tobesofkee Recreation Area shall be unlawful, unless express written permission for such has been authorized by the commission. 
(11)  Possession of any explosive substance, including fireworks, within the Tobesofkee Recreation Area shall be unlawful unless express written permission for such has been authorized by the commission. 
(12)  Motorized vehicles may be operated only upon designated roadways and shall be parked only in officially designated areas. 
(13)  No person shall drive any motor vehicle of any character on the roadways of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour. 
(14)  Pets are not permitted within the Tobesofkee Recreation Area unless on a leash. Under no circumstances are pets permitted on beach areas. 
(15)  The Macon-Bibb County boat ramp docks are to be used only for assistance in launching or removing boats from the water. Use of the boat ramp dock for sunbathing and the placing thereon of lawn chairs and other equipment are prohibited. 
(16)  No person, firm or corporation shall deposit within the Tobesofkee Recreation Area in any of the parks below the 369-foot contour line any dirt, rock, debris or waste matter whether it is solid waste matter, garbage, human waste or other material, which might contaminate the ground or the lake. All waste matter shall be disposed of in approved facilities. 
(17)  Every person shall at all times obey and comply with directions given by all official regulatory signs posted within the area. 
(18)  Utilization of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area and its facilities is at the risk of the user. Macon-Bibb County assumes no responsibility for injury to persons or property arising from the utilization of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area. 
(19)  Persons wishing to utilize a picnic shelter may reserve a shelter in advance by contacting the area office and paying a reservation fee. Shelters not reserved in advance are available on a first come, first serve basis. Payment of a shelter reservation fee does not entitle anyone to enter the park free of charge. Each person desiring to enter the park shall pay the regular admission fee. 
Camping. 
(20)  Campsites may be reserved by contacting the area office. 
(21)  Camping in areas other than designated camping areas is prohibited unless express, written authorization of the Manager is obtained. 
(22)  Payment of camping fees entitles the authorized persons to make use of campsites, beaches, and other facilities not requiring any other additional fees. Payment of camping fees covers admission to other site parks in addition to the one in which the paying parties are camping. 
(23)  Persons desiring to camp must pay camping fees in advance and obtain a permit from the gate stations; however, campers entering after 10:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m. may camp for the night, provided camping and other fees are paid not later than 9:00 am. on the morning immediately following entry. 
(24)  Check out time for camping is 12:00 noon. Campers remaining after 12:00 noon on any day will be charged for an additional day's camping. 
(25)  Camping is limited to 14 consecutive nights at any one site. After 14 consecutive nights, campers and the unit (RV, camper, trailer, etc.) must move to another site designated by the Manager (Waterfront sites in Arrowhead Park and the pull-through sites in Claystone Park are not included). Campers may stay a total of seven nights within a 30-night period at the waterfront sites in Arrowhead Park and pull-through sites at Claystone Park. After a total of seven nights during any 30-night period, campers and the unit (RV, camper, trailer, etc.) must vacate these sites for 30 consecutive nights before re-occupying any one of these sites. 
(26)  Campers who bring boats must pay the daily boat fee regardless of whether the boat is in the water or at a designated parking area. Boats and boat trailers shall not be parked at the campsites. 
(27)  Visitors to any occupied campsite must pay the general admission fee required of all persons. Issuance of a camping permit does not entitle visitors to enter the park area free of charge. 
(28)  Tent camping is permitted in RV sites. Camping occupancy is limited to one camping unit; (RV, pop-up, trailer or family tent) and one additional small tent per campsite. Each campsite is permitted two additional vehicles. Tent camping is not permitted in pull-through and sewer access sites. 
(29)  The use of major electrical appliances such as, but not limited to, refrigerators, washing machines, ice makers, and so forth is not permitted outside any camping unit (RV, pop-up, trailer, or tent). 
(30)  Camp fires are permitted only in designated areas and only when supervised by adults. 
(31)  Persons desiring to arrange for group camping should consult the area office in advance of applicable rules. 
(32)  Loud, boisterous conduct, including playing radios or other sound-producing devices at loud levels, is prohibited. Disorderly conduct, drunkenness, or obscene language is prohibited. 
(33)  Oversized vehicles such as tractor trailer trucks, automotive wreckers, etc., shall not be parked at camp sites. This prohibition does not apply to motor homes used for camping. 
(34)  Persons registering to camp must be 21 years of age or older. 
(35)  After 9:00 p.m. all children under 16 years of age must be accompanied by an adult unless they are at their campsite. Parents shall be responsible for the actions of their children. 
(36)  Pets are allowed in the campground if kept on a leash and attended at all times. Unleashed pets and those whose behavior disturbs other campers must be removed from the park by the owner. Under no circumstances are pets permitted on beach areas. 
Fishing, boating and skiing. 
(37)  Except as provided in subsection (43), fishing, boating and skiing are authorized only for those people who hold a current day's ticket or a current annual permit in their possession. 
(38)  Fishermen, boaters, and skiers are cautioned to comply with all state and local regulations respecting those activities. 
(39)  Persons desiring to night fish after park hours must purchase tickets before park gates close, or have a current annual permit. 
(40)  Fishing is prohibited in swimming areas when the lake is open to swimmers. 
(41)  Fishing from public boat docks when boats are present is prohibited. 
(42)  Skiers and operators of boats towing skiers must exercise due care for the safety and welfare of others. Skiing in lake coves is specifically prohibited. 
(43)  Persons 65 years of age or older may fish without payment of an admission fee, provided they have obtained a senior citizen's pass at the area office. 
(44)  For the present, no limitation is placed upon the horsepower of motors. However, Macon-Bibb County reserves the right to place limits on the size of motorboat motors should the commission determine that to be in the public interest. 
(45)  All fishermen must carry licenses, as required by the state. 
(46)  No trout lines, set hooks, baskets, nets, jugs, or any type of commercial fishing gear shall be permitted. Cast nets and landing nets may be used in compliance with state laws. 
(47)  Fishing from bridges, right-of-way of roads and boat ramp docks is prohibited. 
(48)  No vessel, including sail boards, shall be permitted to enter any swimming area or any area designated as a no boat area. 
Swimming. 
(49)  Swimming at all park sites must be confined to areas designated for that purpose. 
(50)  Diving or jumping from public docks and bridges is prohibited. 
(51)  Swimming is permitted during daylight hours only. Persons choosing to swim when lifeguards are not on duty do so at their own risk. 
(52)  Scuba diving in Lake Tobesofkee is prohibited unless the express written permission of the Manager is obtained. 
(b)  Official copies of these rules and regulations are maintained in the office of the Clerk of Commission and the office of the Manager of the Tobesofkee Recreation Area. 
(c)  If any provision of this section is in genuine conflict with any state or federal law or requirement, the conflict shall be resolved in accordance with law. 
( Ord. of 6-20-2017(2) ) 
Chapter 18 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Statement of policy. 
It is the policy of Macon-Bibb County Government to provide equal employment opportunity to all qualified persons; to prohibit discrimination in employment because of race, color, religion, age, disability, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, veteran's status or national origin; and to promote the full realization of equal employment opportunity through a positive, continuing program in each department and agency of the Macon-Bibb County Government. The policy of equal opportunity applies to every aspect of County employment, policy and practice. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0015, § 1, 3-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Applicant" means any person considered or who requests to be considered for employment by Macon-Bibb County. 
(2)  "County agency" means any office, department, agency, board or commission of Macon-Bibb County. 
(3)  "Employee" means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of owner's family, partner, associate, agent, manager, or representative, and any and all other persons engaged or employed in said business. 
(4)  "Employment" means any occupation, vocation, job, work for pay or employment, including temporary or seasonal work, contracted work, contingent work and work through the services of a temporary or other employment agency. "Employment" shall not, for the purposes of this chapter, include membership in any law enforcement agency. 
(5)  "Conviction" means any sentence arising from a verdict or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, including a sentence of incarceration, a suspended sentence, a sentence of probation or a sentence of unconditional discharge. 
(6)  "Inquiry" means any direct or indirect conduct intended to gather information, using any mode of communication. 
(7)  "Interview" means any direct contact by the employer with the applicant, whether in person or by telephone, to discuss the employment being sought or the applicant's qualifications. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0015, § 1, 3-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-3. - Ban-the-box. 
In connection with printed and/or on-line employment application forms of Macon-Bibb County, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for them to contain a "box" or inquiry regarding an applicant's prior criminal history. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0015, § 1, 3-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-4. - Unlawful discriminatory practice—Ex-offenders. 
To prohibit unfair discrimination against persons previously convicted of one or more criminal offenses: 
(a)  In connection with the licensing or employment of any person, it shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice for Macon-Bibb County to make any inquiry regarding or to require any person to disclose or reveal any criminal conviction(s) during the application process. The application process shall begin when the applicant inquires about the employment being sought and shall end when an employer has accepted an employment application. 
(b)  It shall further be an unlawful discriminatory practice for Macon-Bibb County to make any inquiry regarding, or to require any person to disclose or reveal any criminal convictions against such person before the first interview. 
(c)  Prior to an applicant being selected for hire with Macon-Bibb County, a background check and drug test is required for consideration of employment. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0015, § 1, 3-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-5. - Adverse employment decision—ex-offenders. 
Once the applicant has been deemed qualified for the position for which he/she applied, Macon-Bibb County may then inquire into the applicant's criminal history. If Macon-Bibb County makes an adverse employment decision, including, but not limited to, the refusal, rescission, or revocation of a conditional offer of employment, or termination of employment, after the criminal history inquiry is conducted, Macon-Bibb County shall within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days: 
(a)  Notify the applicant of the adverse employment decision; and 
(b)  Provide the applicant with a photocopy of the results of the criminal inquiry, indicating the particular conviction(s) that relate(s) to the position's responsibilities. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0015, § 1, 3-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-6. - Dissemination of criminal history. 
Any information obtained by Macon-Bibb County that pertains to an applicant's criminal history: 
(a)  Shall remain confidential; 
(b)  Shall only be shared with individuals that have a need to know the contents for the purpose of evaluating candidates or employees in a manner consistent with this section, except as dictated by law; 
(c)  Shall not be used, distributed, or disseminated by Macon-Bibb County for any use other than those permitted under this policy; and 
(d)  Shall not be used, distributed, or disseminated by Macon-Bibb County to any other entity or individual, except as dictated by state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0015, § 1, 3-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 18-7. - Exemptions. 
Macon-Bibb County hiring for positions where certain convictions or violations are a bar to employment in that position under state or federal law, including but not limited to positions that involve work with children and positions in law enforcement, shall not be constrained at any time from asking questions about those convictions or violations. Furthermore, positions with the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department shall also be exempt from the provisions of this Article. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0015, § 1, 3-17-2015 ) 
Secs. 18-8—18-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOCIAL SECURITY AND RETIREMENT 

Sec. 18-32. - Social security authorization. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of Macon-Bibb County to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the Federal Social Security Administration, to the appropriate employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this division, the benefits of the system of old age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act, the state enabling act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, Macon-Bibb County shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws and regulations. 
Sec. 18-33. - Agreements authorized. 
The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the employees' retirement system of the state for coverage of such employees and officials as provided for in section 18-32, to include any employees, namely, who are ineligible for membership in Macon-Bibb County's officers' and employees' pension plan, that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner by such law provided. 
Sec. 18-34. - Employee contributions. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in section 18-32 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
Sec. 18-35. - Macon-Bibb County contributions. 
There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and such funds shall be paid over to the state employees' retirement system in accordance with regulations established by such agency. 
Sec. 18-36. - Records. 
Macon-Bibb County shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
Sec. 18-37. - Exclusions. 
There is hereby excluded from this division any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
Sec. 18-38. - Future authorizations. 
All future authorizations or adoptions of new provisions of the federal social security act, the appropriate state enabling act thereunder, and any new state and federal laws or regulations thereunder, may be adopted by a resolution of the commission. 
Secs. 18-39—18-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-56. - Applications for employment; investigation and examination of applicants; qualifications; list of qualified applicants. 
(a)  Receipt of application. The department of human resources shall receive all applications for employment with the fire departments on Macon-Bibb County employment application forms, regardless of whether a vacancy exists at the time of application. 
(b)  Investigation, physical examination. The director, department of human resources, shall cause to be made a thorough investigation of the character, experience, background and physical fitness, including a physical condition test, of all applicants, which investigation shall include but not be limited to an investigation of police record, all previous employment, reputation in neighborhood of past and present places of residence, personal habits, military record, educational background and any other pertinent statement or statements contained in the application for employment. 
(c)  Minimum education, age and personal qualifications. All applicants for employment with the fire department shall have at least a high school education or its equivalent recognized by the state department of education, or, in the case of firefighter applicants, the adult basic learning examination, form A, level III may be substituted for a high school education or equivalency. Applicants receiving a required certified learning level on the examination will be acceptable for further employment processing. Applications may be accepted from any legal resident of the United States. However, all personnel governed by this chapter must live within a twenty-six-mile radius of the city hall to meet emergency reaction times when they arise. A statement must be signed by each applicant that he or she understands and will comply with this requirement. Certificates will be maintained by the chief or the department of human resources. All applicants must also be a minimum age requirements of 18 years for the fire department. 
(d)  Rejection of application. In addition to the requirements of subsection (c) above, an applicant shall be denied employment hereunder for failure to meet any of the following requirements; or be denied reapplication for failure to meet the following requirements unless reapplication is made within the established time limits and the failure is of a nature that it can be corrected: 
(1)  Have a valid state driver's license; 
(2)  Not have been convicted for an offense under state or federal law for which the applicant could have served any time in confinement; 
(3)  Not have committed five (5) or more traffic offenses in the last twelve (12) months for which a fine of over twenty-five dollars ($25.00) was imposed; 
(4)  Be certified by a police department polygraph operator as satisfactorily answering a standard list of required questions; 
(5)  Not have been dishonorably discharged from the armed services; 
(6)  Pass a human resources department administered physical condition test, provided the test has an adverse impact factor for the qualifying of female applicants; 
(7)  Not have been dismissed from public service for cause; 
(8)  Not have made a false statement of fact or attempted fraud or deception in his or her application or other required documents; 
(10)  Have passed the physical examination required in subsection (b) above; and 
(11)  Pass the assessment center evaluation examination. 
(e)  Examination procedure. The examinations shall be used to determine the fitness of applicants and may be written, oral, physical or in the form of a demonstration of skill or any combination of these and shall be of a character to fairly test and determine the relative fitness and ability of applicants to perform the actual duties of the class or position to which they seek appointment. 
(f)  Fire applicants. The Fire Civil Service Board shall review the application and all information and records on each initial applicant. The Fire Civil Service Board will certify to the chief those applicants who meet the employment standards and are eligible for further consideration together with written findings on any applicant who is not recommended. The chief of the department will make the final decision. 
(g)  List of qualified applicants to be kept. All applicants who have successfully passed the requirements to become a firefighter will be listed in alphabetical order. A list of such applicants will be certified by the director of human resources and furnished to the chief. 
(h)  Selection from list. Whenever vacancies occur in either the fire department, the chief concerned shall select the number needed from the list and submit the names to the mayor for approval to employ. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 1, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-57. - Training program; probationary period. 
(a)  Duration, course of training. After selection for employment with the fire department, the person shall then undergo prescribed training. The course of training shall be determined and approved by the chief. 
(b)  Unsatisfactory performance by trainee. Any trainee whose performance is unsatisfactory during the aforesaid training period shall be brought before the chief and after explanation of the deficiency in question by the training officer, the chief shall determine whether the trainee shall be retained in the training program or dismissed. 
(c)  Assignment to duty. Upon satisfactory completion of the required training program, trainees shall be sworn to faithfully perform their duties by the chief and shall be assigned to duty on a probationary status. 
(d)  Duration of probationary status. After the completion of three hundred sixty-five (365) days of satisfactory probationary service, probationary employees shall be eligible to be promoted to nonprobationary status by official action of the mayor, as classified career employees of their respective departments; provided, however, that the chief may, with the approval of the mayor, extent the probationary service of an employee for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days if such action is deemed to be in the best interest of Macon-Bibb County and the employee. 
Sec. 18-58. - Performance evaluation. 
(a)  Anniversary performance evaluation. All classified career employees of the fire departments shall be rated on performance no less than once each year on the anniversary date of employment. 
(b)  Performance rating forms. The performance rating forms used shall be those approved by the chief and the director, department of human resources. 
(c)  Trainees. Trainees shall be given a written performance evaluation report by the department training officer at the end of their initial training period. This report shall be signed by the trainee and made a part of his personnel records. 
(d)  Probationary employees. Probationary employees shall be given a written performance evaluation at the end of three (3), six (6) and nine (9) months. Following satisfactory completion of their probationary period they shall be given a full year's performance evaluation on their anniversary date. 
(e)  Nonprobationary employees. Nonprobationary employees shall receive a yearly performance evaluation on their anniversary date. 
(f)  Rating by immediate supervisor. Each person shall be rated by his immediate supervisor in the chain of command, and shall be endorsed by the next three (3) supervisors in the chain of command. A failure of any endorsing supervisor to agree with the evaluating supervisor's evaluation shall automatically place the performance evaluation in an appeal status. 
(g)  Evaluator. Each evaluator shall be a minimum of one rank higher than the person rated and each endorser shall be at least one rank higher than the first and subsequent endorser. 
(h)  Transferred employees. Employees transferred from one (1) supervisor to another shall be rated by the releasing supervisor on an interim rating form approved by the chief when the releasing supervisor has supervised the employee thirty (30) or more work days. This evaluation shall be signed by the employee and made available to the new supervisor. 
(i)  Criteria for promotion. To be eligible to stand for any promotion examination or to qualify for promotion from a promotion register, an employee must have been rated as competent or better on his or her last annual performance evaluation, with the preceding annual performance evaluation rated at no less than satisfactory. 
Sec. 18-59. - Performance evaluation appeal. 
(a)  No appeal shall be permitted when the evaluator and subsequent endorsers agree on the evaluation. 
(b)  If one (1) endorser out of three (3) disagrees with the evaluator's evaluation, the employee's evaluation shall automatically be appealed to an evaluation appeal committee. 
(c)  The evaluation appeal committee shall be made up of a nonvoting presiding officer, who shall be the director, department of personnel or a designee of the director, and two senior officers, two (2) sergeants, and one (1) private, none of whom have been directly associated with the appealing officer. The voting members of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor or county manager. 
(d)  The evaluation appeal committee has the right to request appearances of other employees who have knowledge of the appealing employee's performance. The decision of the committee shall be forwarded to the chief for review and concurrence or nonconcurrence. 
(e)  In the event of nonconcurrence with a recommended evaluation change the original evaluation shall be retained. There shall be no appeal of the chief's decision. 
Sec. 18-60. - Declaration of position vacancy. 
Subject to the requirements of Sec. 18-77(e)(1), the chief of the fire department shall fill vacated positions above the entry level positions from the appropriate promotional registry, or post for examination the vacant positions within thirty (30) calendar days of the occurrence of the vacancy, or shall recommend to the mayor that the vacated position be abolished and removed from the authorized budgeted organization. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 2, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-61. - Reemployment of members; entitlement to seniority point credit. 
Members of the fire department whose employment is terminated for any reason shall be eligible for reemployment only upon qualification and selection as provided in this chapter for new members and upon reemployment such members shall not be entitled for seniority point credit for promotion purposes for the time served prior to the date of reemployment. 
Sec. 18-62. - Maintenance of position. 
(a)  Physical examination. The chief of the fire department or the mayor may require any member of the department rated as a classified career employee to take a thorough physical examination if deemed necessary. Such examination shall be conducted by a physician selected by the mayor for conducting the examination and the cost shall be borne by Macon-Bibb County. The employee required to take such physical examination shall present a certificate from the examining physician stating whether or not the employee is physically able to fulfill the duties of his position with the department. If the employee is ruled physically unable to perform his duties, the following actions may be taken as appropriate: 
(1)  Placement on accrued sick leave pending clearance by a physician to return to work; 
(2)  Retirement under the disability retirement feature of the pension plan upon committee approval; 
(3)  Early retirement; or 
(4)  Termination. 
(b)  Program of study. All levels of supervisors in the fire department shall maintain a program of study in fire department management and operational fields in accordance with the minimum recommended standards established by resolution of the commission. 
(c)  Physical fitness standards. 
(1)  Applicants for employment in the fire department must meet the established minimum physical standards for the job classification for which they apply. As a condition of continued employment, all classified career employees in the fire department must meet the established minimum physical standards for their particular classification. 
(2)  The fire chief, in conjunction with a physician, shall have the authority to formulate and establish the appropriate minimum physical standards for each particular job description within the department. Such standards shall bear a reasonable relationship to the requirements of the particular job. 
(3)  The minimum standards of fitness shall be applied equally to all applicants or employees within a particular job description. 
(4)  Physical fitness training program. 
a.  If a classified career employee of the fire department fails to pass the minimum fitness standard for his particular job description, he or she shall be given an opportunity to participate in a physical fitness program for the purpose of meeting the minimum physical fitness standard for his or her job qualification. If such an employee does not meet the minimum physical fitness standard within a prescribed time limit, the chief shall take appropriate disciplinary action unless such employee is unable to meet such standards because of a medical condition verified to exist and being of a correctable temporary nature. 
b.  It shall be the responsibility of a physician and a physical conditioning specialist to suggest the appropriate physical fitness training program for the employee. The chief in conjunction with a physician and a physical conditioning specialist shall determine the length of time, not to exceed one-year, within which the employee must bring himself up to the applicable minimum physical standards. 
c.  At all times, it shall be within the authority of the chief to take necessary and reasonable disciplinary measures to ensure that the physical fitness standard is met and maintained. 
Sec. 18-63. - Fire department service required. 
Service requirements indicated for positions below shall be required before any member of the fire department is eligible for promotion to such position: 
(1)  A minimum of twelve (12) years' service with a recognized paid fire department shall be required before any person shall be eligible to be appointed chief or assistant chief of the fire department. A bachelor's degree in fire sciences, chemistry or a related field shall constitute two (2) years' experience. An associate degree in fire sciences, chemistry or a related field shall constitute one (1) years' experience. 
(2)  Firefighters above the rank of sergeant with a minimum of ten (10) years' service in the Macon-Bibb County fire department are eligible for appointment to the positions of battalion chief, training director or fire prevention director. A bachelor's degree in fire sciences, chemistry or a related field shall constitute two (2) years' experience. An associate degree in fire sciences, chemistry or a related field shall constitute one (1) years' experience. 
(3)  Lieutenants with a minimum of ten (10) years' service with the Macon-Bibb County fire department who have served at least one (1) year as lieutenant shall be eligible for promotion to captain. A bachelor's degree in fire sciences, chemistry or a related field shall constitute two (2) years' experience. An associate degree in fire sciences, chemistry or a related field shall constitute one (1) years' experience. 
(4)  Sergeants with a minimum of eight (8) years' service with the Macon-Bibb County fire department who have served at least one (1) year as sergeant shall be eligible for promotion to the position of lieutenant. A bachelor's degree in fire sciences, chemistry or a related field shall constitute two (2) years' experience. An associate degree in fire sciences, chemistry or a related field shall constitute one (1) years' experience. 
(5)  Privates with a minimum of six (6) years' non-probationary service with the Macon-Bibb County fire department and minimum of two (2) years of emergency apparatus driving experience with the department shall be eligible for promotion to the position of sergeant. A bachelor's degree in fire sciences, chemistry or a related field shall constitute two (2) years' experience. An associate degree in fire sciences, chemistry or a related field shall constitute one (1) years experience. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 3, 6-17-2014 ) 
Secs. 18-64—18-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM 

Sec. 18-70. - Definitions. 
The following terms, when used herein in connection with the Macon-Bibb County Fire Civil Service System, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(1)  Board means the Macon-Bibb County Fire Civil Service Board. 
(2)  Secretary means the Secretary of the Macon-Bibb County Fire Civil Service Board. 
(3)  Appointing authority means the Fire Chief of Macon-Bibb County or any person lawfully serving as Fire Chief of Macon-Bibb County. 
(4)  Macon-Bibb County Commission means the Mayor and Nine (9) Commissioners of Macon-Bibb County. 
(5)  Position means any office or place of employment as a firefighter in the service of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, and any office or place of employment of the Fire Chief of Macon-Bibb County, except those offices and positions placed in the unclassified service as set forth in subsection (a) of Sec. 18-75. 
(6)  Classified employee means any employee holding a position in the classified service. 
(7)  Public hearings means an opportunity given after public notice of at least five days for any person or persons to appear and be heard on the matter involved. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-71. - Changes in system. 
The Macon-Bibb County Commission shall have authority to enact laws changing, altering, or abolishing the Macon-Bibb County Fire Civil Service System herein established and to provide additions, exceptions, or exemptions to the Macon-Bibb County Fire Civil Service System herein established. The Macon-Bibb County Commission may at any time remove the Fire Department of Macon-Bibb County from the Civil Service System herein created. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-72. - Created. 
A fire civil service system is created as follows. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-73. - Status of incumbents. 
Any person holding a permanent position as a firefighter in the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department on the effective date of this Macon-Bibb County Fire Civil Service System shall continue to hold such position subject to the provisions herein and shall be deemed to be qualified for such employment and shall be entitled to receive a regular permanent appointment in accordance with the provisions herein. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-74. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall be convicted of willfully or corruptly violating any of the provisions herein shall be punished as provided in Sec. 1-6; and if such convicted person be in the classified service, he or she shall be dismissed therefrom, at the discretion of the Mayor, and shall not be eligible for reemployment, reinstatement, or reappointment for a period of three years from date of such conviction. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-75. - Unclassified service and classified service. 
(a)  The unclassified service shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Any person serving as Fire Chief of Macon-Bibb County. 
(2)  Any person serving in the appointed position of Assistant Fire Chief of Macon-Bibb County. 
(3)  Any person serving in the appointed position of Battalion Chief and/or Division Director. 
(4)  Any person serving in the appointed position of Educator, Instructor, and/or Coordinator for any division of the Macon-Bibb County Fire Department. 
(5)  Any person serving in the appointed position of Fire Inspector. 
(6)  Any person who does not receive regular compensation from Macon-Bibb County funds, directly or indirectly. 
(7)  Clerical, maintenance, and custodial personnel. 
(b)  The classified service shall consist of all offices and positions of employment as a firefighter in the service of Macon-Bibb County and serving under the direction of the Fire Chief of Macon-Bibb County, and all offices and positions of employment in the service of the Fire Department of Macon-Bibb County, except those offices and positions placed in the unclassified service as set forth above in subsection (a) of Sec. 18-75. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-76. - Oaths. 
The board and all sworn employees shall take the oath of office as prescribed by law for their respective positions. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-77. - Fire civil service board created. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established the Macon-Bibb County Fire Civil Service Board which shall consist of five members who shall have been residents of Macon-Bibb County for two years or more. The members of the Macon-Bibb County Civil Service Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Commission and shall serve a four year term. The members shall annually elect one of their members as chairman of the board and one member as vice-chairman. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Vacancies in the office of said board created by death, resignation, or otherwise shall be filled for the unexpired term by an appointment of the Mayor with the approval of the Commission. No member of the board shall be a current employee of Macon-Bibb County. Members of the board shall be limited to two consecutive full terms of office on the board. Filling more than one-half of an unexpired term of office shall constitute a full term of office. 
(b)  Members of the board are subject to removal at any time by the Mayor. 
(c)  The members of the board shall serve without compensation, except that the Commission may authorize payment to members on a per diem basis for the time actually devoted to the business of the board. 
(d)  The board shall keep its office and shall hold its meetings in the Macon-Bibb County Human Resources Department, and all of said meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall hold regular meetings at least once every three months, and as often in addition thereto as the board may provide. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the board as a body: 
(1)  To review, including orally interviewing, and pass judgment upon whether the qualifications of initial applicants and promotional candidates match the requirements of the Position. The interview shall consist of personal meeting with the applicants or candidates to evaluate their training, experience, and personal qualifications. If it is determined by the board that an applicant's or candidate's qualifications match the requirements of the Position, the board shall designate the applicant or candidate as qualified for the Position. The applicant or candidate shall then be eligible for consideration by the appointing authority in accordance with Sec. 18-79 of this Chapter. 
(2)  To adopt, rescind, and amend rules and regulations for the administration of the process and procedures of the board for interviewing and passing judgment upon the qualifications of applicants and candidates for promotion after providing reasonable notice and a public hearing during which the Macon-Bibb County Commission, appointing authority, and the classified employees shall be afforded every opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  To keep minutes of its own meeting and such other records as the board may deem necessary. 
(4)  To examine and approve or modify the annual report prepared by the secretary and submit such report to the Commission on or before July 1 of each year transmitting therewith any suggestions it may approve for the more effectual accomplishment of the purpose of this fire civil service system; and to supervise generally the work of the secretary in the administration of the provisions of this system. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ; Ord. of 4-19-2016(1), § 1 ; Ord. No. O-16-0043, § 1, 4-19-2016 ) 
Sec. 18-78. - Secretary. 
(a)  The Human Resources Director of Macon-Bibb County or such person's designee shall serve as secretary. 
(b)  The Commission shall provide adequate facilities and quarters for the board and the secretary to store records and to administer the provisions of this fire civil service system. 
(c)  The secretary shall receive no additional compensation for service on behalf of the board unless such shall be provided by the Commission. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the secretary: 
(1)  To attend meetings of the board, to act as its secretary and to record its official actions. 
(2)  To assist the board in administering the civil service system. 
(3)  To establish and maintain a roster of all officers and employees in the employ of Macon-Bibb County Fire Department who are covered by this system, showing for each such person the date of appointment, the title of position or positions held, the initial rate of compensation and all changes thereof, and such other data as deemed desirable and pertinent. 
(4)  To present to the board all matters filed with him for the board's consideration, including providing the board with the names and personnel files of all eligible applicants and candidates for promotion. 
(5)  To provide to the appointing authority the results of the board's review of the eligible applicants and candidates for promotion. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-79. - Appointing authority. 
After receiving the results of the Civil Service Board's review, the appointing authority may use whatever evaluative tools he or she deems necessary or proper, to include validated written tests and/or assessment centers, to further evaluate the eligible applicants and candidates for promotion. The appointing authority shall have final authority to hire and/or promote eligible applicants and candidates using the Uniform Selection Criteria format. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-80. - Transfers. 
The appointing authority may, at any time, transfer any classified employee under his jurisdiction, from one position to another in the same classification. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-81. - Demotions. 
The appointing authority may, in accordance with any personnel policies adopted for employees of Macon-Bibb County by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, demote a classified employee under the appointing authority's jurisdiction from a position in one class to a position in a lower class. Any appointing authority may also, in accordance with the personnel policies adopted for employees of Macon-Bibb County by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, suspend, terminate, or otherwise discipline a classified employee without the need to consult with the Board. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-82. - Personnel policies and general orders. 
Except as specifically provided for or exempted in this Chapter, the appointing authority and all classified employees shall be subject to provisions of all Macon-Bibb County personnel policies adopted by the Macon-Bibb County Commission, including but not limited to disciplinary policies and procedures contained therein, and all General Orders and rules and regulations adopted by the Macon Bibb County Fire Department. If the provisions of this Chapter conflict with the provisions of any Macon-Bibb County personnel policies or any Macon-Bibb County Fire Department General Orders or the department's rules and regulations, the provisions of the Chapter shall govern. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0036, § 4, 6-17-2014 ) 
Secs. 18-83—18-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT REPORTING 

Sec. 18-140. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to describe a comprehensive system of reporting incidents, accidents and other occurrences which involve or may involve Macon-Bibb County employees or vehicles, either or both, or which may be observed by Macon-Bibb County employees in the course of their employment. 
Sec. 18-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accident means an undesired event that results in physical harm to a person or damage to property whether or not the event is a "pure accident," or is attributable to negligence on the part of one or more persons. 
Incident means an event which occurs or is observed by Macon-Bibb County personnel while engaged on Macon-Bibb County business and which is one which is unexpected and is outside the normal course of events, and in the happening of which Macon-Bibb County has or may reasonably be expected to have more than a casual interest. 
Occurrence means an all-encompassing term which includes any event, whether or not resulting in known damage or a known personal injury, whether or not involving motor vehicles belonging to Macon-Bibb County and whether or not resulting in known damage to Macon-Bibb County property or personal injury to Macon-Bibb County employees or others, but involves Macon-Bibb County personnel or property, or an activity in which Macon-Bibb County has or may have an interest. 
Sec. 18-142. - Reports—When required. 
(a)  Whenever an accident, incident or occurrence is observed by one or more Macon-Bibb County employees, the same shall be reported in writing as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  If the accident, incident or occurrence is observed by only one Macon-Bibb County employee, it shall be the duty of that employee to make the required report. If the same be observed by more than one Macon-Bibb County employee, it shall be the duty of the senior Macon-Bibb County employee present and physically able to do so, to make the required report. 
(c)  Reports shall be completed and filed as herein prescribed as soon as possible, but in any event within 24 hours. 
Sec. 18-143. - Same—Form and contents. 
Reports shall be in writing and shall consist of: 
(1)  All reports required by the laws of the state for reporting motor vehicle accidents and occurrences. 
(2)  Such reports as may be required by any insurance company with which Macon-Bibb County or any of its employees is an insured. 
(3)  Such other reports as may be required by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 18-144. - Same—Where filed; forwarding. 
Any person required by the terms hereof to make reports shall file the same with the county clerk. It will be the duty of the county clerk to distribute the same as follows: 
(1)  Reports required by the state shall be forwarded by the department to the appropriate state agency, and a copy sent to the appropriate department head. 
(2)  Reports required by an insurance company shall be forwarded to the risk management department for handling with the appropriate company, and a copy furnished to the appropriate department head. 
(3)  The county clerk, in every case, shall furnish copies of all other reports to the head of the department involved. 
Sec. 18-145. - Responsibility of person filing report. 
It shall be the duty of any person charged with filing reports to see that the same are completely filled out, and that the information required is accurate in every detail and is legible. 
Sec. 18-146. - Responsibility of department heads. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each department head to insure that all employees of that department become familiar with the reporting mandates, the place of filing reports, and the other requirements of this article. 
(b)  Department heads shall further have the duty of seeing that new employees are similarly indoctrinated, and it shall be further the duty of each department head to ensure compliance by department employees with the provisions hereof. 
Secs. 18-147—18-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CLAIMS AGAINST EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 18-150. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Claim includes all claims presented against an employee prior to institution of a proceeding. 
Employee means the members of the governing body of Macon-Bibb County, supervisors, employees, and other elected or appointed officers and their appointees and employees, past and present and future. For the purpose of this article "employee" shall include the members of the Macon-Bibb County Board of Elections, the members of the Macon-Bibb County Board of Tax Assessors, the superintendent of elections, the chief appraiser of assessors, the employees of the Macon-Bibb County Board of Elections, and the employees of the Macon-Bibb County Board of Tax Assessors. 
(1)  The word "employee" does not include officers and employees of the Macon-Bibb County Board of Health; the Bibb County Department of Family and Children Services; the Macon-Bibb County Planning and Zoning Commission; the Macon-Bibb County Hospital Authority; the Macon-Bibb County Economic Opportunity Council; the Macon-Bibb County Transit Authority; the Board of Public Education for Bibb County; the Macon-Bibb County Industrial Authority; the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority; the Development Authority of Bibb County; and other similar agencies; nor does the term include the agricultural agent, the home demonstration agent and the employees of either. Proceeding includes any matter of a civil nature in or before any court or agency of this state or of any other state or of the United States. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0043, § 1, 8-5-2014 ) 
Sec. 18-151. - Exclusions. 
There is excluded further from the operation of this article any claim or proceeding as to which insurance is provided by Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 18-152. - Construction. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to constitute any waiver of any immunity, including governmental immunity, afforded by law. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be deemed to constitute the elected or appointed officers and their appointees and employees as employees of Macon-Bibb County except for the purposes of this article. 
Sec. 18-153. - Defense of employees. 
Whenever any claim is made or proceeding is brought against any employee, either against him asserting personal liability for damages arising out of the performance of his duties or in any way connected therewith, whether based on negligence, violation of contract rights or violation of civil, constitutional, common law or other statutory rights, whether federal, state or local, Macon-Bibb County shall, upon his written request, provide for his defense by an attorney selected by Macon-Bibb County unless otherwise limited by the terms of this article. Macon-Bibb County may decline defense of an employee or decline payment of a claim against an employee if the employee has failed to give notice in writing of any claim or proceeding to the board within 30 days after the employee has notice of a claim or if the employee has failed to give such notice within five days after service of a proceeding. 
Sec. 18-154. - Grounds for refusal of defense. 
(a)  Macon-Bibb County shall refuse to provide for the defense of a claim or proceeding brought against an employee if it determines that: 
(1)  The act or omission did not arise out of and in the course of his employment; 
(2)  The employee acted or failed to act because of actual fraud, corruption, or actual malice on his part; 
(3)  Defense of the claim or proceeding by Macon-Bibb County would create a conflict of interest between Macon-Bibb County and the employee; 
(4)  Provision of a defense against the claim or proceeding would not be in the best interests of Macon-Bibb County; 
(5)  The proceeding is a criminal prosecution; or 
(6)  The employee acts or fails to act as a result of, or at a time when, his own self-indulgence substantially impaired his judgment, as, for example, the act or omission occurs while the employee is intoxicated or under the influence of drugs. 
(7)  The employee fails to cooperate in the defense of the claim or proceeding. 
(b)  Subsection (a)(3) to the contrary notwithstanding, Macon-Bibb County may nevertheless provide a defense against a claim or proceeding where there is a conflict of interest between one employee or group of employees of Macon-Bibb County as compared with another employee or group of employees. 
Sec. 18-155. - Payment of judgments; compromise and settlement of claims. 
(a)  Where defense of a claim or proceeding against an employee is provided by this division, all final judgments awarded in courts of competent jurisdiction against employees in proceedings to which this division applies or any amount payable under any settlement of such proceeding or of claims in accordance with this division shall be paid by Macon-Bibb County as hereafter provided. All compromises of claims or proceedings governed by this article shall be submitted to the commission for its prior approval. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the forgoing, payment of judgments and claims shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  No sum will be paid where the employee's alleged liability is based on a discretionary act or omission. Payment of judgments and claims pursuant to this section shall be made only where liability is based upon a ministerial act of the employee. It is the intent of this section to provide for the payment of claims or judgments only where the defense of sovereign or governmental immunity is not available as a defense to the claim or proceeding. There is, however, excluded from this section payment of any claim against Macon-Bibb County for money for a loss caused by negligence of a Macon-Bibb County officer or employee using a vehicle owned, leased or rented by the county while carrying out his or her official duties or employment pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-92-1 et seq. 
(2)  No sum will be paid on behalf of any employee in excess of $50,000.00 for any one claimant, regardless of the number of claims that claimant may have arising from any one occurrence. In the event of multiple claimants as a result of one occurrence, no sum will be paid in excess of $100,000.00, regardless of the number of claimants or claims. Derivative claims, such as claims for loss of consortium or services, shall not be considered separate claims. 
(3)  No sum will be paid for punitive or exemplary damages. 
(4)  No sum will be paid unless the claimant unconditionally releases the employee and Macon-Bibb County from any and all claims, causes of action or judgments arising out of the subject claim or proceeding. 
(5)  No sum will be paid if Macon-Bibb County has reserved the right not to pay a claim or judgment notwithstanding the acceptance of the defense and if Macon-Bibb County later determines that the claim or proceeding meets one or more of the grounds for refusal of defense enumerated in this section. If Macon-Bibb County reserves the right not to pay a claim or judgment, Macon-Bibb County shall give the employee written notice that Macon-Bibb County has accepted the defense under a reservation of rights. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the forgoing, the commission may, in its discretion, indemnify an employee for a claim or judgment in excess of $50,000.00 if the commission determines that the best interests of Macon-Bibb County will be served by such additional indemnification. This authority to provide additional indemnification shall not extend to claims arising from the operation or use of a motor vehicle or claims based on simple negligence. 
Chapter 19 - PURCHASING, CONTRACTS AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Asset means a non-expendable supply item with a probable useful life of more than one (1) year. 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the Board of Commission to receive a county issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
Budget officer means the person, other than the finance office or buyer, designated as the budget officer or budget management officer of Macon-Bibb County. 
Buyer means the person, other than the finance officer or budget officer, designated as the buyer, buyer/purchaser, or purchasing agent for Macon-Bibb County. 
Card administrator means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the Macon-Bibb County Board of Commission. 
Contractor means any person having or seeking a contract with Macon-Bibb County. 
Contractual services means and includes all telephone, internet, cable, gas, water, electric light and power service; cleaning service; insurance; leases for all grounds, buildings, office or other space required by the using departments; rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other personal property; and other services except professional services. 
County purchase card, county p-card or county credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a Macon-Bibb County official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of Macon-Bibb County. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
Fixed asset means an asset having an original acquisition cost of over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per unit. 
Local labor, non-labor and administrative personnel means individuals who reside in Macon-Bibb County. 
Local offeror means any offeror whose principal place of business is within Macon-Bibb County. 
Local vendor means any vendor or bidder whose principal placed of business is within Macon-Bibb County. 
Offeror means any contractor responding to a request for proposals from Macon-Bibb County. 
Procurement means the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise acquiring of any supplies, services or construction. It also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service, or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
Professional services means those services within the scope of the practices of architecture, investment banking, professional engineering, planning, landscape architecture, land surveying, the medical arts, management analysis, account or auditing, law, psychology or any other similar kind or type of professional practice which is by its nature unique and for which competitive bidding or proposals are not feasible. 
Proposal means a solicited submission of information from a prospective offeror including how that offeror intends to perform certain work; the offeror's technical and business qualifications; the proposed delivery, warranty, other terms and conditions as those might differ from or supplement Macon-Bibb County's solicitation requirements; and any other information requested by Macon-Bibb County's solicitation. It shall also include such pricing information as may be required. 
Purchase order means an order for the procurement of supplies or services, and which is issued for a specific need, and includes data contained in the requisition. A purchase order may include, but not be limited to, the description of the requested item, delivery schedule, transportation data, price and any other terms and conditions which may be incidental to the desired purchase. 
Request for proposals means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals from prospective offerors. 
Requisition means that document whereby a using department requests that a purchase order or contract be entered into for a specific need and may include but is not limited to the description of the requested item, delivery schedule, transportation data, criteria for evaluation, suggested sources of supply and information supplied for the making of any written determination required by this article. 
Responsible bidder or offeror means a person who has the technical and financial capability in all respects to perform fully the contract requirements, and the experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment,, and credit which will assure good faith performance; or means a person who has submitted a bid or proposal which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids or request for proposals. 
Services means the furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include employment agreements. 
Sole source means there is only one (1) source for the required supply, service or construction item. 
Solicitation means an invitation for bids, a request for proposals, a request for quotations or any other documents or request issued by Macon-Bibb County for the purpose of soliciting bids or proposals to perform a Macon-Bibb Count contract. 
Specification means any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply, service, or construction item for delivery. 
Supplies means all personal property owned by Macon-Bibb County, including but not limited to equipment and materials, excluding land or a permanent interest in land and leases of real property. 
Surplus supplies means any supplies no longer having any use to the using agency. This term may include supplies that are worn out, scrap or obsolete. 
User agreement means the required agreement between the Board of Commission and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card. 
Using department means any department, agency, office, commission or other unit in Macon-Bibb County government using supplies or procuring contractual services unless otherwise provided by law. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-2. - Applicability and policy. 
This chapter shall apply to all contracts for procurement and for disposition of real and personal property entered into on behalf of Macon-Bibb County regardless of the source of funds, except this chapter shall not apply were superseded by federal or state law, or, with respect to federal or state grant funds, where superseded by federal or state requirements relating to such funds. The governing authority of Macon-Bibb County believes that it is in the public interest of Macon-Bibb County to purchase or procure supplies and services of a high quality from local businesses and vendors whose principal place of business is within Macon-Bibb County, and providing a local preference for Macon-Bibb County businesses, vendors and merchants will benefit the Macon-Bibb County's economy and potentially generate additional tax revenue for Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-3. - Unauthorized purchases. 
(a)  Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to order the procurement of any supplies or contractual services other than through the finance department, and any purchase order or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved by Macon-Bibb County officials, and Macon-Bibb County shall not be bound thereby. 
(b)  No purchases of materials, supplies, equipment and services shall be made in the name of Macon-Bibb County or one of its departments, or through its procurement department, except such as are required for official use by Macon-Bibb County or one of its departments. Purchases in the name of Macon-Bibb County or a department for personal use by an individual or for other than official use are prohibited, and no Macon-Bibb County funds will be expended or advanced therefor. 
(c)  Macon-Bibb County shall refuse to pay for any material, supplies, equipment or premiums hereafter purchased by any individual, committee or board from any person or business in which an elected or appointed employee of Macon-Bibb County has a significant financial interest. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-4. - Ordering procedure. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 19-5.3 or otherwise provided in this chapter, all using departments, either by or with the authorization of the head of the using department shall file with the buyer detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual services in such a manner, at such times, and for such future periods as the buyer shall prescribe.. 
(b)  A using department shall not be prevented from filing, in the same manner, with the buyer at any time a requisition or estimate for any supplies and contractual services, the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed. 
(c)  The buyer shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost, in consultation with the using agency. 
(d)  Completed requisitions must be forwarded to the budget officer who will ascertain whether sufficient appropriated funds are available to make the purchase and that the correct account has been used, the buyer is authorized to issue a purchase order fulfilling the requisition. 
(e)  If the budget officer confirms in writing that sufficient appropriated funds are available to make the purchase and that the correct account has been used, the buyer is authorized to issue a purchase order fulfilling the requisition. 
(f)  Except as provided in section 19-5.5 of this chapter, regarding emergency procurement, it shall be a violation of Macon-Bibb County policy for the head of any department or office to permit expenditures by their respective department or office that exceed amounts appropriated for the specific line item. Failure to comply with this subsection shall subject the head of the department or office to progressive discipline up to and including termination of employment. Copies of disciplinary actions shall be placed in the employee's personnel file and submitted to the mayor, county manager, mayor pro tem, and appropriations committee chair. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the head of a department or office who determines that funds appropriated in a specific line item will be insufficient to meet needs during the budget year to officially notify the mayor and finance officer in writing, including the reasons for the insufficiency. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-5. - Methods of procurement. 
All Macon-Bibb County procurement of supplies, construction and contractual services shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, pursuant to section 19-5.1, except as provided in the following: 
(1)  Section 19-5.2 (competitive sealed proposals); 
(2)  Section 19-5.3 (small purchases); 
(3)  Section 19-5.4 (sole source procurement); 
(4)  Section 19-5.5 (emergency procurement); and 
(5)  Section 19-5.6 (contracts with or obtained through other governmental entities). 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-5.1. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Invitations for bids. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications and contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. The invitation for bids shall also set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. 
(b)  Public notice. An advertisement inviting bids shall be published on the Macon-Bibb County web site and/or at least once in at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation in Macon-Bibb County. When appropriate, such an advertisement may also be published in a trade journal, a specialized industry publication or other publication. 
(c)  Contents of notice. The public notice shall contain a general description of the supplies or services to be procured, the location where appropriate solicitation documents may be obtained, and the time and place of opening of solicitation documents. 
(d)  Receipt of competitive sealed bids. All bids must be delivered to and received by the buyer on or before the date and time for opening of solicitation documents. 
(e)  Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publically in the presence of one (1) or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The name of each bidder, the amount of each bid and such other relevant information as the buyer deems appropriate shall be recorded. 
(f)  Bid evaluation. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids. 
(g)  Award. The contract shall be awarded by the buyer to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder provided that where a non-local vendor has submitted the lowest bid, a local vendor whose price is within five (5) percent of the lowest bid, and whose price is lower than other local vendors, shall be treated as the lowest bidder, and provided further that, after consultation with the using department and approval by the county manager or the mayor, the buyer may award a contract to other than the lowest responsible and responsive bidder based on "best value" to Macon-Bibb County. The basis for any award based on best value shall be documented in writing by the buyer. Best value shall be documented in writing by the buyer. Best value shall be determined based on the following criteria: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder or firm to perform the contract or provide the services required; 
(2)  The capability of the bidder or firm to perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder or firm; 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder or firm with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or services; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder or firm to perform the contract or provide the services; 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or services to the particular use required; 
(8)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid by the bidder or firm, in any; 
(9)  Price, provided that where a non-local vendor has submitted the lowest bid, a local vendor whose price is within five (5) percent of the lowest bid, and whose price is lower than other local vendors, shall be treated as having submitted the lowest bid; and 
(10)  Preference shall be granted to local vendors as against non-local vendors that are otherwise equal with respect to the above criteria. 
(11)  For contracts involving the use of S.P.L.O.S.T. funding, the degree and manner to which a bidder or firm intends to utilize local labor, non-labor, and administrative personnel. 
(h)  Exceeding available funds. If all bids exceed available funds as certified by the budget officer and the lowest and/or best bid does not exceed such funds by more than five (5) percent, the buyer, with approval of the mayor or county manager, may negotiate an adjustment of the bid price, including changes in the bid requirements with the winning bidder in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-5.2. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Conditions for use. When the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to Macon-Bibb County, a contract may be entered into by the use of competitive sealed proposals. 
(b)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(c)  Public notice. The buyer shall issue public notice for a request for proposals as provided in section 19-5.1(b). The public notice for a request for proposals shall describe the services required and list the type of information and data required of each offeror. 
(d)  Selection and award. Award shall be made by the buyer, upon the recommendation of the head of the using department or a selection committee chosen by the mayor, based upon criteria established and published in the solicitation, to the responsible and responsive offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to Macon-Bibb County. The selection criteria shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Previous experience demonstrating competence to perform work involved in the project; 
(2)  Past performance of previous contracts with respect to time of completion and quality of work and compliance with applicable laws and regulations: 
(3)  The fee or compensation demanded for the work or services, provided that where a non-local offeror has submitted the lowest such demand, a local offeror whose demand is within five (5) percent of the lowest demand, and whose demand is lower than other local offerors, shall be treated as having submitted the lowest demand; 
(4)  The ability to comply with the schedule of the commencement and completion of the work or services as required by Macon-Bibb County; 
(5)  The financial ability to furnish any necessary bonds or other security; 
(6)  The financial condition of the offeror; 
(7)  The ability to provide staffing personnel for the project, satisfactory to Macon-Bibb County; 
(8)  The relative advantage and value of the proposal to Macon-Bibb County; 
(9)  For contracts involving the use of S.P.L.O.S.T. funding, the degree and manner to which a bidder or firm intends to utilize local labor, non-labor, and administrative personnel; and 
(10)  Preference shall be granted to local offerors as against non-local offerors that are otherwise equal with respect to the above criteria. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-5.3. - Small purchases. 
(a)  Heads of all using departments may, in their discretion, make small purchases for expendable supplies and services without the assistance of the buyer in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The purchase is paid for out of petty cash. Upon approval of the finance officer, an audited petty cash account not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for incidental supplies may be established under any using department head. Upon prior written approval of the county manager, an audited petty cash account may exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), but in no event shall any account exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or 
(2)  The purchase is for a service or supply costing up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such purchases shall not include any items that the finance department has contracted to buy. 
(b)  For purchases over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), but not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), at least three (3) quotes shall be obtained and documented unless, after consultation with the buyer, it is determined that there are less than three (3) sources reasonably available for the supply or service being sought. In such cases, as many quotes as reasonably possible shall be obtained. For purchases up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), reasonable best efforts shall be used to obtain the best practice and value for Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Contracts shall not be artificially divided in order to fall under this section. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-5.4. - Sole source procurement. 
A contract or purchase order may be awarded without competitive solicitation when the buyer determines in writing, after conducting a good-faith review of available sources and with the approval of the county manager, that there is only one (1) source for the required supply or contractual service. The buyer shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery and terms. The buyer shall maintain a record of sole source procurements which lists each contractor's name, the name and type of each contract, and a listing of the item procured under each contract. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-5.5. - Emergency procurement. 
Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, when the county manager or the mayor determines that an emergency exists, such person may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements for suppliers or contractual services. The mayor or the county manager shall make such determination when there exists a threat to public health, welfare or safety under emergency conditions. Such emergency procurements shall be made with as much competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file by the buyer. As soon as practicable, the buyer shall make a record of each emergency procurement, shall set forth the basis for the emergency, the selection of the particular contractor, the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the supplies or services procured under the contract, and submit a written report with such information to the clerk of the commission. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-5.6. - Contracts with or through other governmental entities. 
Competitive solicitation shall not be required where Macon-Bibb County is contracting with other governmental entities, whether state, local or federal, and shall also not be required with respect to procurements through the state, as authorized by state law. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-6. - Monthly report to the Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
The buyer shall submit to the clerk of the commission, before the fifteenth (15 th ) of each month, a report listing for the previous month the following information: 
(1)  The titles of all requests for proposals and the method of source selections to be used: 
(2)  All contracts authorized by the commission, the method of source selection used, and the total dollar amount; 
(3)  All contracts authorized for procurement and the method of source selection used; 
(4)  All change orders or contract modifications authorized, the dollar amount, and the reason. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-7. - Right to reject all bids or proposals. 
With respect to all solicitations, Macon-Bibb County shall retain the right, in its sole discretion, to reject any and all bids or proposals and waive any formalities and shall not reimburse any bidder or offeror for its costs in responding or preparing to respond to any such solicitation by Macon-Bibb County. Each solicitation issued by Macon-Bibb County shall so state. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-8. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The buyer shall have the authority to join with other unites of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of Macon-Bibb County would be served thereby. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-9. - Surplus supplies. 
(a)  All using agencies shall submit to the buyer, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports of all surplus supplies. 
(b)  The buyer shall have the authority to transfer surplus supplies to other using departments and shall do so where warranted. 
(c)  The buyer shall have the authority to sell all surplus supplies that have become unsuitable for use by any using department of Macon-Bibb County. 
(d)  If the buyer determines that a surplus supply is unserviceable and beyond repair, and that the estimated market value of the surplus supply is less than Macon-Bibb County's estimated total cost to attempt to sell the surplus supply, including storage and transportation costs, the buyer shall have the authority to discard such supply, or, where feasible, to provide for recycling of such supply. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-10. - Macon-Bibb County contracts; authority to sign; procedure. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no contract with Macon-Bibb County shall be binding on Macon-Bibb County unless, at a minimum, the following requirements are fulfilled: 
(1)  All contracts must be signed by an authorized individual: 
(i)  The mayor shall have authority to sign all contracts. If authorized by the mayor, the county manager shall have the authority to sign contracts for procurement of supplies or contractual services. 
(ii)  All other contracts shall be negotiated at the direction of the mayor, and the mayor shall authorize and sign all such contracts unless the mayor in writing delegates the authorizing and signing responsibility to another Macon-Bibb County official, provided the delegation is for a specific contract or subject. 
(2)  All contracts shall be in writing and approved by the Macon-Bibb County attorney as to form. 
(3)  All contracts must be in compliance with state and federal law. 
(4)  No contract for the sale, exchange, lease or purchase of real estate shall be valid without approval by resolution of mayor and commission unless otherwise provided in this Code. 
(5)  No contract in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in either revenue or expense to Macon-Bibb County (directly or indirectly and regardless of the source of the funds) shall be valid unless approved by resolution or ordinance of mayor and commission. Contracts shall not be artificially divided in an effort to avoid this requirement. Contracts for fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less shall be approved as follows: 
(i)  Contracts for less than or equal to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) may be approved by the purchasing director; 
(ii)  Contracts for more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) up to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) must be approved by the Macon-Bibb County manager. 
(b)  All procurements of consultants, regardless of dollar amount, must be approved by resolution of mayor and commission after a review of the experience and qualifications of the proposed consultant to successfully perform the tasks for which the contract, procurement or appointment is made. Competitive procurement for such consultants shall be made when required by the mayor or resolution of mayor and commission. For purposes of this section, consultant shall include professionals and advisors (other than Macon-Bibb County employees and attorneys) whose services are procured to give advice or provide professional services or to develop specific programs or design specific guidelines or policies. In the procurement of consulting services, preference shall be given to qualified Macon-Bibb County persons, firms, or corporations whenever practicable provided that the local preference established in this section shall in no way be construed to inhibit, limit or restrict the right and obligation of Macon-Bibb County to consider costs and to compare the experience and qualifications of the proposed consultant to successfully perform the tasks for which the contract, procurement, or appointment is made. 
(c)  Any contract entered into by Macon-Bibb County may be cancelled or terminated pursuant to its terms by either the official who executed the contract, the mayor or by resolution of mayor and commission. 
(d)  The clerk of commission shall authenticate all contracts and shall maintain a permanent, indexed file of originals on all Macon-Bibb County contracts. 
(e)  Before entering into a contract with any vendor, Macon-Bibb County shall require such vendor to provide proof of current payment of any undisputed taxes, fees, penalties, fines or other revenue due Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-24, § 1, 4-1-2014 ; Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-11. - Leasing municipal property. 
There shall be no entry into possession of any Macon-Bibb County owned premises which is the subject of any proposed lease with Macon-Bibb County until such lease is fully authorized and executed as required by this Code. All tenants of leased Macon-Bibb County-owned real estate shall abide by all terms, conditions and covenants contained in the lease agreement. Upon first knowledge by Macon-Bibb County of the failure of any tenant to abide by such terms, conditions or covenants, Macon-Bibb County shall give a written notice to the tenant of the lease agreement violation and that the tenant must cease and desist from committing the lease agreement violations within a period of ten (10) days or any longer period which may be specified by the applicable lease agreement. Upon the tenant's failure to present evidence that no provision of the lease agreement has been violated or, alternatively, to cease and desist from continuous violations of the lease agreement, the mayor shall initiate the appropriate legal process to terminate the lease agreement and remove the tenant from the premises. If the tenant takes corrective action acceptable to Macon-Bibb County within the grace period, then the possession of the leased premises shall continue, per the terms of the lease agreement. However, a second violation of the same lease provision during the balance of the lease period shall not be curable, but shall result in the initiation of the appropriate legal process to terminate the lease agreement and remove the tenant from the premises. No exceptions to the provisions of this subsection shall be permitted without the approval of Macon-Bibb County commission by resolution. After the effective date of the ordinance from which the subsection is derived, all new lease agreements entered into by Macon-Bibb County shall contain a paragraph adopting by reference the provisions of this subsection. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-12. - Selling municipal property. 
(a)  All real and personal property of Macon-Bibb County shall be disposed of by the buyer upon order of the mayor pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6, and any other applicable state law, and as provided in this Code. The buyer shall be the designated agent of Macon-Bibb County for purposes of such disposal. 
(b)  Unless the commission, by resolution, provides otherwise, the sale of real property by sealed bid or public auction shall require, in additions to any other required notice under O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6, the posting of a sign, with the maximum size as permitted by the applicable zoning regulations, on the subject property for a period of not less than fifteen (15) days immediately preceding the date of the bid opening or public auction. The sign shall state". "For sale by Macon-Bibb County; for further information, contact buyer at (here list the current telephone number)." 
(c)  All real property of Macon-Bibb County in narrow strips or so shaped or so small as to be incapable of being used independently as zoned or as streets, whether owned in fee or used by easement, may be sold or conveyed to abutting property owners where such sale or conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting property. The estimation of the value of any property to be sold shall be that fair market value as established by the tax assessor's office or a licensed appraiser for the state of Georgia approved by the Macon-Bibb County attorney. Such sale or conveyance may be accomplished without first submitting to the process of an auction or the solicitation of sealed bids; provided, however, that each abutting property owner shall be notified not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than sixty (60) days preceding the last day for the receipt of the proposal. If the sale or conveyance is accomplished without the benefit of auction or sealed bids, the abutting property owners shall be notified directly or by advertising in a newspaper of general circulation in Macon-Bibb County at least once not less than fifteen (15) nor more than sixty (60) days prior to negotiations. After notice has been given, direct negotiations may be undertaken with the abutting property owner to facilitate the highest and best use of the property. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-13. - Inventory of fixed assets. 
All assets costing five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more shall be inventoried and tagged by the finance department. All fixed assets shall be depreciated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-14. - Macon-Bibb County credit cards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use a Macon-Bibb County credit card for any purpose unrelated to official Macon-Bibb County business. Any person who violates this paragraph shall be personally liable to Macon-Bibb County for the amount charged to the credit card, including applicable fees, and prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. The foregoing penalties are in addition to the penalties described in paragraph (c) of this section. 
(b)  No person shall use a Macon-Bibb County credit card to obtain a cash advance. Any person who violates this paragraph shall be personally liable to Macon-Bibb County for any charges associated with the cash advance and shall be subject to the penalties described in paragraph (c) of this section. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be grounds for disciplinary action up to and including discharge and the loss of credit card privileges. In the case of an elected official, upon resolution of the governing authority, failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be grounds for public censure and the loss of credit card privileges. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-15. - Macon-Bibb County purchasing cards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use a purchasing card to make any purchase unauthorized by this section or otherwise unrelated to official Macon-Bibb County business. Any person who violates this subsection shall be personally liable to Macon-Bibb County for the amount of the purchase and prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. The foregoing penalties are in addition to the penalties described in paragraph (i) of this section. 
(b)  A purchasing card shall not be used for: 
(1)  Goods or services for personal use; 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Tobacco products; 
(4)  Meals, except meals for Macon-Bibb County officials and employees during authorized business or travel for which no per diem is provided and meals for the mayor and the mayor's guests while conducting official Macon-Bibb County business; 
(5)  Cash advances; 
(6)  Gift cards, stored value cards, calling cards pre-paid cards, or similar items. 
(c)  A purchasing card may be used only for: 
(1)  Services and supplies not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Purchases shall not be artificially divided so as to circumvent the one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) limit; 
(2)  Supplies provided by vendors with annual or state contracts; 
(3)  Fuel provided by vendors with weekly contracts; and 
(4)  Authorized travel expenses of elected officials, the county manager, Macon-Bibb County attorney, clerk of commission, municipal court clerk, and department heads while on official Macon-Bibb County business. 
(d)  The Macon-Bibb County finance officer may provide purchasing cards to select offices and departments (hereinafter "agencies") of Macon-Bibb County. Each purchasing card is issued in the name of the department head who shall: 
(1)  Ensure that the use of each card is accounted for on forms provided by the finance department; 
(2)  Ensure that each card is secured when not in use; 
(3)  Designate which subordinates, if any, are authorized to use a purchasing card; 
(4)  Ensure that the monthly billing for each card is reconciled and submitted with corresponding receipts to Macon-Bibb County finance department in a timely manner; 
(5)  Ensure that any billing discrepancies are resolved with the vendor; 
(6)  Document any unauthorized use of a purchasing card and report same to the administration; 
(7)  Document any vendor disputes related to purchasing card and report same to the purchasing agent/buyer on at least a quarterly basis; and 
(8)  Notify the purchasing agent/buyer immediately upon learning that a card is lost or stolen. 
(e)  When a department receives a monthly billing statement for purchases made on a purchasing card, the department head or his designee shall; 
(1)  Verify the accuracy of the monthly billing statement by comparing each purchase with the corresponding receipt; 
(2)  Complete and sign a submission statement on forms provided by the finance department; and 
(3)  Submit the reconciled monthly billing statement, corresponding receipts, and submission statement to the accounts payable bookkeeper in the finance department within ten (10) business days of the date the monthly billing statement was received by the agency. 
(f)  No person shall use a purchasing card without first signing for the card on a log sheet provided by the finance department. 
(g)  As soon as reasonably possible after using a purchasing card, the purchaser shall complete and sign the log sheet provided by the finance department and return the card with all receipts to the department head or his designee. Repeated or unjustified failure to provide receipts may result in the purchaser being held personally liable to Macon-Bibb County for the amount of the purchase in addition to any other penalties authorized by this section. 
(h)  Any purchaser who fails to produce a required receipt shall provide a written explanation to the department head or his designee for submission to the finance department. The explanation shall include, at a minimum, a description of the items purchased, the name of the vendor, the reason for the purchaser's failure to produce the receipt, and the efforts the purchaser made to produce the receipt. Failure to provide an adequate explanation may result in the purchaser being held personally liable to Macon-Bibb County for the amount of the purchase in addition to any other penalties authorized by this section. 
(i)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be grounds for disciplinary action up to and including discharge and the loss of purchasing card privileges. In the case of an elected official, upon resolution of the governing authority, failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be grounds for public censure and the loss of purchasing card privileges. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Sec. 19-16. - Purchasing and credit card use policy for elected officials. 
(a)  The Macon-Bibb County Board of Commission, in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
(b)  No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the County's purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
(c)  The County will not make any payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this ordinance or for any purchases that are not authorized by this ordinance. 
(d)  The Board of Commission shall designate the financial officer as the County purchasing card and credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator shall include: 
(1)  Manage County issued purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing cards and credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6)  Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(7)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this ordinance, County procurement ordinances and policies, County purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution or any duly authorized agent of each organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. § 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
(10)  Maintain records for at least seven years or as otherwise provided by the County's record retention policy. 
(e)  County purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this ordinance, County purchasing card and credit card user agreement, County procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
(1)  Only authorized officials may use a County purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to employees. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
(2)  Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the County purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: 

 
(3)  County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the County's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the County's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the County purchasing card and credit card user agreement. 
(4)  Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized county elected official for five years or as otherwise provided by the County's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit or the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official County duties. 
(5)  All receipts and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 dg seq. 
(6)  Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection of misuse or abuse of County issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the County. 
(i)  All purchases shall be reviewed according to the procedures established in Sec. 19-14 and 19-15 of this chapter. 
(ii)  The card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(f)  An elected official shall reimburse the County for any purchases made with a County issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this ordinance or the user agreement. 
In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this ordinance may result to: 
(i)  A warning; 
(ii)  Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a County purchase card or credit card; or 
(iii)  Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a County purchase card or credit card. 
Nothing in this ordinance shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0060, § 1, 12-15-2015 ) 
Secs. 19-17—19-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINORITY AND SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISES AND EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY 
DIVISION 1. - MINORITY AND SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISES 

Sec. 19-30. - Providing minority and small business enterprises meaningful opportunities to contract with Macon-Bibb County. 
It shall be the policy of Macon-Bibb County to ensure that minority and small business enterprises are provided meaningful opportunities to contract with Macon-Bibb County to provide supplies and services and to take affirmative steps to affect this goal. Affirmative steps, to be implemented and supervised by the finance director or his/her designee, shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Creating and operating a "one-stop" clearinghouse for minority and small business enterprises desiring to do business with Macon-Bibb County by: 
a.  Offering minority and small business enterprises a central location and, where possible, a single streamlined method to register to receive bid solicitations; 
b.  Where appropriate, providing the same services above on a self-help basis through both on-site and web-based computer registration; and 
c.  Organizing and maintaining a current data base of prospective minority and small business bidders by specialty, interest, qualifications and other relevant criteria. 
(2)  Conducting a program of targeted outreach to expand the bidder pool for minority and small business enterprises by: 
a.  Conducting project-specific outreach to local firms in advance of major local projects; 
b.  Conducting trade-specific outreach to local firms to increase local bidder participation where apparent deficiencies exist; and 
c.  Presenting "reverse trade shows" and similar outreach events to give a broad cross section of local businesses the opportunity to learn what opportunities are available. 
(3)  Providing technical support to minority and small business enterprises by: 
a.  Assisting businesses in understanding and complying with complex governmental contracting requirements such as Davis-Bacon wage rates and SAVE; 
b.  Assisting businesses in finding solutions to problems such as bonding, insurance, and Workers Compensation which may pose an obstacle to bidding/contracting; and 
c.  Brokering additional technical services through such organizations as the University of Georgia Small Business Development Center, the Small Business Administration, the Chamber of Commerce and others. 
(4)  Monitoring program results by capturing data, performing analysis and providing reports to the mayor and commission so as to evaluate the effectiveness of Macon-Bibb County's initiatives in affording minority and small business enterprises meaningful opportunities to contract with Macon-Bibb County. 
Secs. 19-31—19-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY 

Sec. 19-41. - Title. 
This division shall be known and be cited as the "Macon-Bibb County Equal Employment Opportunity Ordinance." 
Sec. 19-42. - Policy. 
Macon-Bibb County declares that discrimination because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or political affiliation is inconsistent with the Constitution, laws and policies of the United States, Georgia and Macon-Bibb County, and Macon-Bibb County establishes its policy to prohibit discrimination by contractors and subcontractors who do business with Macon-Bibb County against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or political affiliation. 
Sec. 19-43. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to all Macon-Bibb County contracts and purchase orders exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
Sec. 19-44. - Definitions; words defined. 
For the purposes of this division, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall have the following meanings: 
Affirmative action program means a written, results-oriented program meeting the requirements of this division, Macon-Bibb County rules adopted pursuant to this division, and other applicable regulations, designed to ensure that a contractor makes a good faith effort to employ women and minorities at all levels of employment in the contractor's or subcontractor's business, and to treat employees equally without regard to their status as a woman or as a minority. 
An affirmative action program will include, but not be limited to, the following aspects of employment pertaining to women and minorities: 
(1)  Hiring; 
(2)  Upgrading; 
(3)  Demotion; 
(4)  Transfer; 
(5)  Layoff; 
(6)  Termination; 
(7)  Rates of pay and other forms of compensation; 
(8)  Training programs and selection for training, apprenticeship; 
(9)  Recruitment advertising, recruitment efforts; 
(10)  Employment goals; 
(11)  Written plan to achieve those goals with timetables. 
Sec. 19-45. - Administrative authority; functions and duties. 
The provisions of this division shall be administered and enforced by Macon-Bibb County finance director or his/her designee, who shall serve as contract compliance officer for purposes of administration of the provisions of this division. The contract compliance officer shall have the following functions and duties: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement of the equal employment opportunity in purchasing and contracting sections of this division. 
(2)  The establishment of procedures to effectuate the equal employment opportunity in purchasing and contracting sections of this division. 
(3)  The determination in writing, with reasons thereof, of whether potential contractors are in compliance with the equal employment opportunity in purchasing and contracting sections of this division before the award of any public bid or the execution of any Macon-Bibb County contract or purchase order. 
(4)  Approval of affirmative action programs submitted by potential contractors. 
(5)  Investigation of alleged violations of this division and the issuance of written determinations following such investigations, stating the reason therefor. 
(6)  Maintenance of an equal opportunity contractor's precertification list, to be made available as a public record. 
(7)  Maintenance of statistical data showing the demographic characteristics of the available pool of labor skills on which Macon-Bibb County relies for determinations of compliance by contractors with this division, to be made available as a public record. 
(8)  Provision of all necessary forms, applications, documents and papers necessary to comply with this division. 
(9)  Determination of whether a potential contractor and subcontractors, if any, have met the requirements of this section. If bids are submitted, this determination must be made within fifteen (15) days unless the contractor has submitted insufficient information for making the determination. 
(10)  Review of cases where a contractor fails to implement previously made contract compliance agreements to determine whether there should be further efforts or alternative approaches, including but not limited to, contacts with industry, related labor unions and requests for the assistance of any pertinent federal agency for further negotiations. 
(11)  Determination of whether any penalty set forth in section 19-50 is appropriate. 
(12)  Notification to an affected party by registered mail that the party has the right to appeal a determination of noncompliance with this division or refusal to precertify. Such appeal shall be sent to the contract compliance officer, within seven days of receipt of the notice of noncompliance or refusal to precertify. 
(13)  Notification of the chief procurement officer of a determination of noncompliance with this division or a refusal to precertify a contractor, bidder or offeror and the filing of any appeal from such determination or refusal. 
Sec. 19-46. - Requirements for execution of Macon-Bibb County contracts. 
No contract shall be executed on behalf of Macon-Bibb County unless at least one (1) of the following requirements is met: 
(1)  Reflection of labor pool demographics with workforce of fifteen (15) or more employees. The contractor has demonstrated that the contractor's workforce, if consisting of fifteen (15) or more employees, reflects the demographic characteristics of the available pool of labor skills normally utilized by the contractor, according to the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Program (OFCCP) guidelines, as they may be amended, and that each subcontractor with fifteen (15) or more employees has met one (1) of the requirements of this section. If a contractor or subcontractor has a Macon-Bibb County-area workforce of fifteen (15) or more employees, the contractor shall meet this requirement if the contractor's or subcontractor's Macon-Bibb County-area workforce reflects the local demographic characteristics of the available pool of labor skills. 
Affirmative action program. The contractor has demonstrated good faith efforts to comply with the contractual requirement of section 19-42 and section 19-46 . Such good faith is to be demonstrated by an existing affirmative action program, including but not limited to training programs, advertising, recruitment efforts and goals and timetables, to be approved by the contract compliance officer. The contractor must demonstrate that each subcontractor has met one (1) of the requirements of this section. An affirmative action program shall be approved if it is pursuant to an order of a federal court with jurisdiction over the contractor's employment practices or if it meets the standard of the EEOC and OFCCP guidelines, as they may be amended, provided that certification by the EEOC or OFCCP shall be accepted as fulfillment of this subsection only when issued within thirty (30) days of the submission of the contractor's program to Macon-Bibb County. 
(2)  Emergency or sole source contract. The contract has been determined by the mayor, the mayor's designee or the finance director to be an emergency procurement, pursuant to section 19-5.5 or to be available only through a sole source, pursuant to section 19-5.4 . 
(3)  Fourteen or less employees. The contractor and all subcontractors, if any, have work forces of fourteen (14) or less employees. 
Sec. 19-47. - Equal employment opportunity clause. 
The equal employment opportunity (EEO) clause required in all Macon-Bibb County contracts shall read as follows: 
"During the performance of this agreement, the contractor agrees as follows: 
(a)  The contractor shall not discriminate against any employee, or applicant for employment, because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability, or political affiliation. As used herein, the words "shall not discriminate" shall mean and include without limitation the following: recruited, whether by advertising or other means; compensated, whether in the form of rates of pay, or other forms of compensation; selected for training, including apprenticeship; promoted; upgraded; demoted; downgraded; transferred; laid off; and terminated." 
The contractor agrees to and shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices to be provided by the contracting officers setting forth the provisions of the EEO clause. 
(b)  The contractor shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees, placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, domestic relationship status, parental status, familial status, sexual orientation, national origin, gender identity, age, disability or political affiliation. 
(c)  The contractor shall send to each labor union or representative or workers with which the contractor may have a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding a notice advising the labor union or worker's representative of the contractor's commitments under Macon-Bibb County's equal employment opportunity ordinance and other Macon-Bibb County Code or ordinance and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and applicants for employment. The contractor shall register all workers in the skilled trades who are below the journeyman level with the U.S. Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training. 
(d)  The contractor shall furnish all information and reports required by the contract compliance officer and shall permit access to the books, records, and accounts of the contractor during normal business hours by the contract compliance officer so as to ascertain compliance with the Equal Employment Opportunity Ordinance. 
(e)  The contractor shall take such action with respect to any subcontractor as Macon-Bibb County may direct as a means of enforcing the provisions of paragraphs (a) through (h) herein, including penalties and sanctions for noncompliance. 
(f)  The contractor and its subcontractors, if any, shall file compliance reports at reasonable times and intervals with Macon-Bibb County in the form and to the extent prescribed by the contract compliance officer. Compliance reports filed at such times directed shall contain information as to employment practices, policies, programs, and statistics of the contractor and its subcontractors. 
(g)  The contractor shall, specifically or by reference, include the provisions of paragraphs (a) through (h) of the equal opportunity clause in every subcontract or purchase order so that such provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
(h)  A finding, as hereinafter provided, that a refusal by the contractor or subcontractor to comply with any portions of this program as herein provided and described, may subject the offending party to the penalties: 
(1)  Withholding from the contractor in violation all future payments under the involved contract until it is determined that the contractor or subcontractor is in compliance with the provisions of the contract; 
(2)  Refusal of all future bids for any contract with Macon-Bibb County or any of its departments or divisions until such time as the contractor or subcontractor demonstrates that there has been established and there shall be carried out all of the provisions of the program as provided herein; 
(3)  Cancellation of the public contract; 
(4)  In a case in which there is substantial or material violation of the compliance procedure herein set forth or as may be provided for by the contract, appropriate proceedings may be brought to enforce those provisions, including the enjoining, within applicable law, of contractors, subcontractors or other organizations, individuals or groups who prevent or seek to prevent directly or indirectly compliance with the policy as herein provided. 
Sec. 19-48. - Notice to and requirements of bidders and offerors. 
(a)  Notice. The purchasing agent shall include, as part of any contract specifications published for the use of prospective bidders and offerors, a notice that all bidders or offerors will be required to comply with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Requirements. Each bidder or offeror shall submit any information required by this division in duplicate to the contract compliance officer and purchasing agent as part of the bid documents. Each bidder or offeror shall file, as part of the documents of such contract, employment information in such form as may be required by the contract compliance officer, and shall ensure that each subcontractor also files such information. 
Sec. 19-49. - Precertification. 
(a)  Precertification list. The contract compliance officer shall place upon the precertification list the names of all suppliers who, upon application, meet equal employment opportunity standards and criteria as set forth in subsections 19-46(a) and 19-46(b) . When placed upon the precertification list, a contractor shall be deemed in compliance with this division and eligible to enter into a contract for a period of twelve 12 months subsequent to the date of being placed on the precertification list, if the contract has met the requirements of subsection 19-46(a) , or, if the contractor has met the requirements of subsection 19-46(b) , for a period of time less than twelve (12) months subsequent to the date of being placed on the precertification list, to be determined by the contract compliance officer. Such listing may be renewed by application of the contractor. 
(b)  Notice to contractor. The contract compliance officer shall notify any contractor, within thirty (30) days after application for listing as permitted in subsection (a) , whether or not the contractor has complied with this division and has met the criteria for being an equal employment opportunity contractor. The mayor or the mayor's designee shall have the authority to grant to the contract compliance officer, upon application, an extension of fifteen (15) days in which to make such notification. A contractor may appeal the decision of the contract compliance officer as provided for in section 19-54 . 
Sec. 19-50. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
(a)  Penalties. The finding of refusal or failure by a contractor or subcontractor to comply with any portions of this division may subject the offending party to any or all of the following penalties: 
(1)  Withholding from the contractor in violation all future payments under the involved contract until it is determined that the contractor or subcontractor is in compliance with the provisions of the contract. 
(2)  Refusal of all future bids for any contract with Macon-Bibb County or any of its departments or divisions until such time as the contractor or subcontractor demonstrates that there has been established and there shall be carried out all of the provisions of the program as provided in this division. 
(3)  Removal from the precertification list. 
(4)  Cancellation of the contract. 
(b)  Procedures. 
(1)  If there is substantial or material violation of the compliance procedure set forth in this division or as may be provided for by the contract, appropriate proceedings may be brought by Macon-Bibb County to enforce those provisions, including the enjoining, within applicable law, of contractors, subcontractors or other organizations, individuals or groups who prevent or seek to prevent, directly or indirectly, compliance with the policy provided in this division. 
(2)  If the contract compliance officer determines that the contractor has violated or has failed to comply with the equal employment opportunity requirements of the contract, after affording such contractor a reasonable time to correct such situation and where negotiations have been of no avail, such officer shall make a finding of noncompliance and shall transmit the findings and recommendations thereon to the mayor or the mayor's designee and to the contract compliance hearing officer, who shall hold a hearing thereon if requested by the contractor. 
Sec. 19-51. - Project site reports. 
Under this article, when a construction contract exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), a project site report, on forms provided by the contract compliance officer, shall be completed and submitted by the contractor and subcontractor not more than forty-five (45) days from the beginning of the work on the site. Such project site reports shall include such information as to employment practices and statistics of the contractor and subcontractor and shall be in such form as the contract compliance officer may prescribe. If the term of the contract exceeds ninety (90) days, such project site report shall be submitted once each forty-five (45) days or more frequently if the contract compliance officer determines that such a submittal is necessary for a continuing evaluation of the work force composition. Subcontractors shall complete and submit such project site reports to the contractor for transmittal to Macon-Bibb County. Post-award reports shall be viewed as one (1) means of determining contract compliance. 
Sec. 19-52. - Compliance determinations as to certain leases of real property. 
The execution of a lease of real property owned by Macon-Bibb County shall constitute a final and conclusive determination of compliance for such lease with this article, and no further action or determination shall be made for such lease when the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  Such real property, at the time of execution, is leased by Macon-Bibb County to a person other than a governmental entity; 
(2)  The provisions of the lease agreement do not require the expenditure by Macon-Bibb County of any general funds of Macon-Bibb County; 
(3)  Such lease will be used by the lessee for the purpose of ensuring the availability of construction funds from a private lender; 
(4)  The acquisition of improvements upon the property so leased will increase employment; 
(5)  The contractor is in compliance with section 19-45 at the time of execution of the lease; and 
(6)  The mayor or the mayor's designee has certified the existence of the circumstances listed in subsections (1) through (5) of this section in writing before or after the date of execution of the lease. 
Sec. 19-53. - Contract compliance hearing officer. 
(a)  Appointment and term. The mayor shall appoint a contract compliance hearing officer to be confirmed by the Macon-Bibb County Commission. No employee or elected official of Macon-Bibb County shall be appointed who is a contractor or subcontractor or who owns any interest in any contracting or subcontracting firm or who does business with Macon-Bibb County as a contractor. The officer shall serve for a two-year term and shall not be eligible to serve more than two consecutive terms. 
(b)  Authority. Unless an action has been initiated previously in the courts for essentially the same cause of action, the contract compliance hearing officer shall have the authority to review and determine: 
(1)  Any appeal by a contractor, bidder or offeror from a determination of noncompliance with the equal employment opportunity in purchasing and contracting requirements in this division made by the contract compliance officer; 
(2)  Any appeal by a contractor, bidder or offeror from the refusal of the contract compliance officer to place the contractor, bidder or offeror on the list of precertified businesses, pursuant to section 19-49 . 
(c)  Duties and compensation. A contract compliance hearing officer shall hold hearings upon appeal by any contractor, bidder or offeror. The hearings shall be held in any municipal building and shall be open to the public. Each hearing officer shall be paid the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per day or for any portion of the day that the hearing officer serves. Administrative services, as may be required by the officer, shall be furnished by the departments and agencies of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 19-54. - Appeals. 
(a)  Determination of noncompliance or refusal to precertify. Upon a determination of noncompliance by a contractor, bidder or offeror with the equal employment opportunity in purchasing and contracting requirements of this division or a refusal to precertify the contractor, bidder or offeror by the contract compliance officer, the contract compliance officer shall notify such contractor, bidder or offeror in writing by registered mail, setting forth the reasons for the determination or refusal. 
(b)  Time for filing notice of appeal. The contractor, bidder or offeror (aggrieved party) may appeal the determination of noncompliance or refusal to precertify by filing a notice of appeal with the contract compliance officer in writing within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice of determination of noncompliance or refusal to precertify. 
(c)  Notice of hearing date and hearing. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal from the aggrieved party by the contract compliance officer, the contract compliance officer, within three (3) days of receipt of the notice, shall forward the notice to the contract compliance hearing officer. The duties of the contract compliance hearing officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  The contract compliance hearing officer shall set a hearing date not more than seven (7) days from the date of receipt of the notice from the contract compliance officer. The contract compliance hearing officer shall cause notice of the hearing to be served upon all parties, by registered mail. Such notice shall set forth with particularity the charges filed by the aggrieved party and shall include the hearing date, time and place. 
(2)  At the hearing, all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be allowed to produce any and all evidence in either party's possession concerning the alleged violation. 
(d)  Decision. The contract compliance hearing officer shall, within seven (7) days of the hearing, make a written decision on the appeal, which decision shall affirm, alter or deny the determination of noncompliance or refusal to precertify by the contract compliance officer. The contract compliance hearing officer shall decide whether the determination of noncompliance or refusal to precertify was in accordance with the law and the terms and conditions of the solicitation before the contract is awarded or penalties are imposed. If the contract compliance hearing officer finds for the aggrieved party, the contractor, bidder or offeror shall be added to the precertification list, as provided in section 19-49 , or permitted to submit a bid or offer in response to the solicitation. If the contract compliance hearing officer affirms the decision of the contract compliance officer, the contract compliance officer shall make recommendations and findings of the final disposition to the mayor or the mayor's designee. 
(e)  Notice of decision. The contract compliance hearing officer shall issue written notice of the decision on the appeal to all parties within seven (7) days of the hearing. The notice of the decision shall be sent to all parties by registered mail and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. 
(f)  Standard of review for factual issues. A determination of an issue of fact by the contract compliance hearing officer shall be final and conclusive, unless arbitrary, capricious, fraudulent or clearly erroneous. 
Sec. 19-55. - Intergovernmental cooperation. 
If specific discriminatory practices are found to exist in the administration and enforcement of the equal employment opportunity program of Macon-Bibb County, in addition to the sanctions that may be imposed as provided for by the terms of the contract, Macon-Bibb County may forward all pertinent information to the appropriate federal and state agencies. 
Secs. 19-56—19-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SMALL LOCAL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM 

Sec. 19-61. - Affirmative procurement initiatives for enhancing SLBE contract participation. 
(a)  The County, in conjunction with the Procurement Department and the Director of the OSBA, may utilize the following Affirmative Procurement Initiatives in promoting the award of County contracts to SLBEs. 
1.  Bonding and Insurance Waiver: Except as prohibited by state and/or federal law, the County, at its discretion, may waive or reduce the bonding, or insurance requirements depending on the type of contract and whether the County determines that the bonding and or insurance requirements would deny the SLBE an opportunity to perform the contract which the SLBE has shown itself otherwise capable of performing. 
2.  Price Preferences: The County may award a contract to an SLBE which submits a bid within 5% (inclusive) of a low bid by a non-SLBE. However, this price preference would not apply if the award to the SLBE would result in a total contract cost that is, on an annual basis, more than $250,000 higher than the low bid; nor would it apply on a contract in which the total contract cost would exceed the County's budgeted price for the contract. A non-SLBE may partner with a certified SLBE(s) for purposes of receiving the 5% price preference provided that written confirmation is provided in the bid certifying that the participating SLBE(s) will be performing clearly defined and monetarily valued commercially useful functions of at least 33⅓ percent of the total contract cost. 
3.  Evaluation Preferences: The County may reserve from 10% up to 20% of the total points available for evaluation purposes for respondents to an RFP to firms that are certified as SLBE firms, or to joint ventures that have SLBE partners that collectively own at least 51% of the joint venture entity, and are performing clearly defined and monetarily valued commercially useful functions on that contract. 
a.  For Architectural & Engineering, Professional Services, Other Services, and design/build or CM at risk contracts that are awarded based on evaluation criteria and that are let with the Evaluation Preference at the predetermined percentage of total points, there shall be SLBE participation criterion (based upon percentage dollar value of total work that is to be performed by the SLBE participants on the team) for all contracts let at predetermined percentage of the total points awarded. The determination of the Evaluation Preference points awarded to each bidder will be made using the suggested model outlined in the "Point Evaluation Table" below: 
POINT EVALUATION TABLE 

 
4.  Mandatory Subcontracting: 
a.  The Goal Selection Committee may, on a contract-by-contract basis, at its discretion, require that a predetermined percentage of a specific contract, up to 40%, be subcontracted to eligible SLBEs, provided however, that if the prime contractor is a certified SLBE, then the prime contractor shall be able to count the dollar value of the work performed by its own forces towards satisfaction of the Mandatory Subcontracting goal for that contract. 
b.  An SLBE prime contractor may not subcontract more than 49% of the contract value to one or more non-SLBE firms. 
c.  A prospective bidder on a County contract shall submit at the time of bid SLBE - Form S providing the name of the SLBE subcontractor or subcontractors and describing both the percentage of total contract dollar value being subcontracted to the SLBE, and the work to be performed by the SLBE for those dollars. A bidder may request a full or partial waiver of this mandatory subcontracting requirement from the Director of the OSBA for good cause by submitting the SLBE Unavailability Certification form to the Director of the OSBA at the time of bid. Under no circumstances shall a waiver of a mandatory subcontracting requirement be granted without submission of adequate documentation of Good Faith Efforts by the bidder and careful review by the Director of the OSBA. The Director of the OSBA shall base his or her determination on a waiver request on the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the requestor of the waiver has made Good Faith Efforts to subcontract with qualified and available SLBEs; 
(2)  Whether subcontracting would be inappropriate and/or not provide a "Commercially Useful Function" under the circumstances of the contract; and 
(3)  Whether there are no certified SLBE firms that are qualified and available to provide the goods or services required. 
d.  In the absence of a waiver granted by the Director of the OSBA, failure of a Prime Contractor to commit in its bid or proposal to satisfying the mandatory SLBE subcontracting goal shall render its bid or proposal non-responsive. The OSBA will notify the Procurement Department in advance of contract award, the pending review of a waiver request from a bidder and the issuance of a waiver to a Prime Contractor. 
e.  In the absence of a waiver granted by the Director of the OSBA, failure of a Prime Contractor to attain a mandatory subcontracting goal for SLBE participation in the performance of its awarded contract shall be considered a material breach of its contract and grounds for termination of all existing contracts with the County, debarment from performing future County contracts, and/or any other remedies available under the terms of its contract with the County or under the law. The OSBA will notify the Procurement Department of the determination of the failure of a Prime Contractor to attain a mandatory subcontracting goal. 
f.  A Prime Contractor is required to notify and obtain written approval from the Director of the OSBA in advance of any reduction in subcontract scope, termination, or substitution for a designated SLBE Subcontractor. Failure to do so shall constitute a material breach of its contract with the County. The OSBA will notify the Procurement Department of the reduction in scope, termination, or substitution for a designated SLBE Subcontractor. 
5.  Sheltered Market: 
a.  The Director of the OSBA, in conjunction with the Director of Procurement, may select certain contracts which have a contract value of $25,000 or less and reserve them for limited competition and award to a SLBE or a joint venture with a SLBE through the Sheltered Market program. Similarly, the Director of OSBA, in conjunction with the Director of Procurement may select certain contracts that have a value of $10,000 or less and reserve them for limited competition and award to an Emerging SLBE firm through the Sheltered Market program. 
b.  In determining whether a particular contract is eligible for the Sheltered Market Program, the Director of the OSBA and Director of Procurement shall consider: (1) whether there are at least three SLBEs or Emerging SLBEs that are available and capable to participate in the Sheltered Market Program for that contract; (2) the degree of underutilization of the SLBE and Emerging SLBE prime contractors in the specific industry categories; and (3) the extent to which the County's SLBE and Emerging SLBE prime contractor utilization goals are being achieved. 
c.  If a responsive and responsible bid or response is not received for a contract that has been designated for the Sheltered Market Program, or if the apparent low bid is determined in the Procurement Director's discretion to be too high in price, the contract shall be removed from the Sheltered Market Program for purposes of rebidding. 
6.  Competitive Business Development Demonstration Project: 
a.  With the concurrence of the Director of the OSBA, in conjunction with the Director of Procurement, the County may reserve certain contracts for placement into a Competitive Business Development Demonstration Project ("CBD Demonstration Project") wherein those contracts require the purchase of goods or services from an industry that routinely has too few sources of bidders to provide meaningful or sufficient competition for such County contracts. The purpose for the placement of a contract into the CBD Demonstration Project shall be to encourage the development of new capacity within an industry to competitively bid on the future supply of specialized goods or services to the County. 
b.  Contracts reserved for CBD Demonstration Projects shall be subject to a Request for Proposals process whereby the selected firm will be required to be a joint venture between an established firm or experts in that relevant industry and an SLBE firm. The scope of work for the selected joint venture shall include teaching a hands-on curriculum to SLBE firms that have expressed an interest in diversifying into the relevant industry, in addition to performing the customary functions of the contract. This curriculum shall include both administrative skills (e.g. cost estimating, bidding, staffing, project management) and technical skills (e.g., hands-on demonstration of how to perform necessary tasks in the field) required to qualify for future County contracts and to successfully compete in the industry. 
c.  The Director of OSBA, in conjunction with the Director of Procurement, shall be required to select SLBE candidate firms for participation on such CBD Demonstration Projects on the basis of an assessment of their current capabilities and their likely success in diversifying into the new relevant industry once given technical assistance, training, and an opportunity to develop a performance track record in the industry. 
( Ord. of 5-16-2017(1), § I ) 
Chapter 20 - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 20-1. - General provisions. 
It is the intent of this article to consolidate all records management operations under the direction and control of the Macon-Bibb County records committee and the records management officer to the end that records shall be properly safeguarded and then disposed of in accordance with a plan which is designed not only to effect proper maintenance and retention of records, but also the disposition of records in such fashion as will preserve historical records and provide for efficiency and economy in the operations of Macon-Bibb County. The records management plan shall comply with the requirements of the "Georgia Records Act." 
Sec. 20-2. - Macon-Bibb County records committee established, officers. 
(a)  There is hereby created the Macon-Bibb County records committee which shall constitute the policy making body for records management for Macon-Bibb County. The committee shall be composed of persons occupying the following positions: 
(1)  The clerk of the commission, who shall be chairman of the committee and who shall also be the records management officer. 
(2)  The chairman of the courthouse and properties committee of the commission or of any successor committee. 
(3)  The judge of the probate court. 
(4)  The clerk of the superior court. 
(5)  The judge of the municipal court. 
(6)  The tax commissioner. 
(7)  The finance director. 
(b)  The committee may select an individual who need not be a member, to serve as secretary. 
Sec. 20-3. - Duties of committee. 
It shall be the duty of the committee to review, approve, disapprove, amend or modify proposed records disposition standards which shall be submitted to the state department of archives and history and the state records committee for their approvals. Upon approvals by the latter two agencies, the standards shall then become the official records management standards for the county. Amendments to these standards may be accomplished in like manner. 
Sec. 20-4. - Records management officer; duties. 
The records management officer shall be responsible for executing the records management program for Macon-Bibb County pursuant to the approved standards adopted by the committee to the end that the records management program shall result in efficient and economical records management practices. The records management officer shall prepare and submit reports of the status and progress of the records management program to the Macon-Bibb County records committee and to the commission. 
Sec. 20-5. - Duties of heads of administrative departments. 
It shall be the duty of the head of each administrative department of Macon-Bibb County to cooperate fully with the records committee and the records management officer in complying with the provisions of this article and with the provisions of the Georgia Records Act and, specifically, to comply with the approved standards adopted by the records committee. 
Sec. 20-6. - Open records officer; duties. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of Open Records Officer. The Clerk of Commission is hereby designated as the Open Records Officer for Macon-Bibb County and all of its related and subsidiary entities. The Open Records Officer may designate in writing an Assistant Open Records Officer(s) as required to perform the duties of his or her office. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Open Records Officer and his or her duly designated assistant open records officer(s) to accept written requests to inspect and copy public records, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et. seq., and to produce to the requester all records responsive to a request within a reasonable amount of time not to exceed three (3) business days of receipt of a request, unless the time for response is extended in accordance with law. The Open Records Officer shall ensure that all open records requests are handled in accordance with the Georgia Open Records Act. No request shall be deemed filed until served upon the Open Records Officer. Oral requests and requests, whether oral or in writing, served upon any other officer or employee of Macon-Bibb County shall not be deemed filed, until the requester has filed his or her request, in writing, with the Open Records Officer. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0026, § 1, 3-1-2016 ) 
Chapter 21 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, adopted December 20, 2016 , amended ch. 21, in its entirety, to read as set out herein. Previously ch. 21 was titled "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control." 

Sec. 21-1. - Title. 
This Chapter will be known as the "Macon-Bibb County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, 12-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 21-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
(1)  Best Management Practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(2)  Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
(3)  Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
(4)  Certified Personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
(5)  Coastal Marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
(6)  Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
(7)  CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert International, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
(8)  Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
(9)  Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
(10)  Design Professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert International, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
(11)  Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
(12)  District: The Ocmulgee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(13)  Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
(14)  Drainage Structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
(15)  Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(16)  Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. Title 12, Chapter 7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 21-4(C) of this Chapter. 
(17)  Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
(18)  Final Stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
(19)  Finished Grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
(20)  Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
(21)  Ground Elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
(22)  Land-Disturbing Activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 21-3(5). 
(23)  Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
(24)  Local Issuing Authority: The Macon-Bibb County Commission, which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), acting through the Macon-Bibb County Engineering Department, is the designated agent for enforcement of this Chapter. 
(25)  Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440, et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
(26)  Natural Ground Surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
(27)  Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
(28)  NOI: A Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit. 
(29)  NOT: A Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit. 
(30)  Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
(31)  Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
(32)  Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(33)  Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
(34)  Phase or Phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
(35)  Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
(36)  Properly Designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
(37)  Roadway Drainage Structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
(38)  Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
(39)  Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
(40)  Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Ocmulgee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(41)  Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(42)  State General Permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
(43)  State Waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
(44)  Structural Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(45)  Trout Streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, et seq., in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
(46)  Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(47)  Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(48)  Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, 12-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 21-3. - Exemptions. 
This Chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, et seq. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of subsection 4(C) of this Chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1)-(7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the Local Issuing Authority, the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the Local Issuing Authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, 12-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 21-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this Chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 21-4 (B) and (C) of this Chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this Chapter and the NPDES General Permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections 21-4 (B) and (C) of this Chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.GA. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f) of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The Local Issuing Authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections 21-4(C)(15)-(17), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1, et seq., for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1, et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 21-4(B)(2) of this Chapter; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraphs 21-4(C)(16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five (25) foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a fifty (50) foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, et seq., except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five (25) foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The Director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a twenty-five (25) foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280, et seq. And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a twenty-five (25) foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than five hundred (500) square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in EPD Rule 391-3-7-.01 (r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the Division at least fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1, et seq., shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections 21-4 (B) and (C) of this Chapter. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Chapter or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, 12-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 21-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review the general development plans before submission. The Local Issuing Authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this Chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Macon-Bibb County without first obtaining a permit from the Macon-Bibb County Engineering Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Macon-Bibb County Engineering Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 21-5(C) of this Chapter. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsection 21-4 (B) and (C) of this Chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four (4) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(1) shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a Local Issuing Authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the Local Issuing Authority shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the Local Issuing Authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required by subsection 21-4(C)(15)-(17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection 21-5(B)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the Local Issuing Authority and the District have entered into an agreement which allows the Local Issuing Authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the District. The Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised Plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the Local Issuing Authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The Local Issuing Authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the Local Issuing Authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection 21-4 (B) and (C) of this Chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this Chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the District and the Local Issuing Authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this Chapter, any variances required by subsections 21-4(C)(15)-(17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection 21-5(B)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this Chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the Local Issuing Authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Local Issuing Authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his or her successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his or her successor in title is in violation of this Chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The Local Issuing Authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, 12-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 21-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The Macon-Bibb County Engineering Department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the Local Issuing Authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. 
(b)  If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this Chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he or she shall be deemed in violation of this Chapter. 
(c)  The Local Issuing Authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(d)  The Macon-Bibb County Engineering Department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this Chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(e)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the Local Issuing Authority, the Commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(f)  The District or the Commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The District or the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The District or the Commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(g)  The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local Issuing Authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a Local Issuing Authority. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, 12-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 21-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this Chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his or her business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this Chapter, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order. 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his or her Designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his or her Designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he or she shall be deemed in violation of this Chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 21-5(B)(6). The Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this Chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this Chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director issued as provided in this Chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five-hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any City charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five-hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this Chapter under county ordinances approved under this Chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five-hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, 12-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 21-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this Chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, 12-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 21-9. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the Local Issuing Authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the appropriate committee of the Macon-Bibb County Commission within thirty (30) days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Local Issuing Authority, after exhausting his or her administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, 12-20-2016 ) 
Sec. 21-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This Chapter shall become effective on the 20 th day of December, 2016. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this Chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this Chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this Chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this Chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Local Issuing Authority or District for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this Chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the State as defined thereby. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0090, § 2, 12-20-2016 ) 
Chapter 22 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, adopted November 17, 2015 , repealed art. I, §§ 22-1—22-15, in its entirety and enacted a new art. I to read as set out herein. Former art. I pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Original Code. 

Sec. 22-1. - Adopted; implementation. 
(a)  The commission declares it to be the policy of the consolidated government in furtherance of its responsibility to protect the public health, safety, and well being of its citizens and to protect and enhance the quality of its environment, to revise and update existing laws, and to institute and maintain a comprehensive jurisdiction-wide program for all solid waste management which will assure that the storage, transportation, collection, and disposal of solid waste does not adversely affect the health, safety, and well being of the public and does not degrade the quality of the environment by their reason of location, design, method of operation or other means and which, to the extent feasible and practical, makes maximum utilization of the resources contained in solid waste referred to in this chapter as recovered material. 
(b)  It is further declared to be the policy of Macon-Bibb County to educate and encourage generators and handlers of all solid waste to reduce and minimize to the greatest extent possible the amount of solid waste which requires collection, treatment, or disposal through source reduction, reuse, composting, recycling, and other methods to promote markets for and engage in the purpose of goods made from recovered materials and goods which are recyclable. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-2. - Definitions. 
Brush means grass cuttings, weeds, hedge trimmings, tree trimmings and tree limbs not to exceed four feet in length and four inches in diameter. 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
Garbage means all animal and vegetable matter subject to decay or putrefication, such as waste material and refuse from kitchens, residences, grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafés, drugstores, hotels, rooming and boarding houses and other deleterious substances, not including dirt, concrete or rocks, human excreta, sewage, and carcasses of dead animals. 
Industrial waste means solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations that are not a hazardous waste regulated under the Hazardous Waste Management Act and regulations promulgated by the board of natural resources, chapter 391-3-11. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, waste resulting from the following manufacturing processes: electric power generation; fertilizer/agricultural chemicals; food and related products/by-products; inorganic chemicals; iron and steel products; leather and leather products; nonferrous metal manufacturing; foundries; organic chemicals; plastics and resins manufacturing; pulp and paper manufacturing; rubber and miscellaneous plastic products; stone, glass, clay, and concrete products; textiles manufacturing; transportation equipment; and water treatment. This term does not include mining waste or oil and gas waste. 
Inert waste means wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed. 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, refuse, garbage, yard waste, debris, dead animals or other discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in this section. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Open dump means a disposal facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment. 
Permitted disposal facility means any facility which is permitted by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, for the treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste. 
Person means the state of Georgia or any other state, agency or institution thereof and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 
Public or private property means the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
Recapping facility means any facility which remanufactures waste tires for reuse. 
Receptacle means any container used for storing municipal solid waste. 
Recovered materials means those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recovered materials processing facility means a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. 
Refuse means all discarded waste such as garbage, trash, brush and dead animals. 
Single stream recycling means a system in which all recyclable materials are placed in a single bin or container. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 USC Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material. 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities. 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste, a hazardous substance, or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. With the exception of non-hazardous, low-impact animal by-products classified by the state department of natural resources, "waste" includes without limitation, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material; tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, air contaminants from any source or facility, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-3. - Reserved. 
Sec. 22-4. - Special provisions relating to yard trimmings. 
(a)  The following restrictions are placed upon yard trimmings which are generated in or may ultimately be disposed of within Macon-Bibb County. 
(1)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste. 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at municipal solid waste disposal facilities having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion unless approved by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources 
(3)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(4)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. 
(b)  It is the intention of this section to comply with the mandate contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2 and not to impose any requirement not mandated by said code section. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, adopted November 17, 2015 , repealed art. II, §§ 22-21—22-39, in its entirety and enacted a new art. II to read as set out herein. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Original Code. 

Sec. 22-5. - Tampering with solid waste receptacles. 
The tampering or meddling with solid waste receptacles or other receptacles of refuse, or scattering the contents thereof is prohibited and shall be punished as provided by section 1-6. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-6. - Preparation of municipal and commercial solid waste for collection. 
All municipal solid waste, commercial solid waste, brush and other refuse shall be prepared and placed for collection as provided by the terms of this chapter and the failure to prepare and place such material as is provided by the terms of this chapter shall constitute a violation under this chapter. Each day's failure to comply with the terms of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. The division of solid waste shall not and will not make collections of such material where it has not been prepared and placed for collection as is provided by the terms of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-7. - Storage of solid waste. 
(a)  Municipal solid waste shall be stored in wheeled containers furnished by Macon-Bibb County which shall be covered at all times. Such containers must be kept clean, free of accumulations of garbage and maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for solid waste and litter disposal. Boxes and other similar solid waste which because of size cannot be placed in the furnished wheeled containers shall be collapsed, folded flat and neatly placed alongside the container. 
(b)  Commercial solid waste shall be stored in the same manner as in subsection (a), or in dumpster provided or approved by the director of solid waste. Such dumpsters must be kept clean, free of accumulations of garbage and maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for commercial solid waste disposal. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-8. - Constant supervision and surveillance over solid waste receptacle required. 
Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of a house or building used for residence or business is required to maintain supervision and surveillance over any solid waste receptacle on such premises. If the solid waste is not removed and the receptacle is not emptied and the contents removed by an employee of the division of solid waste, the owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee must notify the director of the division of solid waste of this fact within two business days following the scheduled pickup date. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-9. - Placing solid waste receptacles for collection. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, if the house, building or premises from which garbage is to be collected and removed is adjacent to an alley, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of the premises shall be required to place the solid waste receptacle adjacent to the alley for collection in order that they may be easily accessible to the collector from the outside of any fence that may surround the premises. If it is not practicable to collect and remove the garbage from an alley, or if there is no alley adjacent to the premises, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of the premises shall place the containers for collection so that the collector shall not be required to go more than twenty-five (25) feet beyond the rear of the principal building, house, dwelling unit or structure concerned for the purpose of collection, nor shall the collector be required to service containers situated within a fence unless the containers can be easily removed by the collector without going inside of the fenced area. In no event shall the collector be required to enter garages, breezeways, carports, basements or other structures to make collections. If it is not practicable to place the containers for collection as above specified, the director of solid waste shall designate the location of containers. Collectors shall not be required to collect garbage from any premises where a vicious dog is maintained without restraint. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the placement of brush and other yard trimmings not normally placed in solid waste receptacles for collection as provided in section 22-13. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-10. - Manner of collection, removal, disposal; private collection and disposal regulated. 
Macon-Bibb County reserves the right to collect and dispose of solid waste either through its own employees or by contract with a person engaged in the business of solid waste collection and disposal. No person except the duly authorized employees of the department of solid waste shall empty solid waste receptacles or convey or transport garbage, yard trimmings, brush or other refuse on the streets, alleys and public thoroughfares of Macon-Bibb County without a written permit granted and issued by the director of the Department of Solid Waste. The Director of Solid Waste may establish regulations concerning the collection of commercial and institutional garbage in the interest of public health and safety. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-11. - Frequency of collection. 
(a)  Every residential and commercial user of solid waste collection service shall be entitled to receive at least one (1) garbage pickup per week and one (1) single stream recycling pickup biweekly. Yard waste will be collected on the same day that garbage service is provided, except when, in the opinion of the route supervisor, additional yard waste collection is necessary. 
(b)  Uncontainerized yard waste may be collected by Macon-Bibb County or its contractor or upon call by the owner or occupant of premises. 
(c)  The Director of Solid Waste may temporarily change the frequency in or method of the collection of garbage in a specified area for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-12. - Burning of refuse in solid waste receptacles prohibited. 
No person shall burn any garbage in solid waste receptacle maintained under the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-13. - Removal of yard trimmings. 
(a)  Suitable containers required. Yard trimmings of such a nature that it cannot be put in a solid waste receptacle shall be carefully accumulated or placed in suitable containers weighing not more than fifty (50) pounds each or placed in a pile not to exceed three (3) feet by three (3) feet by six (6) feet. The director of solid waste is authorized to charge a fee for collection of more than two (2) cubic yards of yard trimmings and the amount of the fee shall be provided for by regulation of the Solid Waste Department. 
(b)  Location of containers. For convenience of collection, such accumulated yard trimmings or suitable containers shall be placed adjacent to the solid waste receptacle as specified in sections 22-9. 
(c)  Yard trimmings such as limbs, pine straw, leaves and so forth shall be placed by the curb or on the shoulder of the road. All pine straw and leaves must be containerized. Limbs must be cut into four-foot lengths and limbs less than four inches in diameter shall be bundled into packages weighing fifty (50) pounds or less. The director of solid waste is authorized to charge a fee for collection of more than two (2) cubic yards of yard trimmings and the amount of the fee shall be provided for by regulation of the Solid Waste Department. Limbs, tree trunks and other yard waste debris in excess of four inches in diameter will not be removed by Macon-Bibb County unless and until permitted by regulations adopted as provided in section 22-19. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-14. - Removal of tree trunks, logs, limbs and tops required. 
(a)  The owner of property within Macon-Bibb County on which trees are cut down whether by the owner or by another is required to promptly, following the cutting, remove or have removed from property at his own expense all tree trunks, logs, limbs and tops and other debris resulting therefrom. The director of solid waste is authorized to charge a fee for collection of such yard trimmings and the amount of the fee shall be provided for by regulation of the Solid Waste Department. 
(b)  Residue, regardless of size, from commercial tree cutting activities will not be removed by Macon-Bibb County. "Commercial tree cutting activities" shall include any cutting, whether done by the property owner or by another at his direction, of timber for any purpose other than that necessitated by routine removal of dead trees or clearing of storm debris; but even in the latter event, the limitations described above shall apply. In either such case, such residue will be removed by the contractor, owner or occupant of the premises. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-15. - Collection and disposal of dead animals. 
The collection of heavy dead animals such as cows, horses and mules is not and shall not be included in the services furnished by Macon-Bibb County, and the owner or the person having charge thereof shall dispose of the same at his own expense, in the manner and by the method directed by the director of solid waste. Dogs, cats or any other dead animals shall not be placed in garbage containers. Such small dead animals may be picked up by the division of solid waste upon request. The director of solid waste is authorized to charge a fee for collection of such animals and the amount of the fee shall be provided for by regulation of the Solid Waste Department. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-16. - Collection, disposal of heavy accumulations. 
The collection of heavy accumulations, such as brick, broken concrete, lumber, ashes, clinkers, dirt, plaster, sand, gravel, automobile frames, dead trees and other bulky or heavy materials is not and shall not be included in the services furnished by Macon-Bibb County, and the owner or the person having charge thereof shall dispose of same at his own expense in the manner and by the method directed by the director of the Department of Solid Waste. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-17. - Collection, disposal of industrial wastes. 
The collection of wastes resulting from manufacturing, assembling, processing and other industrial operations, waste oils and other similar materials from garages and filling stations, accumulations from packing houses, killing and dressing establishments for poultry and fowl and wholesale fruit and vegetable houses shall not be included in the services furnished by the division of solid waste and such premises or places shall dispose of such material at their own expense, in the manner and by the method directed by the director of the Department of Solid Waste. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-18. - Waste from building construction, remodeling, or landscaping. 
Waste from building construction, remodeling or landscaping is not deemed garbage so as to be removable by Macon-Bibb County Department of Solid Waste. The director of solid waste is authorized to charge a fee for collection of such waste and the amount of the fee shall be provided for by regulation of the Solid Waste Department. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-19. - Other regulations. 
The commission may from time to time adopt other implementing regulations not inconsistent with this Code which have as their purpose the orderly collection and disposal of solid waste and yard trimmings. Any such regulations, upon adoption, shall be available for inspection in the office of the director of solid waste. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-20. - Levy of fees; payment. 
(a)  To pay for the collection and disposal of solid waste on a once-a-week basis, a fee is levied for the period beginning January 1, 2016, and continuing thereafter until changed, in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Roll-out carts, including municipal solid waste, commercial solid waste and yard waste, $240.00. 
(2)  Two cubic yard dumpsters, $616.32. 
(3)  Four cubic yard dumpsters, $842.04. 
(4)  Eight cubic yard dumpsters, $1,225.80. 
(b)  The fees levied for the several types of collections described above shall be paid in quarterly installments. Installments shall be due and payable on the first day of each calendar month thereafter until a change in fees is adopted. 
(c)  Persons desiring collection and disposal of solid waste and yard waste from two cubic yard, four cubic yard and eight cubic yard dumpsters on a more frequent basis may do so by making arrangements directly with the Macon-Bibb County contractor and paying the additional cost therefor to the contractor as follows: 
(1)  For two-cubic-yard dumpsters, $12.84 per pickup. 
(2)  For four-cubic-yard dumpsters, $17.54 per pickup. 
(3)  For eight-cubic-yard dumpsters, $25.54 per pickup. 
Macon-Bibb County reserves the right to revise the amount of fees levied as costs of collection and disposal vary and as is necessary to ensure that the cost of collection and disposal are fully covered by fees. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-21. - Levy and lien. 
The fees hereby levied for the years above specified in the amounts shown are levied severally against the owner and occupant of the residential premises, including mobile home courts and trailer courts. The collection of such fees shall be accomplished for Macon-Bibb County by, and paid into the treasury through, the Tax Commissioner of Macon-Bibb County. The fees for solid waste collection hereby levied shall be due and payable on the last day of each calendar quarter, and if the same are not paid within ten days thereafter, there is hereby levied a late charge equal to five percent of the amount due for the previous calendar quarter, or $1.00, whichever is greater. 
If on the 11 th day following the end of the fiscal year of Macon-Bibb County which ends on June 30 in each year, there are due any sums as principal or late charges on fees theretofore accruing, the same shall, beginning with July 11 in each year, bear interest on the aggregate of fees and late charges due at the rate of 1% per month, 12% per annum. Uncollected fees, whether or not due, shall constitute a continuing lien against the real property served and upon the personal property of the occupant until paid. Fi. fas. may be issued by the tax commissioner for fees which are past due and collection may be effected as provided by law for ad valorem taxes. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ; Ord. No. O-16-0053, § 1, 6-21-2016 ) 
Sec. 22-22. - Exemptions; appeal. 
The commission is authorized and empowered to grant exemptions from the service charges in whole or in part where through inaccessibility, or other good cause shown, the collection and disposal service contemplated in this article has not been received, and in like fashion the commission may relieve persons from the payment of the fees prescribed in sections 22-20 and 22-21 where such persons are indigent according to standards from time to time to be fixed by the committee. The commission may fix standards for determining indigency in the same manner as it adopts regulations. Any person deeming itself to be exempt from the payment of the service fee or fees prescribed in sections 22-20 and 22-21 shall make application for exemption to the Macon-Bibb County director of solid waste who shall transmit the same to the commission for its determination. Decisions of the commission shall be final. The tax commissioner shall be authorized to rely on the certificate of the director of solid waste certifying that any person has been relieved from the payment of fees prescribed by this article, and such certificate shall state the period of time such exemption is to remain in force. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-23. - Nonliability for damages. 
(a)  Whenever the owner or occupant of property from which solid waste or yard waste is collected by Macon-Bibb County, authorizes or permits the use of private driveways or other portions of private property for such collection, such authorization or permission, whether expressed or implied, shall be deemed to constitute a waiver on the part of the owner or occupant, either or both, of the premises of any claim for damages against Macon-Bibb County, its officers, agents, employees and contractors which result from the use of such private property in the collection process. 
(b)  Macon-Bibb County and any person acting as its contractor pursuant to contract shall be deemed to have been invited and authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste and yard waste, either or both, in those cases where other than curbside collection is authorized by ordinance or by regulation. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-24. - Use of facilities required; notice of service termination; resumption. 
(a)  The owner and occupant of each residential premises, including mobile home courts and trailer courts, shall dispose of solid waste only by the means of a collection and disposal service provided by Macon-Bibb County, which, at its option, may accomplish the same by its employees or by contract, all as set out in section 22-10, and no such person shall dispose of solid waste generated by or from residential premises except by such means. 
(b)  Whenever a residential unit becomes vacant, destroyed by fire or other casualty, or is demolished or for some other similar reason no longer generates solid waste, it is incumbent severally upon the owner and former occupant of the premises to notify the Macon-Bibb County director of solid waste in writing of the circumstances. The director of solid waste may cause such investigation of the report as is appropriate and if he finds the same to be consistent with the provisions hereof, the premises in question shall be removed from the solid waste collection digest and the fee charge shall thereupon cease. Until such notice shall have been received by the director of solid waste, however, the fee shall continue to be charged and shall continue to be collectible, notwithstanding the fact that service is not in fact rendered to the residential premises. Similarly, if service has been discontinued pursuant to a notice as provided in this section but is thereafter resumed, or if land which was previously vacant has been improved with residential structures and begins to receive service, it shall be incumbent on the owner and occupant, severally, to notify the director of solid waste of such commencement of resumption of service and the fee prescribed in this article shall be payable for such property from and after the date of such notice. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall be deemed to preclude the Macon-Bibb County director of solid waste from adding to the solid waste collection digest residential properties which are found, independent of any notice, to be receiving the service whether or not such notice has been received and to make the appropriate fee charges. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Sec. 22-25. - Utilization of solid waste containers. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall become effective as to every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee owning, using or occupying any building, house or structure occupied as a residence or business immediately upon the delivery of a wheeled container, or other approved receptacle, to the premises by the solid waste department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of such owner, occupant, tenant or lessee to place all garbage and yard waste needing removal from the premises in a wheeled container which complies with the specifications of the director of solid waste and, when the container is filled to capacity, to place any excess in either a plastic bag or a standard metal or plastic refuse container and place the bag or container next to the location of the wheeled container for collection on designated pickup days. 
(c)  The owner, occupant, tenant or lessee shall, not earlier than 7:00 p.m. on days preceding the normal pickup days designated by the director of solid waste, place the container or containers at the location established by the director of solid waste for pickup. The owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee shall be responsible for placing the container or containers at the location established, prior to pickup time on the day of pickup. Containers shall be removed from the location to the premises of the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee no later than 7:00 p.m. on the normal day of pickup, subject only to the exceptions hereinafter enumerated. 
(d)  Violation and penalties. It shall be unlawful to leave a container at the designated pickup station or any place on the street at any time other than allowed by ordinance. Any owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee having custody or control of the container who fails to remove the container from the location and place it back on the premises by the appropriate time shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(e)  The following are excepted from this section: 
(1)  Any person with documented disabilities, because of age or physical condition, living on premises where there is no resident or occupant thereof physically capable of placing the containers at the location established by the director of solid waste, shall notify the director of solid waste and, if the director of solid waste shall find that there is no one in or upon the premises on a regular basis physically capable of placing the container at the location previously designated, shall have the garbage, yard waste and refuse picked up at the place on the premises where the containers are maintained by the occupant. 
(2)  The director of solid waste may establish exceptions for designated premises which he determines to be unsuitable for curbside pickup or for premises which do not permit a truck to drive onto the premises, taking into consideration the terrain features or other physical impediments, and at such premises, pickup service shall be provided to dwelling units as determined by the director of solid waste or, in the alternative, the occupant may be instructed to place only plastic, securely tied bags at a designated location on scheduled pickup days. 
(f)  The wheeled containers furnished by Macon-Bibb County shall not be removed from the premises to which they are delivered and it shall be the duty of the occupant of the premises, in the event the dwelling is to be vacated by the occupant, to notify the director of solid waste at least three days prior to the vacancy. 
(g)  In the event a container previously furnished by Macon-Bibb County to any premises is damaged, destroyed or stolen, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of the premises to immediately notify the director of solid waste and also the county sheriff and to cooperate with said officials in investigating the cause of the damage, destruction or theft. Further, the owner or occupant shall, if requested to do so, appear in the appropriate court as a witness should a prosecution result from the investigation. Should the owner or occupant fail to so report or so cooperate, or should the director of solid waste, as a result of the investigation determine the damage, destruction, or theft was caused, or contributed to, by the negligence of the owner or occupant, then the cost of repair or replacement of the container, or $45.00, whichever is less, shall be a charge against the owner and occupant; otherwise Macon-Bibb County shall repair or replace the container at no charge. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the director of solid waste to deliver a wheeled cart to each of the occupied residential premises and to give appropriate notice to the occupant of each residential premises which shall designate the pickup location for the premises and the normal days of pickup, together with instructions as to delays of pickup caused by inclement weather or holidays. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0059, § 1, 11-17-2015 ) 
Secs. 22-26—22-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-46—22-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LITTER AND DEBRIS CONTROL 

Sec. 22-51. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this division shall have the following meanings: 
Building means any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering any occupancy. 
Debris, for the purpose of this division, shall include residue from the burning of wood, coal, or other combustible material, as well as paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, fallen, broken, or destroyed trees or tree limbs or other material or objects not a part of the land and constituting a health or safety hazard. 
Lot, for the purposes of this division, shall mean one or any one or more of several contiguous parcels of land making up a block, measured and set apart for use or occupancy. 
Road or street, for the purposes of this article shall be mutually inclusive, and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Sec. 22-52. - Deposit of garbage, trash, and brush prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw or deposit any garbage, trash, brush, stagnant water, dead animals, discarded items or other debris into, upon or along a drain, gutter, street, sidewalk, vacant lot or upon any public or private premises within Macon-Bibb County; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prevent the placing of such items on private property at or near the front property line thereof for routine pickup in accordance with the policies of the county. 
(b)  Every person convicted in municipal court of a violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(c)  Whenever any garbage, trash, etc., which is dumped in violation of this section is discovered to contain any articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon, addressed to such person or in any other manner indicating that the article belongs or belong to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this provision. 
Sec. 22-53. - Dumping and littering of streets and sidewalks, etc., prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, store, dump, park or broadcast any junk, metal, brickbats, stones, plaster, lumber, trash, garbage, yard waste, grass clippings, leaves, litter, paper or similar rubbish or junk upon any public street, sidewalk, lane, alley, park, or reserve, or in the storm drainage system in Macon-Bibb County, except to place such materials for collection and disposal in a manner authorized by the department of public works. 
(b)  Any person using a mechanical leaf blower is responsible for collection and disposal of any yard waste, grass clippings, leaves, sediment, trash or other debris displaced by the device, in a manner permitted by law. It shall be unlawful for any person to use such a device to blow any material into a street or into the storm drainage system. 
(c)  Every person convicted in the municipal court of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by the Charter and section 1-6, provided, that any fine levied for violation of this section shall not be less than $25.00. 
Sec. 22-54. - Boxes, containers on streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on the streets or sidewalks in the county any crates, boxes or any similar containers, except authorized trash receptacles. 
Sec. 22-55. - Littering, spitting in churches and public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or throw hulls, peelings or other litter upon the sidewalk or in or upon the floors of churches, public halls, theaters, buses, auditoriums and other similar public places. 
Sec. 22-56. - Objects in streets and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or to throw or to leave or abandon on any street in the county any glass bottle or can or the fragments thereof, or any broken glass or crockery of any kind, or nails, tacks, brickbats, or any article or object likely to injure barefoot persons using such streets or sidewalks or to injure or puncture the tires of vehicles utilizing pneumatic tires for their locomotion. 
Sec. 22-57. - Handbills and advertising matter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in or on any automobiles in Macon-Bibb County or otherwise distribute or cause to be distributed anywhere in Macon-Bibb County, any handbills, circulars, pamphlet, poster, post cards or like material likely to be dropped or blown about. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place on private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard or other literature, except with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of the property or intended recipient. 
Sec. 22-58. - Transportation of refuse restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any garbage, trash, refuse or other cargo upon the public thoroughfares if the same is of a character or substance which is likely to be deposited from the motor vehicle onto the public rights-of-way unless the same is secured by containers, tarpaulin, or other device in such fashion as to effectively prevent such deposit on the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  The duties and responsibilities herein imposed shall be applicable alike to the owner of motor vehicles, the operator thereof, and the person from whose home or business establishment the garbage, trash, refuse or other cargo originated. 
Sec. 22-59. - Duty to ensure cleanliness of area surrounding businesses. 
The proprietor and person in charge of every business and commercial establishment in Macon-Bibb County, jointly, and severally, is hereby required to keep the driveways, yards, parking lots, sidewalks, and areas adjacent thereto and under his control clean at all times and to place sweepings in a container to prevent rescattering. 
Sec. 22-60. - Owners to provide containers for litter. 
Every owner, occupant, tenant and lessee using or occupying any commercial, institutional or industrial building or property shall be obligated, jointly and severally, to provide litter containers of such character, size, number and type as may be specified by the Macon-Bibb County director of solid waste to be reasonably required to hold litter generated by operations on the premises. Specifically, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the requirement for such containers shall apply to shopping centers, supermarkets, convenience stores, fast food restaurants, service stations and similar establishments; and shall likewise apply to commercial establishments, garages, schools, colleges, and churches. 
Sec. 22-61. - Parking lot owners to provide containers. 
Every owner and every operator of a private or commercial parking lot shall provide litter containers of adequate size, character and number, as specified by the director of solid waste, to contain the litter generated by the operations of such parking lot. 
Sec. 22-62. - Litter, trash and debris resulting from special occasions. 
Litter, trash and debris resulting from special occasions such as holidays, moving, or cleanup will be made into bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds each and not more than four feet long, two feet wide and two feet high, and made secure. Empty cartons will be broken down before being placed in bundles. Bundles will be placed at or near the front property line for pickup. 
Sec. 22-63. - Garbage storage areas to be kept clean. 
Every owner, occupant and lessee of a house or building shall be jointly and severally required to maintain garbage storage areas in a clean condition and to insure that all garbage is properly containerized. 
Sec. 22-64. - Work areas to be kept in clean condition. 
All work areas, including but not limited to, loading and unloading areas, shall be provided with containers for the deposit of litter created by packing or repacking operations and the owner of the premises and the occupant thereof shall jointly and severally maintain surveillance to insure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. 
Sec. 22-65. - Construction site to be maintained. 
(a)  Property owners and prime contractors in charge of a construction site are jointly and severally required to furnish litter containers for construction litter. All litter from construction and related activities shall be containerized and shall be picked up and placed in containers at the end of each work day. 
(b)  Rock, waste building materials, or other refuse resulting from building or remodeling operations or resulting from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property just prior to its occupancy, shall not be removed by the solid waste division. Such waste shall be removed by the building contractor, owner, or occupant of the building at his own expense. 
Sec. 22-66. - Duty of owners with respect to litter. 
The owner, occupant and lessee of all property, jointly and severally, are required to remove all litter and place the same in proper containers. Vacant lots, borders, parking lots, embankments, fences, walls and sidewalks shall be kept free of litter. Parking lots, shopping centers, convenience stores, drive-in restaurants and all other commercial and industrial enterprises shall see to it that their respective properties are kept litter-free. 
Sec. 22-67. - Cleaning of property at owners' expense. 
In cases where litter has remained on private property for a period of 30 days following written notice by the director of public works to the owner of such property to remove the same, the director of public works is authorized but not required to cause such litter to be removed and to bill the owner for the cost thereof. If the owner fails or refuses to pay the bill for the cleanup service within 30 days from the date of billing, then execution may be issued against the property upon which such service is rendered for the amount of the cleanup service charge; and from and after the recording of such execution on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, such execution shall constitute a lien on the property on which the service is rendered until the same shall have been fully paid and satisfied. Such executions may be enforced in the same manner and with the addition of interest and costs as provided by law for the enforcement of executions for ad valorem taxes of the county. Action by the director of public works shall not preclude prosecution for a violation of this article. 
Sec. 22-68. - Complaint; trial; order; failure to comply; assessment; collection. 
(a)  When it becomes necessary to issue a citation to an owner or occupant of lands subject to the provisions of this division, said citation shall be in the form of a written complaint setting forth, particularly, the nature and location of the nuisance and the identity of the person complained against. If the court determines that the conditions do in fact constitute a nuisance, the court shall issue an order specifying the time within which such nuisance must be abated. 
(b)  The failure of the owner or occupant to comply with the court's order to abate the nuisance shall constitute an offense and shall subject the person to prosecution and penalties as provided in section 1-6, including: 
(1)  Fines not to exceed $300.00 per violation. 
(2)  Imprisonment, not to exceed 60 days. 
(3)  Community service to be performed with any private, nonprofit community service organization or any public agency willing to participate and approved by the state court of Bibb County. Violators shall not be used for any purpose resulting in private gain to any person, except in accordance with state law. The role of the county in the supervision of violators performing community service shall be a governmental function. 
Secs. 22-69—22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES 

Sec. 22-81. - Finding. 
The commission finds that old household appliances which are discarded, dismantled, scrapped, ruined or junked, when stored on property in Macon-Bibb County constitute health hazards through the breeding of mosquitoes and other insects and unsightly nuisances. This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 
Sec. 22-82. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof in the Macon-Bibb County Municipal Court or State Court of Bibb County, shall be punished as provided in section 22-256. 
Sec. 22-83. - Keeping old household appliances restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the area of Macon-Bibb County, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent thereof, to store or permit to be stored on such property any old discarded, dismantled, scrapped, ruined or junked household appliances. 
(b)  As used in this section, the terms "discarded, dismantled, scrapped, ruined or junked household appliance" shall mean any appliance which is inoperable because of missing parts necessary to make the appliance operable. 
Sec. 22-84. - Notice to remove from lot, property or premises; service, contents. 
When any such old household appliance is abandoned, stored, or left on any lot, property or premises within Macon-Bibb County for a period of more than 30 days, notice shall be served personally by the sheriff of the county or other authorized official designated by the commission upon the owner or person in charge of the property or premises if occupied, or if unoccupied by certified U.S. mail to the owner or person in charge of the property or premises, with an additional notice posted on the old household appliance to remove, store or dispose of the old household appliance within 30 days from the date of the notice. The notice shall set forth the fact that the old household appliance is abandoned or stored in violation of this article and that upon failure to remove, properly store, house or otherwise dispose of the same, as provided in this article, that it will be removed, sold or disposed of by Macon-Bibb County and that any proceeds arising from the sale thereof will be applied first to payment of expenses incurred in connection with the removal and sale of the old household appliance and any remaining balance paid to the owner thereof. If such old household appliance is not removed, stored or disposed of within such 60-day period, the sheriff or other official authorized by Macon-Bibb County shall remove and store the same pending disposition. 
Secs. 22-85—22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LANDFILLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-101. - Unauthorized use prohibited. 
No person shall dump or otherwise dispose of garbage, solid waste or refuse in any landfill within the limits of Macon-Bibb County and owned by another person or entity than the one dumping or disposing of such materials without the prior consent of such other person or entity and without having made arrangements for the payment of charges, if any, which may be imposed by such other person or entity. 
Sec. 22-102. - Landfill—Fees. 
(a)  Computation of tipping fee; special wastes; environmental protection division surcharge. The tipping fee charged for hauling refuse to the landfill for disposal shall be computed annually with the new rate to be effective beginning on July 1 of each year. The tipping fee shall be that amount computed by totaling all budgeted operating costs of waste disposal programs, including the operations of the landfill and mulching sites, less revenues generated from interest income (earned on the reserve fund) and the sale of methane gas for the upcoming fiscal year, and dividing the result by the total tonnage projected for the fiscal year. The calculated tipping fee shall be $27.00 per ton, for all tons disposed with exception of those covered by separate contracts as approved by the mayor. The tipping fee shall be multiplied by the total tonnage disposed of by the landfill customers at the end of each month, and this amount shall be billed to each individual customer. The director of solid waste, with the approval of the county manager, is authorized to charge additional fees for special wastes over and above the tipping fee. Said additional fees shall be based upon the actual costs incurred for handling the special wastes. The term "special wastes" as used herein shall be defined as any waste that requires additional handling in order to be disposed of at the landfill over and above the handling required for normal refuse, including, but not limited to: tires, sludges and semi-solids. 
In addition to the tipping fee set forth above and other fees charged for disposing of solid waste at the Macon-Bibb County landfill, each disposer of solid waste at the landfill shall pay to Macon-Bibb County any surcharge imposed by the state environmental protection division; said surcharge shall be increased from time to time as necessary to reflect future increases in such surcharges levied by the division. Said funds are collected by the city on behalf of the state environmental protection division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39(e). 
(b)  Disposition of revenue. All tipping fees received in the course of operating the landfill shall be paid into the solid waste management fund. The operating expenses of the waste disposal programs (as defined above) shall be paid from said fund and shall include all costs, direct and indirect, except depreciation. All operating revenue which exceeds the operating expenses shall be deposited in the solid waste management reserve. All revenues contributed by the city for solid waste disposal except for that portion of revenues representing payment of the surcharge provided in subsection (a), shall be used to support the operating and capital needs of Macon-Bibb County's solid waste management programs. Additionally, all interest earned on solid waste reserve shall be retained in and become a part of the solid waste management fund. All solid waste reserve monies shall be available for capital and operating expenses and waste management, including but not limited to heavy equipment recycling-related capital expenditure, landfill property, engineering fees, cover material and landfill property. 
(c)  Exemptions. Urban solid waste district residents who personally haul refuse, not including garbage, from their places of residence to the landfill shall be permitted to dispose of such refuse at the landfill once per month per household free of charge; provided, however, the total load per visit weighs 500 pounds or less. All others who dispose of refuse at the landfill are required to pay the tipping fees and surcharges set forth in this section. District residents who dispose of loads weighing more than 500 pounds, or who deposit more than one load per month, are required to pay the tipping fees and surcharges set forth in this section for such excess amounts and additional loads. 
(d)  Holidays. The landfill will normally be closed on all observed city holidays. The landfill may be opened at the discretion of the director of solid waste or the mayor. If the landfill is opened on a holiday the tipping fee for that day shall be one and twenty-five-one-hundredths (1.25) times the tipping fee in effect on regular workdays. 
Sec. 22-103. - Same—User permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall be permitted to dispose of any type of refuse at the sanitary landfill without first obtaining a landfill user permit from the finance officer. This section shall not apply to homeowners and residential tenants who personally haul household refuse from their own places of residence to the landfill. 
(b)  Application; contents. Any person who wishes to obtain a landfill user permit shall, in addition to the general business license requirements, submit the following information on an application form furnished by the finance officer: 
(1)  A description of the type of business in which the applicant is engaged; 
(2)  The applicant's anticipated frequency of landfill use; 
(3)  The make, model, VIN number and tag number of each vehicle to be used at the landfill; 
(4)  Permit applicants with more than three (3) vehicles shall furnish proof of motor vehicle liability insurance (or self-insurance) in a minimum amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) total aggregate limits and proof of general liability insurance in a minimum amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). Applicants with three (3) or less vehicles shall furnish proof of motor vehicle liability insurance (or self-insurance) in a minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) total aggregate limits and proof of general liability insurance in a minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The state, county and all municipalities, governmental units and authorities with Macon-Bibb County shall be exempted from the provisions of subsection; 
(5)  A signed affidavit affirming that the refuse to be deposited in the sanitary landfill will originate in the county, unless prior approval is obtained as required by law. 
(c)  Grounds for denial; approval of qualified applicants. No permit may be issued to any person if the person, owner or majority stockholder has, in the past five (5) years, been convicted in state or federal court of any offense involving illegal dumping or the mishandling or dumping of toxic or hazardous wastes. 
(d)  Suspension, revocation. Any permit issued under this section may be suspended or revoked by the judge of the municipal court, after giving the permit holder notice and an opportunity to be heard, upon the finding by the court that the permittee has done one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Violated any terms of this Code or committed any act made unlawful hereunder; 
(2)  Made any false statement or misrepresentation on the application for the permit; 
(3)  Violated any of the rules and regulations pertaining to landfill use established by Macon-Bibb County; 
(4)  Failed to pay proper permit fees, landfill user fees, or license fees due to Macon-Bibb County within thirty (30) days of their due date. 
The mayor may suspend a permit for up to thirty (30) days pending a hearing to be held in municipal court as provided above. 
(e)  Issuance; renewal; transferability; vehicle decal. Once an applicant has completed the application, furnished all required information, received approval of the Sheriff and paid the required fee, the city finance officer is authorized to issue a landfill user permit to the applicant. The permit issued hereunder shall be effective for each calendar year and shall be renewed each year thereafter as all other privileged licenses. The ownership of this permit is nontransferable. A permit shall be issued to each person who meets the qualifications set out above, along with a decal for each vehicle. The decal shall be permanently affixed to the lower right corner of the front windshield of each of the permittee's vehicles. This decal must be displayed in order for a vehicle (other than homeowners' and tenants') to be admitted to the landfill. 
(f)  Inspection of vehicles. The director of solid waste and the Sheriff are authorized to make inspection, from time to time, of all vehicles which are permitted to use the landfill, including their load, to ensure compliance with all local, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(g)  Single-use permit. Upon completion of a single-use permit application and payment of the applicable fees shown thereon, an individual, not otherwise eligible to enter the landfill, shall be issued a single-use permit for access to the transfer station located at the landfill. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-0050, § 1, 9-2-2014 ) 
Sec. 22-104. - Service charges—Collection; lien for unpaid charges; change in rates; exemptions from payment. 
(a)  The service charges, specified in section 22-67 and costs specified in section 22-103 are levied against both the owner and occupant of the premises served, jointly and severally, but collection from one shall relieve the other. The service charges shall be collected in the manner and at such intervals as may be prescribed by resolution of the commission and shall be paid into the treasury. All uncollected service charges shall constitute a continuing lien against the property served to the same and as full an extent and subject to addition of interest and costs as provided by law with respect to city ad valorem taxes, and may be enforced in the same manner. 
(b)  With respect to the calendar year 2014 and subsequent years, the issuance by Macon-Bibb County of a business license to transact any business in Macon-Bibb County is conditioned upon the applicant for the license having fully paid all garbage service charges for which the applicant may have become liable for all prior years. 
Sec. 22-105. - Same—Executions; satisfaction and cancellation of record. 
There shall be entered upon each execution for unpaid garbage service charges and collected with the principal, interest and other costs thereof the cost charged by the clerk of the superior court of Bibb County, Georgia, for satisfying and cancelling each execution of record upon the general execution docket in his office. Upon full payment of each execution, the Macon-Bibb County clerk shall cause the execution to be delivered to the superior court clerk's office for satisfaction and cancellation of the execution of record and shall thereafter forward the satisfied and cancelled execution to the person which paid off the execution. Macon-Bibb County shall pay to the superior court clerk his charge for each execution satisfied and cancelled of record as provided in this section. 
Sec. 22-106. - Legislative determination; waste management fees; billing and collection of waste management fees; exemptions; nonpayment. 
(a)  The mayor and commission find and determine that there exists insufficient funding to accomplish the mandates imposed by the federal and state governments relating to solid waste management and that as a result of such mandates, a new source of funding is required for the purpose of funding recycling and composting programs in Macon-Bibb County, for the purpose of funding the $0.50 per ton surcharge upon solid waste disposal required by state law, for the purpose of offsetting the cost of collecting, removing and disposing of garbage and other refuse, and for the purpose of recovering the costs associated with collecting charges for such services. 
(b)  In accordance with the findings hereinabove set forth, there is hereby levied upon each owner of property to which waste collection services are provided a quarterly waste management fee as follows: 
Fees 
Residential units, including single-family dwellings, mobile homes, duplexes, triplexes and quadraplexes, with existing container collection, for each unit thereof\$45.00 
Residential units of the Macon housing authority, for each unit thereof\$30.00 
Household units for which collection services are provided under subsection (c), for each unit thereof\$45.00 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b), the director of the division of solid waste shall have the discretion to designate other properties to which waste collection services will be provided, the owners of which shall be charged in accordance with the per unit fees set forth in said subsection and billed and collected in accordance with the provisions of this section. In considering whether to designate other properties to which waste collection services will be provided by Macon-Bibb County, the Director of Solid Waste shall take into consideration the location of the establishment, the applicable collection routes, the available manpower, the equipment and manpower necessary for such additional service, and all such other factors as may be necessary and proper to determine whether collection services will be economically and practicably feasible. 
(d)  The household waste management fee set forth in subsection (b), shall be billed and collected quarterly in advance by Macon-Bibb County pursuant to a contract as determined by the mayor. Such fees shall be charged to the owners of all of the properties designated in subsection (b), on or after July 1, 1996, and for each quarterly period thereafter, at the rate set forth in said subsection. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, persons who are financially unable to pay in whole or in part the waste management fees applicable to them under the provisions of this section, may be relieved wholly or partially from payment of such fees. Guidelines for determining financial inability to pay shall be established by the mayor with the approval of the commission, provided that no relief from whole or partial payment shall continue for a period of more than one-year from the date granted except upon further application and approval thereof extending such relief for an additional period of time not to exceed one-year from the date of the grant of such extended relief from payment. All applications for initial and extended relief from payment of such fees shall be in writing, filed with the finance officer on or before February 1 for each year for which the exemption is sought. In instances in which an applicant for relief from whole or partial payment of waste management fees does not show financial inability to pay according to the guidelines established by the mayor and commission, such application shall be denied. 
(f)  All uncollected waste management fees shall constitute a continuing lien against the property served to the same extent and subject to the addition of interest and cost as provided by law with respect to city ad valorem taxes and may be enforced in the same manner. 
Sec. 22-107. - Private collection and disposal regulated; responsibility of franchisees. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste, other than industrial waste, generated by another person within Macon-Bibb County without first obtaining a franchise. 
(b)  Every person desiring to engage in the collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste, other than industrial waste, generated by another person within Macon-Bibb County shall make written application to the Director of Solid Waste on forms prescribed by the director. 
(c)  Macon-Bibb County shall have the authority to determine that franchises will not be granted for certain classes of solid waste collection, such as residential solid waste, or in designated areas of Macon-Bibb County. 
(d)  Franchisees must comply with this chapter as well as any policies or regulations of Macon-Bibb County concerning solid waste collection to include recycling collection. 
(e)  In addition to any other permit required by Macon-Bibb County, all persons now or hereafter engaged in the business of the collection or transportation of solid waste, other than industrial waste, shall annually apply for a franchise to operate such business. The application shall be filed with the Director of Solid Waste and a franchise shall not be issued until the director has approved the application in writing. 
(f)  No franchise shall be issued or renewed except upon a written application available from the division of solid waste in a form prescribed by Macon-Bibb County and setting forth such facts as it may deem appropriate, including, but not limited to the franchise application information outlined in established policies and procedures. 
Sec. 22-108. - Franchisees; billing and fees. 
(a)  At the time of initial application for a franchise, a franchise application fee of $300.00 shall be paid to Macon-Bibb County. Said franchise application fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(b)  At the time of application for the renewal of the franchise, a franchise renewal fee of $300.00 shall be paid to Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 22-109. - Requirements. 
(a)  Condition for franchise. It shall be a condition of each franchise that the franchisee shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  All provisions of this chapter, and the policies and/or procedures promulgated under authority of this chapter. 
(2)  All applicable federal, state, county and local laws, statutes, rules and regulations, including but not limited to those pertaining to the collection, transport, delivery or disposal of solid waste generated within Macon-Bibb County. 
(3)  Reasonable requirements for quarterly and annual reports which may be established by the director of solid waste. 
(b)  Denial of franchise. The director of solid waste may deny the issuance of the franchise for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure of the applicant to comply with this chapter. 
(2)  Violations of this chapter or any other applicable federal, county and local laws, statutes, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to the collecting, transporting, delivering or disposing of solid waste generated within Macon-Bibb County. 
(3)  Prior criminal convictions in connection with solid waste collection, processing and disposal activities in the last ten years (other than minor traffic offenses) by the applicant, its subsidiaries or its parent company or prior license revocation(s) by the applicant, its subsidiaries or its parent company. 
(4)  Failure to pay any money due Macon-Bibb County. 
(5)  Misrepresentations of any material fact in the application for the franchise. 
Sec. 22-110. - Franchisees—Termination of franchise. 
(a)  Franchises may be terminated by mutual agreement of Macon-Bibb County and the franchisee at any time. Franchisees may terminate franchises by giving 60 days' notice to the director of the division of solid waste. 
(b)  Franchises are nontransferable. 
Sec. 22-111. - Revocation of franchise. 
Macon-Bibb County shall have the right to revoke the franchise of any person that fails to abide by any provision of this chapter and any policies and procedures authorized hereunder. Before revocation of a franchise, the director of solid waste shall inform the applicant of its intention and the applicant shall have the opportunity to be heard before the judge of the municipal court who shall make the final decision regarding the application. Prior revocation of a franchise shall be sufficient grounds for refusal to certify any future application by such franchisee. 
Secs. 22-112—22-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRY SOLID WASTE 

Sec. 22-120. - Definition. 
As used in this division, the term "solid waste" shall have the meaning attributed to it by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22, except that it shall not include putrescible waste, as such term is defined in section 22-140, or biomedical waste, as such term is defined in section 22-210. 
Sec. 22-121. - Compliance with Code required. 
No putrescible waste shall be deposited in a landfill in Macon-Bibb County unless the landfill operator complies with the provisions of this Code relating to the payment of a license fee and further complies with the provisions of sections 22-140 through 22-143. No biomedical waste shall be deposited in any landfill or incinerated unless the incinerator operator complies with the provisions of this Code relating to the payment of a license fee and further complies with the applicable provisions of sections 22-210 through 22-220. 
Sec. 22-122. - Requirements for license issuance. 
No person, firm or corporation shall commence or continue the operation of a landfill for the disposal of solid waste except upon payment of the fee above prescribed and the fact that a license has been issued, and no license shall be issued or continued in force except upon compliance with the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The site of the landfill shall have been and shall remain approved by the Macon-Bibb County planning and zoning commission. 
(2)  The operator shall have obtained and shall maintain in force valid permits from the appropriate federal and state regulatory agencies. 
(3)  The landfill shall be operated at all times in full compliance with the terms of any permit from regulatory agencies and the planning and zoning commission. 
(4)  The landfill shall be operated in an efficient and workmanlike manner and in such fashion that it does not constitute a nuisance to others. 
(5)  The landfill operator shall permit to be placed in the landfill only those materials which are authorized by appropriate permits. Specifically, and without limiting the foregoing, there shall be no disposition in any landfill of solid waste or of nonsolid waste which would be classified as "hazardous" material. 
(6)  Liquid or nonsolid waste shall not be disposed of in a landfill. 
(7)  The operator of a landfill shall obtain and maintain in force throughout the period of time that the operator holds a license for the landfill a performance bond with good and sufficient security payable to Macon-Bibb County in the penal amount of $75,000.00 and conditioned upon compliance by the operator of the landfill with federal and state law and county ordinances respecting the operations of landfills. 
The requirement for furnishing good and sufficient security shall be deemed to have been satisfied if: 
a.  The bond which is furnished is secured by a corporate surety engaged in that business and authorized to do business in the state; 
b.  The bond is accompanied by the deposit in a federally insured bank in the sum of $75,000.00 evidenced by a certificate of deposit issued jointly in the name of the principal and the county; or 
c.  The bond is accompanied by a letter of credit from a federally-insured bank in the amount of $75,000.00. 
If a cash deposit is made and certificate of deposit issued, the terms of the deposit shall be such that the principal may not withdraw the amount so long as the principal is engaged in the landfill business in Macon-Bibb County without the consent of Macon-Bibb County, but may be drawn against by Macon-Bibb County at any time upon presentation of a resolution of the commission that the sum to be withdrawn has been determined by the commission to be necessary to cure a breach of the bond. Until otherwise ordered by the commission, interest on a bond shall be paid to the other joint owner. If a letter of credit is furnished, Macon-Bibb County shall be entitled to draw upon the letter of credit in the same manner as it might draw upon a cash deposit. In the event of cancellation or withdrawal of the letter of credit, the license of the principal to conduct a landfill operation shall automatically be suspended. 
(8)  The operator of the landfill shall obtain and maintain in force at all times a general public liability policy which will insure against injury or death to persons and injury or damage to property in the amounts, respectively, of $1,000,000.00 and $50,000.00. 
(9)  The operator of the landfill shall maintain records which will reflect, at a minimum, the date and hour of the deposit of each load of solid waste, the name and address of the owner of the truck in which the waste was delivered, and a general description of the waste which is deposited. The operator of the landfill shall file in the office of the Macon-Bibb County engineer a copy of such records by the tenth day of the following month reflecting landfill operations for the preceding calendar month. The landfill operator shall likewise furnish such other and further information to the engineer as he may require in order to verify the actual landfill operation. 
(10)  Every operator shall make the landfill and the records maintained in connection therewith available for inspection at reasonable times by the engineer or other person designated by the governing authority so as to enable Macon-Bibb County to determine whether the landfill is being operated properly. 
(11)  In addition to other remedies, if Macon-Bibb County shall determine that a landfill is being operated in violation of the provisions hereof, the commission may order the landfill closed or its operation suspended and in default of compliance with such order, the commission may seek an injunction to restrain further operations either on a permanent basis or until violations hereof are corrected. 
(12)  In determining whether Macon-Bibb County will issue a permit for the operation of a landfill, the commission may take into consideration the density of the population in the area which might be affected by the landfill. 
Secs. 22-123—22-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUTRESCIBLE WASTE 

Sec. 22-140. - Definition. 
Putrescible waste shall mean those wastes which are capable of being quickly decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include, but are not necessarily limited to, kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, dead animals, garbage and waste which are contaminated by such wastes. 
Sec. 22-141. - Application for landfill license. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall commence or continue the operation of a landfill or the disposal of putrescible waste except upon the filing and approval of an application, payment of the license fee prescribed in exhibit A hereto, and compliance with the provisions set forth in this division. Provided however, no person, firm or corporation shall be denied or refused issuance of a permit for the commencement or continuance of the operation of a landfill for the disposal of putrescible waste if said person, firm or corporation completes and files the required application, tenders payment of the prescribed license fee, complies with the provisions set forth in this division and provides satisfactory evidence that such landfill has been duly permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. The license issued pursuant to this section shall be renewed upon the submission of a renewal application and the payment of a $5,000.00 license fee once every three years. The application and license fee required under this section shall be in addition to, and not a substitute for, any business license application or fee required by any other ordinance or provision of this Code or any applicable state law, rule or regulation. 
(b)  The application for the operation of a landfill under the provisions of this division shall show the name of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, it shall show the names and addresses of the officers, directors and the owners of a majority of the outstanding stock. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall reflect the names and addresses of the partners. The application shall further reflect: 
(1)  The experience of the applicant in operating, maintaining and closing landfills. 
(2)  Whether the applicant, if an individual, or any officer, director or shareholder, if a corporation, or any partner, if a partnership, has been convicted of or pled guilty to any crime involving moral turpitude or any offense involving the violation of any law regulating the disposition of garbage or solid waste. 
(3)  Whether a certified landfill operator will be in charge of the day-to-day operations and if so, the name, address and license number of the operator. 
(4)  Such other information as may be reasonably necessary to determine fitness for operating and closing of landfill sites. Such information shall include audited comprehensive financial statements for the five years immediately preceding the year in which application is made under this division for the entity or individual(s) making application under this division, and any parent or subsidiary entity with which the applicant files a consolidated tax return for federal or state income tax purposes. Except for the information required by subsections (1), (2) and (3), and the audited comprehensive financial statements required by the preceding sentence, any other information which is required to be provided by the application shall not be unduly burdensome for the applicant, and such requested information shall not be duplicative of information provided by the applicant in response to the permitting process required by state law, or the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
Sec. 22-142. - Findings. 
Macon-Bibb County has legitimate legislative interests in protecting its residents, resources and environment from the adverse effects of disposing of putrescible waste in landfills located or to be located in the county. In furtherance of those interests, the commission has determined to take reasonable, lawful and appropriate measures, including the enactment of this division, to insure that the disposal of putrescible waste within the unincorporated areas of the county, including the location, operation and closure of landfills licensed hereunder, does not adversely affect the health or well-being of residents, does not diminish or degrade the quality of the air, soil, water and other natural resources and environment; does not unreasonably adversely affect the economic viability of any particular geographic area or region of the jurisdiction; does not conflict with Macon-Bibb County's short term and long term land use plans; and does not place an unreasonable or disproportionate burden on road maintenance and other public services. 
Sec. 22-143. - Requirements for license issuance. 
In furtherance of the findings and policies set forth in section 22-142, no license shall be issued under this division or continued of force except upon compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  The licensee and the landfill shall be subject to and shall comply with all of the provisions set out in section 22-122(1) through (12), except that: 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  The amounts of the general public liability policy described in subsection [22-122](8) shall be $10,000,000.00 for injury or death to persons and $5,000,000.00 for injury or damage to property. The term "general public liability policy" shall also include environmental impairment liability coverage in the amounts stated. 
(3)  The licensee shall provide, construct and maintain an asphalt or concrete exit roadway from the right-of-way of the state or county highway on which egress from the landfill occurs back to the landfill operation. The licensee shall maintain said exit roadway in a clean condition. 
(4)  The licensee shall take such action as is reasonably necessary to prevent scavenging. 
(5)  Burning or other incineration at the landfill is prohibited. 
(6)  Each licensee shall take such measures as are necessary to prevent the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals at the landfill site. 
(7)  The licensee shall take such measures as will prevent scavenging and scattering of any windblown litter and will keep the premises in a sightly condition. 
(8)  Landfill sites shall be enclosed with a minimum four foot "red page wire" fence and topped with two strands of barbed wire. Entrances and exits shall be only through gates monitored by the licensee. 
(9)  The operating hours for the landfill site shall be as stated and required in the permit issued by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, a copy of which shall be provided to the Macon-Bibb County engineer. Provided however, in the event that the operating hours are not stated in such permit, then the landfill shall be opened and operated only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., current time. The hours of operation of the landfill site for any given day may be extended under exigent circumstances with the prior approval of the engineer or the mayor. 
(10)  Reserved. 
(11)  The licensee shall be responsible for the control and proper disposal of incidental litter by policing the landfill site. 
(12)  The licensee shall prepare a fire prevention control plan which shall be submitted to and approved by the engineer. Such fire prevention control plan shall demonstrate the procedures and safeguards implemented by the licensee for preventing and controlling fires at the landfill site. 
(13)  The landfill site shall be subject to periodic inspections by the engineer or his designee at any time upon the providing of at least 24 hours advanced notice to the licensee or its on-site designee. 
(14)  The license issued hereunder shall be transferable, subject to the transferee completing and submitting the application required by section 22-141 and upon evidencing compliance with all other requirements set forth in this division in the same manner as required of the transferor. In addition thereto, no transfer of the license issued hereunder shall be valid without the transferee first having been issued the required permit by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. Evidence of the issuance of such permit shall be submitted as part of the application required by section 22-141. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the transfer of a license issued in accordance with this division shall not be effective any sooner than 90 days after the transferor has given written notice to the Macon-Bibb County engineer of the transferor's intent to transfer the license to another person, firm or corporation. The identity of the transferee shall be stated in the written notice required by the preceding sentence. 
Excepted from the provisions of this division are landfills owned and operated by Macon-Bibb County which began operations prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives; provided, however, that any expansion of its landfill operation beyond its present permitted capacity shall require Macon-Bibb County to comply with the terms of this division. 
Secs. 22-144—22-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SURCHARGE ON CERTAIN DISPOSAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 22-160. - Definition. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility shall have the same meaning as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(19). 
Sec. 22-161. - Levied. 
There is hereby levied upon every municipal solid waste disposal facility operated by private enterprise and upon the operators thereof, a surcharge of $1.00 per ton or a volume equivalent thereto received by the facility, in addition to any other charges or fees which are now or which may hereafter be imposed by Macon-Bibb County for the facility. 
Sec. 22-162. - Determination of tonnage. 
The tonnage or volume equivalent thereto with respect to which the surcharge is hereby levied shall be such as is finally determined by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. When the periodic report of tonnage is prepared by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, whether monthly or otherwise, each operator affected hereby shall be advised either by the environmental protection division or Macon-Bibb County of the tonnage or equivalency thereof as determined, and each operator of a municipal solid waste disposal facility shall remit to Macon-Bibb County the amount of the surcharge determined as provided in section 22-161 within ten days. If the environmental protection division shall fail to make the determination, it shall be made by Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 22-163. - Appropriations. 
Upon receipt of the surcharge from a municipal solid waste disposal facility, the finance director shall cause the same to be deposited into a separate account and the funds so collected and deposited are hereby appropriated to offset the impact of the facility, public education efforts for waste management, the cost of solid waste management, and the administration of local or regional solid waste management plans as determined from time to time by the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 22-164. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article or who shall fail to make timely payments of the surcharge levied in section 22-161 shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in article X. 
Secs. 22-165—22-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED 

Secs. 22-180—22-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - INCINERATION OF WASTE 

Sec. 22-210. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biomedical waste means and includes the following: 
(1)  Pathological waste, which means all recognizable human tissues and body parts which are removed during surgery, obstetrical procedures, autopsy, and laboratory procedures. 
(2)  Biological waste, which means bulk blood and blood products, exudates, secretions, suctionings, and other bulk body fluids which cannot or are not directly discarded into a municipal sewer system. 
(3)  Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated biologicals including cultures from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of biologicals, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures. 
(4)  Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, and their bedding, and other wastes from such animals which have been exposed to infectious agents, capable of causing disease in man, during research, production of biologicals or testing of pharmaceuticals. 
(5)  Sharps, which means any discarded article which may cause punctures or cuts. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, items such as needles, IV tubing and syringes and needles attached, and scalpel blades. 
(6)  Chemotherapy waste, which means any disposable material which has come in contact with cytotoxic/antineoplastic agents (agents toxic to cells) and/or antineoplastic agents (agents that inhibit or prevent the growth and spread of tumors or malignant cells) during the preparation, handling and administration of such agents. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, masks, gloves, gowns, empty IV tubing, bags and vials, and other contaminated materials. The above waste must first be classified as empty which means such quantity that it is not subject to other federal or state waste management regulations prior to being handled as biomedical waste. 
(7)  Discarded medical equipment and parts, not including expendable supplies and materials which have not been contaminated, that were in contact with infectious agents. 
The term "biomedical waste" shall not include low level radioactive waste and laboratory hazardous waste, the incineration and/or disposal of which is expressly prohibited, except as provided by federal and state law. 
Biomedical waste incinerator facility means an incinerator or incinerators at a single location which accept biomedical waste for purposes of incineration. 
Commission means the Macon-Bibb County commission. 
Environmental quality board (EQB) means a board of five citizens appointed by the commission to assist in the administration of this article. The EQB shall only function when members are named and appointed by the commission following a request for a permit to construct and/or operate a principal use incinerator facility or a biomedical waste incinerator. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, the terms of service of the members appointed to the EQB shall end upon the approval or denial of such permit application. 
Incineration means a controlled process by which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changed into gases and a residue produced which is relatively free of combustible materials. 
Incineration facility means the combined incinerators under one ownership at a single location. 
Incinerator means all devices intended or used for the reduction or destruction of solid, liquid or gaseous wastes by burning. 
Incinerator ash means the residue remaining after the incineration of solid waste. 
Operator means the person having the direct supervision of daily field operations of an incineration facility to ensure that the site operates in compliance with the permit. 
Person means the state of Georgia or any other state or any agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, special district, partnership association or other entity in Georgia or any other state. The term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, special district empowered in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments and agencies of the federal government. 
Principal use incinerator facility is an incinerator or incinerators at a single location where the incineration process is a primary business and where the facility has the total capacity of burning greater than 250 pounds per hour. 
Sec. 22-211. - Findings. 
Macon-Bibb County is confronted with increasing quantities of solid wastes and the decreasing availability of landfill space, and there is an urgent need to regulate the handling of solid waste. The incineration of solid waste is increasingly proposed as a partial alternative to land disposal, however incineration of waste poses certain hazards to the environment and creates special problems of residue disposal in landfills. The handling and disposal of biomedical waste poses certain unique hazards and is of special public concern. Under article 9, section 2, paragraph 3 of the state constitution and under the provisions of the Georgia Solid Waste Management Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20—12-8-41) local governments are empowered with the responsibility to regulate solid waste handling and air quality in such manner as to assure the public health, safety and welfare. 
Sec. 22-212. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the location, operation and management of incineration facilities dealing with the storage, transfer, treatment or disposal of waste where the total incinerator capacity is of greater than 250 pounds per hour. 
(2)  Regulate the disposal of biomedical wastes which require special handling in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 22-213. - Permits required. 
(a)  Owners and operators of incinerators applying for a permit under this article shall be permitted as required by the rules and regulations of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Any violation of the conditions of the permit issued by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency, and any violation of the rules and regulations of the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state department of transportation, the United States Department of Transportation, and rules and regulations promulgated under the Occupation Safety and Health Act shall also be a violation of the conditions of the permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No person shall engage in the operation of a principal use incinerator and no person shall construct or operate a principal use incinerator facility without having a permit issued by the board pursuant to this article. 
(c)  No person shall operate a biomedical waste incinerator or shall construct or operate a biomedical waste incinerator facility without having a valid biomedical incinerator permit issued by the board pursuant to this article. 
(d)  Any person who began operation of a principal use incinerator facility or a biomedical waste incinerator facility prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, and who would otherwise be subject to its terms shall be permitted to continue the operation of such facility but the person shall be strictly prohibited from transferring ownership or operation of or expanding its incinerator operation in any way, unless the person first makes application to the commission in accordance with this article and complies with the applicable provisions hereof. The term "expanding its incinerator operation" shall mean any action taken by such person after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives to increase its present state permitted volume of waste incineration and disposal of the facility. 
Sec. 22-213.1. - Notification/permit modification requirements. 
(a)  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to make application to the commission for a modification of its existing permit issued pursuant to this article in the event that any of the following changes or modifications shall occur after the date upon which the permit is originally issued: 
(1)  Any modification of equipment or operation of the incineration facility; 
(2)  Any change of ownership or operator of the incineration facility; 
(3)  Any change in hours of operation of the incineration facility; 
(4)  Any increase in waste throughput at the incineration facility; 
(5)  Any change in the types of waste being treated at the incineration facility; 
(6)  Any change in residue disposal practices; and/or 
(7)  Any changes in the incineration facility's ash management plan. 
(b)  The commission, or its designee, shall establish a short form application for the purpose of reviewing and facilitating the processing of permit modification requests under this section. 
(c)  The application procedure for permit modification requests shall be the same as required for initial permit applications under section 22-216. 
Sec. 22-214. - Contents of permit application. 
A permit applicant shall prepare and file an incineration permit application with the commission. The permit application shall include all related documents submitted to the United States government and to the state. 
(1)  An application shall contain the following information: 
a.  A description of the company, information on its financial capability, and a detailed history of all its past activities in the field of incineration, including a synopsis of every other facility it has operated, and including a detailed account of all past and pending litigation, favorable and unfavorable. The applicant shall include the record of any subsidiary or parent corporation having an interest greater than five percent of the outstanding shares of the applicant corporation. The applicant shall also include a list of all past and present litigation, favorable and unfavorable, the subsidiary or parent corporation has been involved in. 
1.  The identity of whom the applicant purchased the incinerator from, its manufacturer, and the contractor(s) responsible for the installation and/or modification of the incinerator and air pollution control devices. 
b.  The applicant shall provide a history of any claims, charges and/or assessments against the applicant concerning or arising out of the violation of any state or federal rule or regulation relating in any way to any incineration facility, now or formerly owned/operated by the applicant, including any incineration facility now or formerly owned/operated by any subsidiary or parent corporation of the applicant. 
c.  Justification for and anticipated benefits from the project. 
d.  A description of the scope of the proposed project, including an estimated schedule of how much and what kinds of waste the facility would accept, where the material would come from, what pretreatment will be required of wastes unacceptable to the facility without such pretreatment, and how long the facility is expected to operate. 
e.  Yearly site operation expenses and an estimate of the costs for the lifetime of the project. 
f.  The proposed method of financing the project, including development, operation and closure stages. Include a list of the financial institution names which will be funding construction. 
g.  Resumes of management personnel and the proposed number of employees and types of positions, including information on the training and experience required for each position, and safety precautions undertaken for the protection of personnel. 
h.  The anticipated date to begin construction. 
i.  The anticipated date to begin operation. 
j.  A detailed estimate of the types and amount of local government services required by the operator in each year. 
k.  A description of emergency procedures and safety and security precautions that will be in use at the facility. This information should include details on emergency assistance and emergency medical treatment that will be required from the area's medical facilities and fire departments. 
l.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be taken by the applicant to prevent contamination in and around the facility site and the description of planned monitoring systems, with an estimated budget for each of these items. 
m.  A description of the environmental protection measures to be used during transportation of materials to and from the facility, with an estimated annual budget for these arrangements and an estimate of the volume of material to be transported during each year of operation. 
n.  A description of the site closure plan for the facility, the anticipated date of closure, and the estimated cost of closure, including post closure costs, if applicable. 
o.  A description of anticipated need for postclosure care. 
p.  A description of the means or method by which to capture any leachate or runoff from waste feed and ash storage areas, and areas in which trucks, equipment, containers and tools that have come into contact with the waste are decontaminated and processed for disposal. 
(2)  A map or other written material attached to the application shall include the following information: 
a.  Ownership. 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of legal owner (and/or agent) of the subject property. 
2.  Name, address and telephone number of professional persons responsible for plat of survey. 
3.  Description of any existing rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
4.  Reference to any existing restrictive covenants to the property. 
b.  Description. Location of property tax map parcel number. This description should include a reference to the deed book and page or other evidence of title the current property owner may have. 
c.  Features. Each map shall contain the following information: 
1.  Drawn to scale of not less than 160 feet to an inch. 
2.  Location sketch map showing relationship of the project to the surrounding area. 
3.  Graphic scale, date, north arrow and legend. 
4.  Location of property with respect to surrounding property and roads, and the names and addresses of adjacent property owners according to county tax records. 
5.  Zoning classification of proposed project and adjacent property. 
6.  The location of all boundary lines of the property. 
7.  The total acreage of land in the project. 
8.  The location of existing and/or platted streets, easements, buildings, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, sewers, water mains, culverts, wells and gas and electric transmissions lines. 
9.  The location of water bodies, watercourses, groundwater aquifers, springs and other pertinent features. 
10.  The location, dimensions and acreage of all property proposed to be set aside for various uses on the applicant's property. 
11.  The location of all test wells and/or borings. 
12.  The location of the 500-year and 100-year floodplain, and records of flood, including inundation due to dam break. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  Topographic map. A topographic map with contours at vertical intervals of not more than ten feet at the same scale as to the project site map shall be included. Date, method of preparation and preparer of such survey shall be stated. 
f.  Transportation route map. A map showing proposed transportation routes to and from the facility site, including location of towns and emergency and safety facilities. An estimate of the volume of material to travel on each route shall be included. 
(3)  The application shall address the following factors with regard to, but not limited to, on-site storage and/or disposal: 
a.  Possibility of site flooding; planned special facility design. 
b.  Potential human exposure to incinerator ash and wastewater, including planned safety procedures, clothing, instruction, and practice for employees; planned oversized or redundant treatment capacity, effluent monitoring and automatic shutdown systems. 
c.  The nature and predictability of pollution movement, including planned stack height for incinerators, with continuous stack monitoring and recording, until emission levels are predictable; and planned segregation of incompatible wastes. 
Sec. 22-215. - Application and processing fees. 
The commission shall require a permit application fee in the amount of $50,000.00 to reimburse Macon-Bibb County for the costs of any needed professional assistance that may be required to evaluate the permit application and amendments, verify its contents and evaluate the impact of such a permit on the community, public health and environment. This assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, the assistance of lawyers, biologists, geologists, engineers, chemists, hydrologists, emergency response, transportation and public health experts, land appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the permit application shall be returned to the applicant. 
Sec. 22-216. - Application procedure. 
(a)  The permit applicant shall submit to the commission six copies of all information required by federal and state agencies for the facility for which it requests a permit at the time such information is submitted to the state and federal government. The review procedure shall not begin nor shall the application be designated as complete until such time as all required data are submitted and the appropriate fees are paid, or suitable arrangements for payment have been approved by the commission. 
(b)  A designee of the commission shall compile copies of all reports, applications, minutes of the EQB meetings, reports by consultants and similar materials. These shall be placed in one location with free access by the public and availability of copying any portion of any document at cost. 
(c)  Within 45 days of the submission of the application, the commission shall set a time for a public hearing so that the applicant can present its plans to the EQB and answer questions regarding the same. 
(d)  After the hearing, the board after consultation with the EQB, shall have 60 days in which to determine if the application is complete and shall mail notice of its determination to the applicant. If it is not complete, the applicant will have six months to complete the application. However, the applicant may at the end of six months upon making a showing of good cause to the commission, be granted a maximum three-month extension. 
(e)  Each application shall require an analysis conducted by the Macon-Bibb County staff and a consultant or consultants selected by the commission upon the recommendation of the EQB. The analysis shall be completed within 90 days from the day the application is determined to be complete. In certain instances where the complexity of the application requires more than the usual 90 days, the Macon-Bibb County staff and/or consultant may request an additional 60 days from the board, and the applicant, likewise, has the option of requesting the commission to extend the analysis period to allow time for responding to staff and/or consultant request for additional information on a completed application. 
(f)  The Macon-Bibb County staff and each consultant shall make reports on the application to the EQB at its meetings. 
(g)  The EQB shall call a public meeting for public comment on the completed application along with the analysis of Macon-Bibb County staff and consultants. The purpose of this meeting shall be for public review of the application. The staff shall give notice by regular mail of the time and place of the public meeting to the owner and adjacent property owners as specified on the map. Such notice shall be mailed not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon. Notice of a public meeting in a form prescribed by the EQB shall be posted by the applicant on the proposed facility property on each and every street of access not less than 14 days prior to the date specified thereon. The posted notice shall be at intervals of not greater than 1,500 feet. Notice shall also be placed by the applicant in the local newspaper of general circulation not less than 14 days prior to the dates specified thereon. 
(h)  Within 45 days after receipt of the final analysis, complete application and public comment, the EQB shall make a recommendation to the commission at a public meeting whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. This recommendation shall be made to the full commission at a public meeting whether to accept the application, deny it, or accept it with modifications. This recommendation shall be made to the full commission; however, before making a recommendation to the commission to accept the proposal or accept it with modifications, the EQB shall make the following determinations: 
(1)  That there is a bona fide need for the facility and there is no reasonable alternative facility which will pose a lesser threat to the environment. 
(2)  That the construction and operation of the facility will not pose an unreasonable health or environmental risk to the surrounding locality. 
(3)  That the applicant (or facility operator) has the capability and financial resources to construct, operate and maintain the facility. 
(4)  That the applicant or operator has taken or consented in writing to take any and all reasonable measures to comply with the applicable federal, state and local regulations and ordinances. 
(5)  That the applicant's plan represents the best available technology for handling the waste for which the applicant has demonstrated that it will employ the best management practices in handling the waste at the proposed facility. 
(6)  That the incineration facility is compatible with an integrated long range solid waste management plan, taking into account alternative methods of management such as recycling. 
(7)  That the applicant has a valid contract with the operator of a state licensed landfill for the disposal of the projected ash production of the incineration facility for a three-year period. 
(i)  At its next scheduled meeting, the commission shall make its decision to grant the permit, deny it, or grant it with specified conditions. 
(j)  A permit shall be valid for 36 months from the date it is granted by the commission. 
Sec. 22-216.1. - Record keeping, reporting requirements and inspections. 
(a)  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to perform such monitoring and recording of process and operational parameters as deemed necessary and appropriate by the commission with the advice of the EQB. Monitored parameters and required measuring and recording frequencies may include, but not limited to, one or more of the following: 
(1)  Frequency and mass of waste charging (continuous). 
(2)  Ash generation rate (weekly). 
(3)  Primary and secondary chamber temperatures (continuous). 
(4)  Flue gas opacity (continuous). 
(5)  Auxiliary fuel usage (weekly). 
(6)  Primary and secondary combustion air flow rates (weekly). 
(7)  L.D. fan motor current (weekly). 
(8)  Wet scrubbers (weekly): 
a.  Scrubber liquid header pressure. 
b.  Scrubber liquid flow rate. 
c.  Scrubber liquid pH (daily). 
d.  Scrubber static pressure drop. 
e.  Demister static pressure drop. 
(9)  Dry scrubbers and spray dry absorbers: 
a.  Reagent flow rate (daily). 
b.  Slaker slurry outlet temperature (weekly). 
c.  Solids recycle rate (weekly). 
d.  Nozzle air and slurry pressures (weekly). 
e.  Wet and dry bulb temperatures (weekly). 
(10)  Fabric filters: 
a.  Bag failure records (continuous). 
b.  Static pressure drop (weekly). 
c.  Baghouse inlet and outlet temperatures (weekly). 
(11)  Flue gas concentrations: 
a.  Acid gases. 
b.  CO. 
c.  O 2 , CO 2 . 
d.  Opacity. 
(b)  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to perform a TCLP ash sampling based upon a schedule to be determined by the commission or its designee, which may include the taking of daily grab samples, the analysis of composite grab samples, the analysis of composite grab samples at such frequency as determined by the commission or its designee. 
(c)  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article may be required by the commission or its designee to engage in performance testing of the incineration facility at one or more of the following times: the initial startup of a new incineration facility, the startup of an existing incineration facility after significant modification or operational changes, prior to the issuance of an initial permit, and/or the renewal of an existing county permit. Such testing may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: TCLP testing of ash, combustibility testing of ash, putrescility testing of ash, stack testing for acid gases, metals, CO, VOC's, dioxins/furans, PM, etc., and biologic tracer test. 
(d)  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to provide the commission or its designee, the Macon-Bibb County health department, environmental section, copies of all semi-annual reports submitted to the environmental protection division of the state (EPD), all notices of violation from EPD and responses thereto, EPD reports of no-notice site inspections, and all other correspondence with and submissions to the state EPD. Additionally, Macon-Bibb County shall be promptly notified of any occurrence of a serious nature likely to cause public concern, including but not limited to, fire, explosion, or extensive uncontrolled emissions. 
(e)  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to provide to the commission or its designee, on an annual basis, the resumes of supervisory and management personnel responsible for the supervision and management of the incineration facility, and all records of training and certification relating to any employee of the incineration facility. 
(f)  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to present an ash management plan to the commission or its designee at the time that the holder of a permit first makes application for an initial permit pursuant to this article, and annually thereafter following the issuance of the permit for the operation of the incineration facility. Such plan shall include a description of the estimated quantity of ash to be disposed of during the upcoming year, and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all landfills where such ash will be disposed. 
(g)  The commission or its designee shall have the right to perform inspections of the incineration facility during normal operating hours without prior notice to the owner/operator of such facility. The commission's or its designee's right to perform inspections under this subsection shall include the authority to perform independent testing on any aspect of the performance of the incineration facility for purposes of monitoring the facility's compliance with this article. The commission or its designee, shall have the authority to require that the holder of a county permit issued pursuant to this article be required to install auxiliary sampling ports as a condition of its permit for the purpose of supporting inspections and independent testing. 
Sec. 22-216.2. - Insurance requirements. 
A condition of every permit issued pursuant to this article shall be the requirement that the holder of said permit maintain environmental impairment liability insurance and general public liability insurance in such amounts to be determined by the commission or its designee based upon such objective factors as the board deems appropriate to provide for the protection of its citizens and the environment, including but not by way of limitation: the permitted capacity of the incineration facility, the cost of the incineration facility, the environmental safety record and history of the type of equipment installed at the incineration facility, the environmental safety record and history of the manufacturer of the incineration facility, the environmental safety record and history of the owner/operator of the incineration facility, and the estimated cost of closure and post closure. The amount of environmental impairment liability insurance and general public liability insurance required by the commission, or its designee, shall not exceed $10,000,000.00 actual coverage nor be less than a minimum of $1,000,000.00 actual coverage. The amount of environmental impairment liability coverage established by the commission, or its designee, shall be required to remain in force for five years subsequent to the closure of the incineration facility. Once the amount of actual coverage required by the commission, or its designee, is established for the incineration facility, the applicant shall provide the commission, or its designee, evidence of such insurance coverage prior to the issuance of the permit. 
Sec. 22-216.3. - Packing and refrigeration. 
(a)  All biomedical waste transported to the biomedical waste incineration facility and accepted for incineration at such facility shall be packaged in containers which meet or exceed the requirements of 49 CFR 173.196 and 197, or such federal or state regulations which may be adopted in the future setting forth the minimum packaging requirements for biomedical waste. 
(b)  The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be required to provide refrigerated transportation and storage of biomedical waste that has been or is expected to be held for longer than 72 hours after being discarded at its point of origin. 
Sec. 22-217. - Control of emissions. 
Emissions from all principal use incinerator facilities and all biomedical waste incinerator facilities shall not cause ambient pollution concentrations to exceed levels established by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources (EPD/DNR) or levels established by the commission or its designee, if such levels, as established, are more stringent than those established by EPD/DNR. The commission, or its designee, may be required as a condition of any initial permit, renewal and/or modification thereof, that ambient pollution concentrations not exceed specific levels as established pursuant to this section. 
Sec. 22-218. - Certification of operator. 
No person shall operate a principal use medical waste incinerator unless such individual who operates or maintains the incinerator obtains a certificate of training in medical waste incinerators issued by the American Society of Mechanical engineers within nine months of the commencement of the training program. Copies of the training certificates for the operators and maintenance engineers shall be submitted to the EQB and shall be available for inspection at the facility along with the permit to operate. 
Sec. 22-219. - Issuance of permit and fee. 
Should the commission grant a principal use incinerator facility permit or a biomedical waste incinerator facility permit in accordance with the terms of this article, the permit shall not be issued by Macon-Bibb County until the person to whom the permit is granted complies with the provisions of this Code relating to the payment of a license fee. 
Sec. 22-220. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this article shall, on conviction, be punished as provided in article X. In addition thereto, the commission shall be authorized to seek injunctive relief to restrain further violation of this article. 
Secs. 22-221—22-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STORAGE OF USED OR DISCARDED MATERIALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-230—22-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OUTSIDE STORAGE OF DISCARDED APPLIANCES 

Sec. 22-251. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this division, the word "appliance" or "appliances" refers to stoves, refrigerators, hot water heaters, air conditioning equipment, furnaces, washers, dryers and similar items falling under the general classification of household appliances. 
Sec. 22-252. - Finding. 
This body finds that the outside storage of discarded appliances renders the property whereon appliances are stored unsightly and unattractive, attracts rodents and insects, devalues neighboring property and constitutes a nuisance. 
Sec. 22-253. - Outside or uncovered storage of appliances prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, organization or association of any kind in charge or control of any property within the area of Macon-Bibb County, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, agent or otherwise, to store or permit the storage of appliances in the open. An appliance shall be deemed to have been stored in the open if it is visible from the street or streets upon which the property may front and when viewed from adjoining property or uncovered. 
Sec. 22-254. - Planning and zoning regulations not affected. 
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize any outside storage when it is prohibited by regulations of the Macon-Bibb County planning and zoning commission. 
Sec. 22-255. - Division to carry out terms of article. 
The environmental health division and the environmental education and enforcement officer are authorized and empowered to carry out the provision of this article and each employee of the division and the environmental education and enforcement officer are authorized and empowered to issue citations for violations hereof. 
ARTICLE X. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 22-256. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person(s), firm or corporation violating any provision of article IX where such violation occurs within Macon-Bibb County, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the Macon-Bibb County Municipal Court or magistrate court of Bibb County, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense. By a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to 30 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. However this section shall not preclude Macon-Bibb County from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the jurisdiction to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; 
(2)  For the second or more offense(s). The violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to 60 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; and/or 
(b)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may also be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway and/or other public right of way for a distance not to exceed one-mile, any litter the person has deposited, and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; and/or 
(c)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right of way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and/or 
(d)  The court may order the person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation; and/or 
(e)  In case of an open dump or improper solid waste, litter or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this section. Macon-Bibb County shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; and/or 
(f)  The expenses incurred by Macon-Bibb County for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this section. 
(g)  In addition to actions filed by Macon-Bibb County for violations of article IX, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 22-257. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of article IX shall be the responsibility of the commission, the environmental education and enforcement officer or his/her designee, and/or the Bibb County sheriff's office. The environmental education and enforcement officer shall be authorized to issue citations for violations. Citations for violations of this chapter occurring within Macon-Bibb County shall be issued for appearance and disposition in the municipal court for Macon-Bibb County, which shall have jurisdiction over all such cases. 
(b)  Any person(s) authorized to enforce this section shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation must be visible from a public road or right of way, or upon said person(s) having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this section, or by a judge's order upon said person(s) having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
Sec. 22-258. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  In the event that any person violates any provision of article IX, Macon-Bibb County or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation. In addition, Macon-Bibb County may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other locally issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer(s) in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court as defined in section 22-256(a)(2). 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of article IX, the court and/or the commission may cause written notice to be given, or incorporated into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of article IX for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 20 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the board of commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of, including but not limited to, any litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this section, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the section on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and the board of commissioners and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for herein, the shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by Macon-Bibb County, the dates of local action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
Sec. 22-259. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)  Whenever litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this chapter, is thrown deposited, dropped, or dumped by any person(s) or from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that said person(s) or the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever any litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this chapter, which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
Chapter 23 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 23-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the stormwater management chapter for Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
Sec. 23-2. - Authority. 
Macon-Bibb County is authorized by the state constitution, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I(a) and III(a)(6) thereof, and state law to provide stormwater management services throughout the geographic area of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 23-3. - Findings, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  The commission of Macon-Bibb County makes the following findings of fact: 
(1)  Land development and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants; 
(3)  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites; 
(4)  Improper management of stormwater runoff may cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses, residences, and other facilities with water damage and may cause environmental damage to the rivers, streams, and other bodies of water within and adjacent to Macon-Bibb County; 
(5)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater may affect the operations of sanitary sewer operated by the Macon Water Authority by, among other things, increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system; 
(6)  Adverse water quality and quantity consequences could result in substantial economic losses; 
(7)  Proper management of stormwater is a key element of having clean water with adequate assimilative capacity for treated wastewater discharges and adequate potable drinking water that are essential to support existing and future development in Macon-Bibb County; 
(8)  The Macon-Bibb County is required under federal and state regulations (i.e., the Macon-Bibb County's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase I notice of intent and stormwater permit) to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality to mitigate the impacts of pollutants which may be discharged from the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and stormwater conveyance into state or United States' waters; 
(9)  The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety; 
(10)  Illicit discharges as defined herein contribute to degradation of plants and wildlife in natural water bodies in the County. The elimination of these illicit discharges is in the public interest and will prevent threats to the public health. 
(b)  The purposes and intent of the governing authority of the Macon-Bibb County in enacting this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  Protect, maintain, and enhance the short-term and long-term public health, safety, and general welfare by: 
a.  Establishing minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction; 
b.  Providing for the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable by regulating the contribution of pollutants by stormwater discharges by any user; 
c.  Protecting, preserving, and enhancing water quality and fish and wildlife habitat within the jurisdiction and in downstream receiving waters; 
d.  Protecting those downstream from water quality and quantity impacts. 
(2)  Comply with the state department of natural resources and environmental protection division stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act. These requirements include: 
a.  Regulating activities to improve and maintain those water resources that lie partially or wholly within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Macon-Bibb County; 
b.  Prohibiting illicit connections and illicit discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4); 
c.  Providing reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation through enactment of a comprehensive set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters; 
(3)  Require development plans to minimize the transport of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by requiring approval and implementation of stormwater management plans for activities that may have an adverse impact on community waters. 
(4)  Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring, and enforcement procedures as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
Sec. 23-4. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have a meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined by Webster's Third New International Dictionary, copyright 2000. The term "shall" is mandatory not discretionary; the term "may" is permissive. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this chapter into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to the occurrence. 
Appeals authority means the commission, one of whose duties is to review appeals to this chapter and render decisions and variances. 
As-built drawings mean amended site and construction plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities, and operational capabilities of road and drainage structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
Best management practices (BMP's) mean structural devices to store or treat stormwater runoff and also means a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions on practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. Best management practices includes schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
Cooling water means water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device, or apparatus. 
Construction means any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development of changing use, including particularly any preparation for, building of, or erection of a structure and/or infrastructure. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES construction permits or land disturbance permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one (1) acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Conveyance means stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, etc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Day. A day is defined as a calendar day. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Design storm means the rainfall event of such size and frequency as described in the state stormwater management manual or the local design manual which is used for the design of stormwater facilities. 
Development means any action in preparation for construction activities which result in alteration of either land or vegetation other than such minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping repairs or maintenance work which result in minor soil erosion. Development includes: 
(1)  The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plots, sites, tracts, parcels or other division by plat or deed; 
(2)  The construction, installation, or alteration of a structure, impervious surface, or drainage facility; 
(3)  Clearing, scraping, grubbing, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site; or 
(4)  Adding, removing, exposing, excavation, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise disturbing the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site. 
Developer means any person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of any owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources of the state. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Drainage means a general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
Drainage plan means a plan prepared using appropriate and commonly accepted engineering standards which specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system. 
Drainage structure means any stormwater conveyance structure as defined below, and any piping or ditching for stormwater management purposes. 
Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, retention facilities and the storm sewer system. 
Easement is a property right provided to a person for his or her use and benefit over the property rights of other property owners. It is an interest in land, which confers upon its owner, some right, benefit, dominion, or lawful use out of or over the estate of another. An easement must be used for a stated purpose and is usually granted for a specific portion of the real property. For stormwater purposes, easements may be established by developers or property owners to define areas which must be kept clear of obstructions to water flow to prevent flooding. Macon-Bibb County reserves the right to accept or not accept maintenance responsibilities for such easements based on policies and criteria established by the commission. 
Engineer means the director of the engineering department of Macon-Bibb County. 
Engineering department means the engineering department of Macon-Bibb County. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from land disturbing activity. 
Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Filling means the placement of any soil or other solid material, either organic or inorganic, on a natural ground surface or excavation. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flood means a general and temporary rise in the level of rivers, streams, lakes, marshes, and ocean, which results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
Flooding means the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, especially to an unusual or harmful degree. 
Governing body means the mayor and commission of Macon-Bibb County. 
Grading means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenbelt means an area of land to be dedicated to Macon-Bibb County or a land trust which shall remain undisturbed, insofar as possible, from its natural state to form a screen or buffer. 
Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Hotspot means an area where the land use or activities generate or have the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater or as specified by Macon-Bibb County. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to Macon-Bibb County's stormwater drainage system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit connection means any man-made conveyance connecting a discharge directly to a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to Macon-Bibb County's municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in this chapter. 
Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface which prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Structures or surfaces which are constructed so as to only minimally affect the infiltration of stormwater are not considered impervious surfaces. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
Intermediate regional flood means a one hundred (100)-year frequency flood, as defined on the flood hazard map, which has a one (1)-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Intermittent stream means a stream that flows in a well-defined channel during wet seasons of the year but not for the entire year. 
Issuing authority means Macon-Bibb County, which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which results in changes in the volume or flow rates of rainfall runoff, soil erosion from water or wind, or the movement of sediments into state waters or onto land within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land. 
Live retention means that quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a designated facility for stormwater storage for a specified period of time. 
Local stormwater design manual (LDM) means the most recent manual containing specific guidelines and standards for stormwater management that are either watershed or county-wide specific, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter. Copies of this manual may be obtained from the engineering department of Macon-Bibb County. The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual is available online at www.georgiastormwater.org. 
Lot means a tract, portion, or parcel of land separated from other tracts, portions, or parcels by description on a subdivision plat of record or survey map or described by metes and bounds, and intended to be used to facilitate transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purposes of this chapter, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
Maintenance means any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this chapter and to prevent structural failure of such facilities, including but not limited to, preserving the enclosing walls or impounding embankment of the retention facility in good condition; ensuring structural soundness, functional adequacy and freedom from sediment; and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means a conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains, owned or operated by Macon-Bibb County or a city, county, or other public entity, designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water runoff and is not a combined sewer or part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or a permit issued by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. Section 1342(b), that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Non-structural best management practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and green space areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Owner means the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property, by proprietor; this term may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property, and any agent of the owner or tenant, including a developer. 
Perennial stream means a stream that flows in a well-defined channel throughout most of the year under normal climatic conditions. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality, or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Pollution means the contamination or other significant alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including, but not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to render such waters harmful, detrimental, or injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish, or other aquatic life. 
Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution including any impurity or waste material that degrades the physical, chemical, biological, or radiological integrity of surface or subsurface waters. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatable; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and participate metals; animal waste; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Post-development conditions means the conditions which exist following the completion of the development activity in terms of topography; vegetation; land use; and rate, volume or direction of stormwater runoff. 
Predeveloped conditions means those land use conditions that existed prior to the initiation of the development activity in terms of topography; vegetation; land use; and rate, volume, or direction of stormwater runoff. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Pretreatment means the onsite reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in stormwater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the publicly owned drainage system. 
Private means property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state, or federal government. 
Procedure means a procedure adopted by and through the director of the engineering department of Macon-Bibb County, to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this chapter, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes, ordinances, or resolutions of Macon-Bibb County or other agencies. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Public right-of-way shall mean a strip or parcel of land occupied by or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, pedestrian path, cart path, utility system, water main, sanitary sewer, or storm drain sewer main, drainage ditches, and watercourses or any other valid public use by the county. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a record or final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and not included within the dimensions or areas of such other lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or other use involving maintenance by Macon-Bibb County, shall be dedicated or deeded to Macon-Bibb County's use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
Reach means a longitudinal segment of a stream or river measured along specified points on the stream or river. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Roadway drainage structure means bridges, culverts, inlets, and ditches associated with roadway construction, which allow stream flows to move freely under a stream crossing or to convey stormwater runoff from a roadway to a stream. 
Runoff coefficient means the ratio of runoff to rainfall. 
Sanitary sewer system means the complete sanitary sewer system of the Macon Water Authority which discharges sewage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes, and flushing inlets, and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant. 
Sediment means solid particulate matter, both organic and inorganic, in suspension, that has been or is being transported by water, air, ice, or gravity from its site of origin as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the action or process of forming or depositing sediment. 
Sedimentation facility means a facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process. 
Shear failure means failure of an earthen bank caused by the steepness of the slope and other environmental, vegetative, or human causes. 
Site means any lot, plot, parcel, or tract of land. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, wetlands, wet weather streams, and all other bodies of surface or subsurface water, including any waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the ocean tides, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stormwater drainage system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is owned or maintained by Macon-Bibb County. 
Stormwater facility means a facility which provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood storm. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this chapter and which shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
Stormwater management facilities means constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions, including, but not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catch basins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems, and modular pavement. 
Stormwater management plan means the set of drawings and other documents that comprise all of the information and specifications for the drainage systems, structures, best management practices, concepts, and techniques that will be used to control stormwater as required by this chapter and the stormwater management design manual. Also included are the supporting engineering calculations and results of any computer analysis. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
Stormwater runoff means the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a ditch, stream, storm drain, or other concentrated flow during and following the precipitation. 
Stream means natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground. 
Structural erosion and sediment control practices mean measures for the stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating, or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity, the quality, the period of release, or the velocity of flow. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
Subdivision means any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, buildings sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development. This definition includes any division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, resubdivision, and, where appropriate to the context, includes the process of subdivision of the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition: 
(1)  The division of land into parcels of five or more where no new street is involved, and 
(2)  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between separate or common owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created, and that the lots created are in accordance with the provisions of the zoning resolutions of the county. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, that creates or adds five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater of new impervious surface area, or that involves land disturbing activity of one (1) acre or more, including projects of less than one (1) acre if they are a part of a larger common plan of development or sale. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places; or 
(3)  Any project that properly obtains a waiver from these requirements from the commission of Macon-Bibb County. 
Utility means any public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems, and railroads or other utilities identified by the county. 
Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter. 
Vegetation means all plant growth. 
Watercourse means any natural or man-made conveyance channel, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which stormwater flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed, and banks, and including any areas adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Water quality means the condition of water relative to the requirements of one or more species and/or to any human need or purpose. The term refers to chemical, physical, and biological characteristics and is most frequently used in reference to a set of standards against which compliance can be assessed. Water quality under this code will normally be determined by standards set by the State of Georgia for applicable water bodies and their uses. 
Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
Sec. 23-5. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the geographic limits of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  The engineer or designee shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The engineering department shall be responsible for the conservation, management, maintenance (where applicable), extension, and improvement of the stormwater system, including activities necessary to control stormwater runoff and activities necessary to carry out stormwater management programs included in Macon-Bibb County's NPDES stormwater permit. 
(d)  The application of this chapter and the provisions expressed herein shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statute. In addition, if site characteristics indicate that complying with these minimum requirements will not provide adequate designs or protection for local property or residents, it is the designer's responsibility to exceed the minimum requirements as necessary. 
(e)  The engineering department shall develop, and update periodically, a stormwater management design manual for the guidance of persons preparing stormwater management plans, and designing or operating stormwater management systems. 
Sec. 23-6. - Powers of the engineering department. 
(a)  The engineering department shall have the power to administer and enforce all regulations and procedures adopted to implement this chapter, including the right to maintain an action or procedure in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The engineering department may: 
(1)  Administer, coordinate, and oversee acquisition, design, construction, and O&M of stormwater facilities and conveyances; 
(2)  Establish or oversee establishment of development standards and guidelines; 
(3)  Determine the manner in which stormwater facilities should be operated; 
(4)  Inspect private systems which discharge to the stormwater system; 
(5)  Advise the commission and other departments on issues related to stormwater; 
(6)  Protect facilities and properties controlled by the engineering department and prescribe how they are used by others; 
(7)  Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater contributions to comply with the terms of this chapter; 
(8)  Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(9)  Adopt and implement the stormwater management program for Macon-Bibb County. 
Secs. 23-7—23-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLLUTION PREVENTION 

Sec. 23-11. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply throughout the entire area of Macon-Bibb County and to all nonstormwater discharges entering the MS4 or watercourses of Macon-Bibb County on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 23-12. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
Sec. 23-13. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall throw, drain, discharge, or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
(b)  The commencement, conduct, or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited, except those discharges described as follows. 
(c)  The following discharges are exempt from the discharge prohibitions established by this article: 
(1)  Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated—typically less than one (1) PPM chlorine), discharge from firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the engineering department as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the engineering department twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time of the test followed by written notice within ten (10) days. 
(4)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency or the state environmental protection division, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the engineering department prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(5)  Any stormwater discharge regulated under an NPDES stormwater discharge permit for industrial activities provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the engineering department prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(6)  Any stormwater discharge regulated under an NPDES stormwater discharge permit for construction activities or other local land disturbance permit provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the engineering department prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
Sec. 23-14. - Illicit connection prohibitions. 
(a)  The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to Macon-Bibb County's stormwater drainage system is prohibited. 
(b)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(c)  A person violates this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or watercourses, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(d)  Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the county health department for onsite wastewater management systems or the Macon Water Authority for sanitary sewer systems. 
Sec. 23-15. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to Macon-Bibb County's engineer or designee prior to allowing discharges to the stormwater drainage system. 
Sec. 23-16. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or who is responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the stormwater drainage system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person, by phone, facsimile, or email no later than the next business day, of the nature, quantity, and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the engineer or designee within three (3) business days of the phone call or by personal notification. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
Sec. 23-17. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The engineering department may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the engineering department may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge in non-emergency situations. Any person discharging to the MS4 or watercourses in violation of this article may have their MS4 access of those sources of pollution under their control terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The engineering department will notify the violator in writing of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the engineering department for a reconsideration and hearing. 
(c)  A person commits a violation of this article if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior written approval of the engineering department. 
Sec. 23-18. - Right of entry, monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  The engineer or designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, and in accordance with state and federal law, shall be permitted to enter private or public property at reasonable times to inspect or investigate conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter, the investigation of any apparent violation of any provision of this chapter, compliance with the terms of any permit or maintenance agreement, observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to the county water resource protection ordinance or compliance with any permit and periodic investigations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The engineer or designee shall notify the owner of said property or the representative on-site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(c)  The engineer or designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, and in accordance with state and federal law, shall be permitted to enter private or public property at reasonable times for repairs, maintenance and other similar purposes related to any portion of the county MS4. The engineer or designee shall notify the owner of said property or the representative on-site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(d)  In addition to other procedures provided, the engineer or designee may obtain an inspection warrant for the purpose of inspection or investigation of conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter, compliance with the terms of any permit, or observation, measurement, sampling, or testing with respect to this chapter or the permit, and periodic investigations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Inspection warrants may be issued by either the magistrate court of the county or state court of the county when the issuing judge is satisfied that the engineering department has established that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection that includes the property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of the property. 
(e)  The owner or operator shall allow the engineering department ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination, and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(f)  A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits a violation if the person denies the engineer or designee reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(g)  The engineer or designee shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the engineer or designee to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(h)  The engineer or designee may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least biannually to ensure their accuracy. 
(i)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the engineering department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(j)  If a discharger has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the engineering department. 
(k)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the engineering department access to a facility shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 23-19. - Emergency powers. 
(a)  If, after inspection, the condition of a stormwater conveyance presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, Macon-Bibb County shall have the right to take action as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to make the stormwater conveyance safe. 
(b)  The engineering department may conduct emergency maintenance or remediation operations on private property and on private stormwater conveyances. Emergency maintenance or remediation operations shall constitute actions to remedy conditions that in the opinion of the engineer create a condition potentially injurious to life, property, or the MS4. 
(c)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any stormwater conveyance shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 23-20. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants. 
(a)  Specification of best management practices. Macon-Bibb County may adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility, which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the MS4, or watercourses, or waters of the U.S. as indicated below. 
(b)  Pollution prevention in new facilities. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. 
(c)  Pollution prevention in existing facilities. Any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be the source of an illicit discharge, may be required by the engineering department to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or watercourses. 
(d)  Charge permits from other regulatory agencies. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed to constitute compliance with the provisions of this section. BMPs designated for compliance with the NPDES permit or BMPs implemented as a result of action taken in compliance with this article shall be included in a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
Sec. 23-21. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. Where property through which a watercourse passes is leased, the lessee of said property shall likewise be responsible for maintaining the property in accordance with this section. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
Secs. 23-22—23-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLANS 

Sec. 23-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream and drainage channels; 
(2)  Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(3)  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(4)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
Sec. 23-32. - Applicability. 
This article shall be applicable to all development plan applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the engineering department under the specifications of this article. This article also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation or addition of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that disturbs one (1) acre or more of land; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation or addition of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1) acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the engineering department to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (1) and (2) if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(5)  Any development project, regardless of size, deemed by the engineering department as a development that will contribute to a known or suspected water quality or quantity impairment. 
Sec. 23-33. - Exempt activities. 
(a)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the engineering department. 
(b)  When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current local stormwater design manual (LDM). This criterion is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment project permits will be determined after a review by the engineering department. 
Sec. 23-34. - Development of a local stormwater design manual (LDM). 
(a)  Macon-Bibb County may furnish additional policy, criteria, and information including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter and will provide such information in the form of a LDM. The LDM will serve to supplement and/or clarify information set forth in the state stormwater management manual. 
(b)  The LDM will include a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the Macon-Bibb County, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring, and local maintenance experience. Minor administrative or technical changes may be made to the manual by the engineering department at its discretion. Major changes that would have a significant cost impact to development shall be approved by the commission. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards during the design and permitting phase of a land development project. 
Sec. 23-35. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading, or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Application requirements. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the Macon-Bibb County a permit application on a form provided for that purpose. Unless otherwise accepted by this article, a permit application must include the minimum requirements as defined in this article or LDM in order for the permit application to be considered. See also chapter 21, soil erosion and sedimentation control, for permit requirements. 
(c)  Application review fees. Macon-Bibb County may require the submittal of a review fee for review of the stormwater management plan. This review fee shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the commission. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support local plan review, inspection, and program administration, and all fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any development permits. 
(d)  Application procedure. All applications received by the Macon-Bibb County will be received and processed in the manner outlined in the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance of Macon-Bibb County. 
(e)  Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the engineering department notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under permit condition. Should no activity take place on the site, the permit shall expire within one (1) year of issuance. 
Sec. 23-36. - General performance criteria for stormwater management. 
Unless judged by the engineering department to be exempt or granted a waiver from stormwater management requirements, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
(1)  All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)  All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly into a state water without adequate control of stormwater runoff. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the engineering department. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) or the state department of natural resources. 
(3)  Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained to the maximum extent practical, by promoting infiltration through the use of structural and non-structural methods where allowable. 
(4)  For new development, stormwater treatment practices shall be designed to remove pollutants to levels prescribed in the current LDM. It is presumed that a BMP complies with this performance standard if it is: 
a.  Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQv); 
b.  Designed according to the specific performance criteria outlined in the LDM; 
c.  Constructed properly; and 
d.  Maintained regularly. 
(5)  To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the current LDM. 
(6)  Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas, etc.) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(7)  Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI) under the provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit. The stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites. 
(8)  Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots," may require the use of specific structural stormwater treatment practices (STPs) and pollution prevention practices. 
(9)  Prior to design, applicants are encouraged to consult with the engineering department to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements. 
(10)  The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the LDM shall be used for sizing all stormwater management practices. 
Sec. 23-37. - Basic stormwater management design criteria. 
(a)  Minimum control requirements. All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality, channel protection, ten (10) year, one hundred (100) year) as identified in the LDM are met, unless the engineering department grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the engineering department reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
(b)  Site design feasibility. Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Applicants shall consult the current LDM for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice. 
(c)  Conveyance issues. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. The current LDM shall provide detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater management practices. 
(d)  Landscaping plans required. All stormwater management practices that utilize wetlands vegetation as part of the functional treatment process (e.g. constructed wetlands, etc.) must submit a separate landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. This plan must be prepared by an individual having a professional certification by the Society of Wetlands Scientists and having completed three projects of a similar nature that have been successfully implemented or equivalent qualifications as determined by the engineering department. 
(e)  Maintenance agreements. All new stormwater treatment practices shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater treatment practice. In addition, a legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities. An example of the covenant can be found in the LDM. 
(f)  Non-structural stormwater practices. The use of non-structural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned through the use of non-structural practices that reduce the generation of stormwater from the site. These non-structural practices are explained in detail in the current LDM and applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of non-structural practices must ensure that these practices are documented and that appropriate guidance as to their location and maintenance requirements is given to subsequent property owners. 
Sec. 23-38. - Waivers of stormwater management requirements. 
(a)  Waivers for providing stormwater management. Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this article, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the engineering department for approval. 
The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions apply or the applicant presents sufficient engineering data and analysis to support their request for a waiver as determined by the local jurisdiction: 
(1)  It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this article; 
(2)  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the engineering department and local ordinance (or some other legally enforceable document) that requires the implementation of the plan; 
(3)  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices, and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice; 
(4)  The engineering department finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site; 
(5)  Non-structural practices will be used on the site that reduces: a) the generation of stormwater from the site; b) the size and cost of stormwater storage; and c) the pollutants generated at the site. These non-structural practices shall be explained in detail in the local or state stormwater management manual and the amount of credit available for using such practices shall be determined by the engineering department; or 
(6)  The location of the development in the drainage basin is such that some of the requirements for stormwater control in the local design manual would increase the potential for flooding or other harmful effects. 
(b)  Conditions of waiver. In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the engineering department may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the engineering department that the waiver will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways: 
(1)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(2)  Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
(3)  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; and 
(4)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property. 
(c)  Mitigation requirements for waivers. Where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant may be required to satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the engineering department. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat. 
(2)  The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this article. 
(3)  Monetary contributions (fee in lieu) to fund stormwater management activities such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland delineation studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macro invertebrates, stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies, hydrologic studies, and monitoring of stormwater management practices, etc.). 
(d)  Fee in lieu of stormwater management practices. Where the engineering department waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant may be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the engineering department. 
When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and Macon-Bibb County agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the commission. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any development permits. 
(e)  Dedication of land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an agreement with Macon-Bibb County for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and Macon-Bibb County prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the development permits. 
Sec. 23-39. - Requirements for stormwater management plan approval. 
(a)  Stormwater management plan required for all developments. 
(1)  No application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. This plan must be certified by a professional engineer or landscape architect licensed in the state of Georgia. Further, pursuant to the provisions contained in O.C.G.A. § 43-15-2, as amended, a surveyor registered in the state may prepare hydrologic studies and design stormwater drainage systems. Said plan must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and if on-site, the general location and type of practices. 
(2)  The stormwater management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a professional engineer, landscape architect, or surveyor licensed in the state, who will verify that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist found in the current LDM. 
(3)  No development permits shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the engineering department after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(1)  A stormwater management plan shall be required with all land disturbance activity (LDA) permit applications and will include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site— both present and future—on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development. 
(2)  To accomplish this goal the applicant shall prepare a design report which shall include elements sufficient to ensure compliance with this article as outlined in the current LDM. The engineering department reserves the right to extend these requirements to ensure compliance with this article if the requirements in the current LDM prove to be insufficient. However, in these cases, the engineering department must provide a written explanation of the additional elements needed to the applicant. 
(c)  Performance bond/security. 
(1)  Macon-Bibb County may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus twenty-five (25) percent as agreed to by the applicant and Macon-Bibb County. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. 
(2)  The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of "as-built plans" and written certification by a professional engineer, landscape architect, or registered surveyor licensed in the state that the stormwater practice will function in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this article. The engineering department will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial prorata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages may be done at the discretion of the engineering department. 
(d)  Errors and omissions insurance. Macon-Bibb County shall require a professional engineer, landscape architect, or registered surveyor licensed in the state submitting plans for review under this chapter to maintain in full force and effect errors and omissions liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence while practicing in Macon-Bibb County. A valid certificate of insurance shall be submitted to the engineering department to evidence that such insurance has been procured and is in force. 
Sec. 23-40. - Construction inspection. 
(a)  Notice of construction commencement. The applicant must notify the engineering department in advance before the commencement of construction. If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall proceed unless permitted by the engineering department until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the engineering department. 
(b)  As-built plans. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management practices located both on-site and off-site after final construction is completed in a format specified in the current LDM. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer, landscape architect, or registered surveyor licensed in the state. A final inspection by the engineering department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(c)  Landscaping and stabilization requirements. All requirements of Macon-Bibb County's soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance for stabilizing the site during construction and after completion of final grading shall apply. 
Sec. 23-41. - Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities. 
(a)  Maintenance easement. Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy or final plat that has a stormwater management facility as part of the project, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the engineering department, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. 
(b)  Maintenance covenants. 
(1)  Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the engineering department and recorded into the final plat prior to final approval. As part of the covenant, appropriate maintenance standards shall be developed for the manner in which maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. 
(2)  Macon-Bibb County, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(3)  Stormwater management facilities may be required to undergo annual inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include: removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes; grass cutting and vegetation (including tree) removal; and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the engineering department, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. The requirement for such inspections shall be outlined in the maintenance covenant. 
(c)  Inspection of stormwater facilities. Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. 
Inspections may include, but shall not be limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(d)  Right of entry for inspection. 
(1)  When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property for which a maintenance agreement has been executed between Bibb County, the City of Macon, or Macon-Bibb County and the owner of the detention pond, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system or sanitary sewer, the property owner shall grant to the engineering department the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter. Unreasonable delays in allowing the engineering department access to a facility shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Where existing drainage control structures exist for which a maintenance agreement does not exist between Macon-Bibb County and the property owner, the engineering department may inspect the facility as a courtesy to private property owners to identify maintenance needs. The department will, where feasible, obtain permission from the property owner to inspect the stormwater facility. 
(e)  Failure to maintain practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, or if it fails to correct a deficiency in a structure for which no maintenance covenant exists and which would endanger the public, the engineering department, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the engineering department will notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility, in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall affect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner and within the established deadline. After proper notice, Macon-Bibb County may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 23-42. - Administration. 
Unless otherwise stated, the engineering department shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the engineering department may be delegated by the engineering department to persons or entities acting under the authority of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 23-43. - Effects of compliance. 
The standards set forth herein pursuant to this chapter unless otherwise noted are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no adverse effect with regard to water quality and quantity. 
Sec. 23-44. - Liability of Macon-Bibb County. 
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter nor the compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity from responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor shall it impose any liability upon Macon-Bibb County for damage to any person or property. 
Sec. 23-45. - Grandfather clause. 
Any applicant or owner of a parcel of land within the territorial jurisdiction of Macon-Bibb County who has constructed the required stormwater management facility or BMP or who is in the process of meeting the stormwater management requirements of the law at the time of the effective date of this article may elect to apply to the engineer for reconsideration under the provisions of this chapter. 
Secs. 23-46—23-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 23-51. - Violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section, or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the engineer or designee is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The engineer or designee is authorized to seek costs of the abatement. 
Sec. 23-52. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  If the engineer determines that an owner, user, or developer has failed to comply with the provisions of article II or article III or is engaged in activity prohibited by article II or article III, a notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The owner, user, developer, or other responsible party shall be provided a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days, to cure such violation; except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the user or the responsible person. 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring. 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
d.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(2)  The notice of violation may further require, without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
f.  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)  Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work may be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
Sec. 23-53. - Citation for violation, penalties. 
(a)  All violations of this article shall be issued a citation by Macon-Bibb County. The municipal, magistrate court, and state court of the county shall each have concurrent jurisdiction to try offenses alleging violations of this chapter by any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity. 
(b)  Violations of this chapter shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. Each day any violation of this chapter shall continue shall be considered a separate offense. 
(c)  Upon conviction for a violation of the provisions of article II, any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per violation or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than sixty (60) days, or by both this fine and imprisonment for each offense. 
(d)  Upon conviction for a violation of the provisions of article III, any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per violation. 
Sec. 23-54. - Remedies. 
(a)  Cost of abatement of violation. Within thirty (30) days after abatement or remediation of a violation by the engineering department, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within thirty (30) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the commission, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(b)  Injunctive relief. The attorney for Macon-Bibb County or his designee on behalf of the government may institute injunctive, or other appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this chapter or to correct violations of this chapter, and any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. 
(c)  Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, Macon-Bibb County may impose upon a violator, alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(d)  Stop work orders. Any stop work order imposed shall be in effect until the engineering department confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner as determined by the engineering department can result in penalties in accordance with this chapter. 
(e)  Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits will not be granted until all corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the engineering department. 
(f)  Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, Macon-Bibb County may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(g)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(h)  Recovery of fees, costs. Macon-Bibb County may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the discretion of the engineering department to seek cumulative remedies. 
Sec. 23-55. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision or directive of the engineering department or the Macon-Bibb County engineer under this chapter, including any decision with respect to a waiver of stormwater management requirements, may appeal the same by filing a written notice of appeal to the commission within thirty (30) calendar days of the issuance of said decision by the department or county engineer. 
(b)  All appeals shall be heard by the commission within forty-five (45) days after receipt of notice of appeal or a date mutually agreed upon in writing. 
(c)  Any appeal of said final decision may be made to the superior court of the county within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of a final decision. Said notice shall be sent registered mail to the appealing party. 
Sec. 23-56. - Variances from requirements. 
(a)  The engineer may grant a variance from requirements of article III if exceptional circumstances applicable to a site exist such that adherence to the provisions of said article will result in unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of said article. 
(b)  A written request for a variance shall be required and shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting data, why a variance should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance. 
(c)  The engineer will conduct a review of the request for a variance and may approve, deny, or request additional information concerning the variance request. 
Chapter 24 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, adopted July 21, 2015 , repealed ch. 24, arts. I—VIII, §§ 24-1—24-3, 24-41—24-47, 24-66—24-78, 24-100—24-109, 24-126—24-131, 24-165, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 24 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 24 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Original Code. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Soliciting trade on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or walk upon any sidewalk or street in front of or near, a store or place of business of any kind, or so near the sidewalk as to obstruct its use, for the purpose of soliciting customers or trade thereof by calling out or "spelling" for such business, or by taking hold of passersby and undertaking to persuade or force them into a store or place of business, or by any other acts similar to these mentioned. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-2. - Displaying merchandise on sidewalks and the like. 
(a)  Sidewalk special temporary sales. A special temporary sale conducted on a public sidewalk by a retail or wholesale business is permitted under the following conditions: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided for in the Downtown fire zone in paragraph (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a sidewalk sale without a permit. The application for a permit shall contain such identifying and descriptive information of the sale as the Director of Business Development Services may prescribe. 
(2)  Only one sidewalk sale shall be permitted during any one trimester and the period of the special sale shall be limited to 2 consecutive days. 
(3)  The fee for a permit to conduct a sidewalk sale shall be $25.00. 
(4)  Any display of merchandise by a business in a sidewalk special temporary sale shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  The display shall be situated so as to abut the front wall of the building in which the business selling the displayed merchandise is located; 
B.  The display shall not exceed a size of 12 feet by four feet (12' × 4'); however, such display shall not extend beyond either end of the front exterior wall of said business; and 
C.  The displayed merchandise shall be items regularly sold as a part of the business displaying the merchandise. 
D.  The provision of paragraph (4) above notwithstanding, an area of not less than five feet of unobstructed pedestrian passageway shall be maintained at all times between any display and the nearest curb, tree, pole or other public structure. 
E.  All displays and/or merchandise displayed in a sidewalk sale as provided for in this section shall be removed from the sidewalk during any time when the business conducting such sale is closed to customers. 
F.  All final sales transactions between business and customer shall be conducted within the business establishment, not on the sidewalk. 
G.  Any person or business conducting a sidewalk sale shall not cause any loud or offensive noise, either from his or her person or from any device, instrument or equipment for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods or services for sale or distribution. 
H.  No person or business conducting a sidewalk sale shall display goods or merchandise on the ground, or on any cloth, plastic or similar ground covering on any sidewalk or other public right-of-way. All displays shall be set up so that the displays are easily detectable by the visually impaired. 
(5)  No sale on a public sidewalk as described in this paragraph shall be permitted on the same sidewalk or portion of a sidewalk where any street party or other special event is occurring, unless the producer of the special event agrees in writing to such sidewalk sale. A copy of such an agreement shall be filed with the Business Development Services Department. 
(b)  Sidewalk displays of merchandise in the Downtown area. A sidewalk display of merchandise may be conducted on a public sidewalk by a retail or wholesale business in the Downtown area embraced within what is known as the fire zone without a permit under the following conditions: 
(1)  The display shall be situated so as to abut the front wall of the building in which the business selling the displayed merchandise is located and shall not obstruct building entrances, fire exits, utility meters, cellar entrances, or standpipes or other safety equipment; 
(2)  The display shall not exceed a size of 12 inches in depth, 36 inches in width and 60 inches in height; alternatively, displays consisting solely of newspapers, periodicals or other publications shall not exceed a size of 27 inches in depth, 48 inches in width and 60 inches in height. In no event shall a display extend beyond either end of the front exterior wall of said business; 
(3)  The provision of paragraph (2) above notwithstanding, an area of not less than five feet of unobstructed pedestrian passageway shall be maintained at all times between any display and the nearest curb, tree, pole or other permanent object situate in the right-of-way; 
(4)  The display shall consist only of fungible merchandise regularly sold in the ordinary course of the business displaying the merchandise; and no signs, advertisements or other written or graphic material (except such merchandise sold in the ordinary course of the business maintaining the display) may be posted or placed on a sidewalk display; 
(5)  The following items are prohibited in any display: tobacco products, alcoholic beverages, obscene material as defined by O.C.G.A. section 16-12-80, weapons, live animals or pawned items; 
(6)  All sidewalk displays as provided for in this section shall be removed from the sidewalk during any time when the business displaying such merchandise is closed to customers. 
(7)  All final sales transactions between business and customer shall be conducted within the business establishment, not on the sidewalk; 
(8)  Any person or business conducting sidewalk displays shall not cause any loud or offensive noise, either from his or her person or from any device, instrument or equipment for the purpose of attracting attention to such display or to the sale of any goods or merchandise; 
(9)  No person or business shall display goods or merchandise directly on the ground, or on any cloth, plastic or similar ground covering on any sidewalk or other public right-of-way. All displays must be stabilized with no risk of overturning due to wind or incidental contact. All displays must either extend to the ground or have a two-inch wide rubberized strip at all bottom edges to be easily detectable by the visually impaired; 
(10)  Furniture and Clothing racks shall constitute displays unto themselves and may extend beyond the front of the building by more than 12 inches. Each establishment shall have the right to display furniture or clothing at such depth and width so long as at least 5 feet of usable sidewalk space is available or that the display of wares does not extend more than 10 feet from the front of the establishment; 
(11)  Fire zone means the downtown fire district which is defined as embraced within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of Martin Luther King, Jr., Boulevard and Riverside Drive; extending along Riverside Drive to Spring Street, extending along Spring Street and an extension thereof to Hazel Street; extending along Hazel Street to Fifth Street; extending along Fifth Street and Martin Luther King, Jr., Boulevard to Riverside Drive, the beginning point, including both sides of segments of the above streets forming such boundaries. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section. 
(d)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed as giving to any person transacting any business in Macon-Bibb County any authority to obstruct public sidewalks, streets or other public places, or to commit or maintain a nuisance. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 24-3—24-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 

Sec. 24-21—24-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PAVING 

Sec. 24-41. - Material; dimension; approval. 
It shall be the duty of the engineering department to have paved any street, or part of any street, within Macon-Bibb County whenever the street or part of the street, shall be ordered paved by resolution of the Macon-Bibb County commission. All paving material, before it is set up and used, shall be approved by the Macon-Bibb County engineer, and shall be organized and constructed under his supervision and direction. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-42. - Uniformity of material and workmanship. 
In order to ensure uniformity in material and workmanship, all material used in paving, shall be approved or supplied by Macon-Bibb County, and all work done in setting up such paving may be done by Macon-Bibb County with labor employed by Macon-Bibb County, or by a contractor, should the Macon-Bibb County engineer so determine, who shall do such paving at a specified cost, keep an accurate account of every item of expense incurred in doing the work, including the cost of material, so that when the paving of any street or part of any street has been completed, the actual cost of doing the work may be assessed against the abutting property owners, as provided by this article. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-43. - Notice to owners. 
When any street, or a part of any street, shall be ordered paved, as provided in this article, the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall notify the owner of the property abutting on the street or part of street to be paved, of the intention of Macon-Bibb County to pave the street, and the notice shall further require any property holder having gas or water service pipes or sewer pipes connecting the mains with his premises, to lower the gas or water pipes or sewer pipes, or any other pipes or obstruction of any kind, for which the owner of the property may be responsible, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of the notice. Any person failing to comply with the notice shall be required to appear before the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County, and, upon conviction, shall be punished; provided, however, any owner of property affected may, within fifteen (15) days from the date of service of the notice, appeal to the Macon-Bibb County commission and show cause why he should not comply with the notice and the provisions of this section. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-44. - Assessment of costs. 
Immediately upon the completion of the paving of any street or part of any street, the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall certify to the mayor and commission, that the work of paving the street or part of street has been completed, and thereupon, it shall be the duty of the Macon-Bibb County Tax Commissioner to assess two-thirds of the entire cost for the work against the real estate abutting on those sides of the street on which such paving has been done. Each piece of real estate so abutting shall be assessed in proportion to the ratio its frontage bears to the frontage of the entire property abutting upon that part of the street or portions of the street so paved or improved. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-45. - Payment of costs. 
(a)  Immediately after the cost of paving and improving any street has been prorated by the Macon-Bibb County Commission and assessed, the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall prepare a list of the property holders whose property abuts on the portions of the streets so paved and improved under the provisions of this article and provide it to the Macon-Bibb County Tax Commissioner who shall mail to each of the property holders a written notice of the assessment in a properly stamped and addressed envelope. Thereupon, each property holder shall make payment for the paving so assessed against each, respectively, within 30 days from the date of such notice unless the Macon-Bibb County Commission shall have determined that extenuating circumstances exist. If the Macon-Bibb County Commission, in its sole discretion, determines that extenuating circumstances exist, the board may permit the property owners to pay the assessment in monthly or quarterly installments over a term not to exceed five years. In such instance, the written notice or statement shall be mailed to the property owners as required herein immediately after approval of the installment payment and term and the property owners shall make such payments each month during the approved term until such assessment shall have been paid in full. 
(b)  If any property holder shall fail to pay to the Macon-Bibb County Tax Commissioner his share of the costs in accordance with the assessment, within the aforesaid time from the date of mailing the notices, then the Macon-Bibb County Tax Commissioner shall issue an execution against the delinquent property and property holder for the amount so due and unpaid, together with all costs thereon, and the execution shall bear interest at the rate of nine (9) percent per annum. Any delinquent sums due under this section may also be collected as are other debts due the county. 
(c)  The execution issued by the Macon-Bibb County board of commissioners or its designated agent, as provided for in this section shall bind and be a lien upon all property of such delinquent owner abutting on such improvements or served thereby and shall be a special lien superior to all other liens except for taxes upon such property. The execution shall be collected and defenses thereto may be made in the manner provided by law with respect to ad valorem taxes. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-46. - Assignment of execution to contractor. 
Whenever such work is done by a contractor, under the authority and direction of the mayor and commission, the execution for the work shall be transferred and turned over to the contractor in full payment for the work done, and the execution may be levied and collected by the finance officer, as is now provided in the case of executions for paving sidewalks. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-47. - Obstruction across gutter prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any obstruction across the gutter of any paved street for the purpose of providing a driveway into abutting property, and all such obstructions are hereby declared unlawful and the Macon-Bibb County engineer is ordered to remove such obstruction. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 24-48—24-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 24-66. - Duty to lower pipes. 
Whenever excavations are to be made in any street or sidewalk for the purpose of curbing or laying sidewalks or improving or repairing such street or sidewalk, any property holder having gas or water pipes connecting the mains with his premises, or having sewer pipes or other pipes or obstructions of any kind for which the owner of the property may be responsible, shall lower the pipe or other obstructions. The Macon-Bibb County engineer shall serve the property owner with notice to lower the pipe or other obstruction within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice. The notice shall state the depth of the excavation to be made. The notice may be served upon the owner, an agent or other person in charge of the property, abutting on, or in front of which the sidewalk is to be laid or the curb set. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to lower the pipe or other obstruction as set forth in this section. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-67. - Pipe lowered by Macon-Bibb County at owner's expense. 
If any property owner shall be notified as provided in this article, and shall fail within fifteen (15) days to comply therewith, the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall have the pipes lowered at the owner's expense. In all such cases the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall cause a bill for the cost of the work to be presented to the property owner or agent in charge thereof if a resident of Macon-Bibb County. If not a resident, the bill shall be presented by mailing a letter enclosing such bill, addressed to the owner at Macon, Georgia, at the street number of the property in front of which pipes are to be lowered, and if the bill is not paid within fifteen (15) days, the Macon-Bibb, County engineer shall deliver such bill to the finance officer, who shall issue execution for the amount of the bill against the property and owner and provide for its collection as for other debts due Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-68. - Unlawful to excavate without permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person including franchisees to excavate or dig into or perform any character of construction on or under, or otherwise disturb the surface of any paved or unpaved street and paved or unpaved sidewalk of Macon-Bibb County without first having obtained from the Macon-Bibb County engineer a permit to do so. This permit, if granted, shall be in duplicate, specifying the name of the street, the house or lot number, the purpose of the excavation, the character of the pipe to be laid, or taken up, the type and extent of construction to be performed, and the time allowed for full performance of the work. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-69. - Payment of indebtedness prior to issuance. 
No permit shall be issued by the Macon-Bibb County engineer to any person who is indebted to Macon-Bibb County for work already done in repairing excavated pavements, until the person shall have discharged in full all such indebtedness. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-70. - Expiration of permits. 
All permits issued pursuant to this article by the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall become void after the expiration of the allotted time designated in the permit, unless an extension is granted by the Macon-Bibb County engineer in writing. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-71. - Failure to return permit unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this article for any purpose whatsoever by the Macon-Bibb County engineer to fail to return such permit within three (3) days after the expiration of the allotted time designated in the permit. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-72. - Relaying pavement. 
Unless authorized by the Macon-Bibb County engineer, no person after making an excavation or digging into such street, or sidewalk, as hereinbefore provided, shall relay the pavement, but the same shall be laid by Macon-Bibb County employees, officers and agents. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-73. - Specifications for excavating. 
The following specifications for digging into, excavating or disturbing the street or sidewalk shall be observed and followed. The applicant shall carefully remove the pavement between prescribed lines taking all necessary precautions to maintain the undisturbed pavement adjacent to the excavation. So much of the paving material displaced as can be relaid must be stacked up parallel to the excavation at a sufficient distance therefrom to prevent damage to the undisturbed pavement. Excavated earth and concrete shall be placed upon the opposite side of the excavation in such manner and at such distance as will prevent any damage to the surrounding pavement. In refilling the excavation, which is to be done by the applicant, tamping or puddling must be continued from bottom to top of the excavation, replacing all, or more earth, if required, to produce the sub-grade level of the street. Macon-Bibb County officers and employees shall then replace the displaced concrete foundation and paving material, charging the applicant for the actual cost of such replacing and repairing. These charges shall be paid to the director of finance on demand and before another permit shall be issued. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-74. - Liability for damage; removal of waste. 
(a)  During the time occupied in making the excavation, removing earth and pavement and relaying such pavement, and from the time the excavation is begun until the completion of the relaying of the pavement, the applicant shall be liable for all damage that may be done to Macon-Bibb County property or to life, limb or property of any person. 
(b)  When the work is completed, Macon-Bibb County or a person authorized by the Macon-Bibb County engineer, shall remove the waste material and clean up the street. Only such old paving material as shall be accepted by the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall be used in repairing and repaving the streets excavated. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-75. - Reports of excavations to fire chief and sheriff. 
It shall be unlawful for any plumber, contractor or other person digging into or making excavations in any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of Macon-Bibb County, to fail to report to the fire chief and sheriff each afternoon during the progress of the digging or excavation, specifying the exact location of the excavation or digging. The report shall be made before the hour of 5:00 p.m. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-76. - Duty to repair gas, water or other main. 
Whenever any gas, water or other pipe was not laid in conformity with the grade required by the Macon-Bibb County engineer, and is broken in working the streets or damaged in any other manner, the person owning or operating the main from which the pipe is run to the property line, shall immediately at his own expense, repair such main, and shall maintain the pipes leading from the mains to the property line in good repair. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-77. - Duty to protect public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person making any excavation in any of the paved or unpaved streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks or public parks of Macon-Bibb County to fail to protect the travelling public by placing thereabouts barricades, red lights and other danger-signals, sufficient to put any reasonable person on notice of the excavations so made. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-78. - Contractor's bond required. 
Every contractor or other person making any change in curbing for the purpose of constructing or repairing driveways, every contractor or other person constructing or repairing driveways, and every contractor or other person constructing or repairing sidewalks, or doing any construction or repairing which necessitates the disturbing of the surface of a sidewalk or street, shall give bond to Macon-Bibb County in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), conditioned for the doing of the work in accordance with the ordinances, rules, and regulations of Macon-Bibb County, and to save Macon-Bibb County harmless in case of any damage to person or property, which arises from the doing of the work, the bond to be executed by the contractor or other person desiring to do the work as principal and by a surety or bonding company authorized and qualified to do business in the state and in Macon-Bibb County. 
Contractors and plumbers shall be relieved from posting the bond upon securing a liability policy containing property damage coverage in the sum of at least twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and personal injury coverage in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and filing a copy thereof with Macon-Bibb County clerk. 
No policy shall be considered acceptable under this section unless it contains products hazard coverage including completed operations liability and the C.D.U. exclusions are omitted therefrom. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 24-79—24-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIDEWALKS 

Secs. 24-96—24-104. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24-105. - Exclusive pedestrian travel on certain designated alleys. 
2nd Street lane from its intersection with Mulberry Street to its intersection with Poplar Street, Third Street Lane from its intersection with Cherry Street to its intersection with Poplar Street Lane, and Broadway Lane from its intersection with Cherry Street to its intersection with Cherry Street Lane which are hereby limited to pedestrian travel exclusively. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-106. - Sidewalks to be free of obstructions. 
Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk or alley within Macon-Bibb County by placing any object thereupon or therein in such manner as to interfere with or obstruct the full, free and proper use thereof, nor erect or place any building, fence or obstruction in whole or in part upon any alley or sidewalk. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-107. - Duty of contractors in erecting buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any contractor, or other person erecting a building in Macon-Bibb County, to occupy more than one-fourth of the street adjacent thereto for the purpose of temporarily storing thereon building material, or to render impassable the sidewalk on which the building abuts unless a safe temporary walkway is provided and approved by the Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-108. - Cellar doors on sidewalks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have or maintain upon any sidewalk or alley in Macon-Bibb County any cellar door and all such as now exist are hereby declared to be nuisances. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-109. - Gates opening upon sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have or permit to remain upon his premises any gate that opens out upon the sidewalk. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 24-110—24-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENCROACHMENTS 

Sec. 24-126. - Nonconforming Encroachments; removal; application. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advance their lots from the original boundary on any of the streets of Macon-Bibb County without making application to the Macon-Bibb County commission for an encroachment agreement and having such encroachment agreement granted as provided in this article. 
(b)  No building of any description shall ever be erected upon any lot in Macon-Bibb County outside of the lot line. 
(c)  No person shall be allowed to erect a fence, steps, portico, or other obstruction beyond the line of his lot so as to be an encroachment upon the street right-of-way without an approved encroachment agreement. 
(d)  In all cases of unauthorized, illegal, or nonconforming encroachments upon streets, lanes or alleys, the mayor shall cause the nonconforming encroachment to be removed upon reasonable notice to the party maintaining the nonconforming encroachment, or in the mayor's and commission's discretion, permit and sanction the nonconforming encroachment for such fair consideration as the parties at interest may agree upon, due regard being first had to the interest of the other property holders likely to be affected thereby. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-127. - Fees on application for encroachment; purchase of municipal property. 
(a)  Every person applying to Macon-Bibb County for any encroachment agreement, for the purchase of any public property in conformance with Sec. 19-12(c) of this Code, for the location of any property line, or for any other matter or thing, which requires in the judgment of Macon-Bibb County engineer, a survey, investigation or the making of a map by Macon-Bibb County, shall pay upon demand a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash to be paid into the treasury of Macon-Bibb County. The application shall not be acted upon, nor shall Macon-Bibb County engineer do any work in pursuance thereof, until the fee prescribed in this section shall have been first paid. 
(b)  Every person applying to Macon-Bibb County for any encroachment agreement, for the purchase of any public property in conformance with Sec. 19-12(c) of this Code, for the location of any property line, or for any other matter or thing which requires, in the judgment of the Macon-Bibb County attorney, the making of an investigation or the doing of any legal work by the Macon-Bibb County attorney, shall pay upon demand a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash to be paid into the treasury of Macon-Bibb County. The application shall not be acted upon, nor shall the Macon-Bibb County attorney do any work in pursuance thereof, until the fees herein prescribed shall have been first paid. 
(c)  No encroachment upon the streets, alleys, or public property of Macon-Bibb County, shall be granted an encroachment agreement for a consideration of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), which shall be consideration in addition to fees for legal and engineering services. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-128. - Application and deed; engineer's report; plat. 
(a)  The application shall also be accompanied by the deed showing the title of the applicant to the property in front of which the encroachment is desired. The applicant shall furnish a plat of the desired encroachment, prepared by a registered land surveyor, showing the center line of the street and the property line and necessary dimensions to identify the encroachment. The applicant's address shall also be stated. 
(b)  The application, plat and deed shall, as soon as possible, be delivered to the Macon-Bibb County engineer, who shall survey the desired encroachment, and return such application, plat and deed with a report thereon together with all the papers concerning such application and deed to the Macon-Bibb County Attorney's Office. 
(c)  To every encroachment agreement shall be attached a plat to be preserved in the office of the Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-129. - Purchase of municipal property. 
If the report is favorable on the application and the report is adopted by the commission and approved by the mayor, the clerk shall so notify the applicant, and the mayor shall execute and deliver to the applicant a deed to the property purchased in conformance with Sec. 19-12(c) of this Code, provided payment therefor is made to the director of finance within thirty (30) days from the adoption of the favorable report. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-130. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24-131. - Record of encroachments. 
(a)  After the application has been disposed of the Macon-Bibb County clerk shall file all papers concerning such conforming encroachment, classifying the papers according to blocks or squares on which the encroachments are situated. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Macon-Bibb County clerk to provide a suitable book in which shall be carefully kept minutes-relative to each conforming encroachment granted, giving the names of the party to whom it was granted, the time when granted, the locality of and price paid for such encroachment. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-132. - Minimum requirements for changes or encroachments in right-of-way for any purpose other than its intended use as a public street or highway. 
(a)  Prior to the erection of a permanent encroachment, all such persons shall obtain prior approval, including all necessary permits and/or agreements, from the Engineering Department, The Engineering Department shall require the person conducting activities pursuant to the permit and within the right-of way to provide each abutting property owner or occupant with reasonable and timely notification of any impending construction work that would unreasonably interfere with either egress or ingress onto said owner's or occupant's property. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, encroachments include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Vehicle, pedestrian or utility bridges. 
(2)  Vehicle, pedestrian or utility tunnels. 
(3)  Pipes, wires, conduits or similar facilities. 
(4)  Basements, vaults, elevator shafts, stairs, stairwells, ventilation shafts, gratings or similar facilities. 
(5)  Any building, parking garage, surface parking lot, structure, or part of thereof, including footings, foundations, tie-backs, supports, walls, eves, or projections; which extend into the public right-of-way; whether intended for public or private use; whether new or historic shall be defined as an encroachment. 
(6)  A vault encroaching under the public right-of-way which is covered by the franchised agreements between the Macon-Bibb County and the various utility companies is excluded, except when that vault is an integral structural part of the building being served, including the basement walls, footings or foundations of the building, in which case the vault will also be subject to an agreement as outlined in this section between the building owner and the county. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-133. - Establishment of administrative rules. 
The Director of Engineering works is authorized to establish and implement such administrative rules and procedures necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-134. - Nonconforming encroachments. 
(a)  Structure or properties that encroach into public right-of-way and for which there is not an applicable agreement shall be considered "nonconforming uses." Macon-Bibb County may, at the discretion of the Director of Engineering, permit certain nonconforming encroachments. The county may at any time determine that continued encroachment is not in the public interest and may require the removal of said encroachment. 
(b)  If a nonconforming encroachment ceases to have continuous use, has a change in the type or degree of use, or if the structural or functional soundness of the structure or property deteriorates due to lack of maintenance, damage by fire, flood, wind, or other act of God, it shall no longer be tolerated and shall not be eligible for repair, replacement, or further use until an encroachment agreement has been executed. Macon-Bibb County shall have the right and duty to require the removal of any encroachment thus affected. 
(c)  Past tolerance of an encroachment or failure to enforce the prohibition against an encroachment shall not be grounds for continued existence of a nonconforming encroachment. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-135. - Obligation to relocate upon notice. 
(a)  Macon-Bibb County reserves the right to perform any public works or public improvements necessary to maintain the public right-of-way. The county may therefore, upon written request to the permittee, require relocation of the permittee's facilities existing in the public right-of-way at the permittee's own expense when the relocation is necessary to maintain the health, safety, or welfare of the public or to improve or maintain the public right-of-way for transportation uses. 
(1)  Notification, failure to remove. Upon receiving written notice from the county to remove, or relocate facilities which are using or occupying a public right-of-way which the county has to improve, the permittee shall, within 60 days thereafter, begin arrangements for said removal or relocation in accordance with said written notice from the county. Should the permittee fail to comply with such notice within a reasonable time sufficient to allow for procedures reasonably necessary for the removal and relocation of the facilities, the county may give the permittee a final notice directing that such removal begin not later than ten days from the receipt of such final notice. 
(2)  Removal or relocation of facilities by Macon-Bibb County. If the permittee refuses or neglects to relocate said facilities existing in the public right-of-way within ten days of receipt of such final notice, or if an emergency affecting public safety or health exists requiring immediate relocation of the permittee's facilities, to the extent not inconsistent with state and federal law, the county may relocate such facilities and the permittee shall pay to the county the reasonable costs incurred in connection with such relocation. 
(3)  Removal or relocation of facilities for aesthetic purposes. If the relocation of facilities in the right-of-way is for aesthetic purposes or purposes not related to improving the public right-of-way for transportation purposes or to maintain the public right-of-way for health or safety reasons, then the cost of such relocation shall be borne by the requesting third party and not by the county or the permittee. 
(4)  Removal or relocation of facilities by an act of God. If an act of God necessitates the relocation of the permittee's facilities located in the public rights-of-way, the cost of such relocation shall not be borne by the permittee. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-136. - Conditions of Permit. 
(a)  Encroachment agreement. It shall be prohibited and shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any temporary or permanent right-of-way encroachment in Macon-Bibb County, unless that encroachment is covered by an encroachment agreement administered by the Engineering Department. 
(b)  Macon-Bibb County will not enter into an encroachment agreement to any owner of property adjacent to any street or roadway that is part of the street system of Macon-Bibb County or right-of-way along the limited-access highways of the federal or state aid road system within the county limits or any agent or contractor employed by the owner to make changes to, to alter or to construct an encroachment over, upon or under the right-of-way unless. 
(1)  Changes to benefit public. In the opinion of the Director of Engineering the proposed alteration, excavation or encroachment will constitute a benefit to the public and, except for permitted temporary disruptions of service, will not adversely impact the ability of the right-of-way to handle vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise to perform their intended function. 
(2)  Agreement as a condition of a permit. The owners of the adjacent or connected properties abutting the right-of-way seeking a permit to alter, excavate or encroach on the right-of-way enter an agreement with Macon-Bibb County, which agreement shall be binding upon the owners of the property abutting the right-of-way and their successors in title in perpetuity or until the agreement is ended by mutual consent of Macon-Bibb County and the agreeing parties. 
(3)  Submission of plans and technical specifications. All alterations, excavations or encroachments permitted on, in, over, under or within the public right-of-way of Macon-Bibb County shall be pursuant to a plan, calculations and technical specifications prepared by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state, which plans, calculations and technical specifications have been approved by the Director of Engineering pursuant to the standards set forth in this chapter or promulgated pursuant to this chapter and, when applicable, the standards of state department of transportation or the federal highway administration or both. Minimally, the plans should show the location of any supports, the height or depth of the structure and the width and volumetric cubic feet of the structure, where applicable. 
(4)  Performance bond as a condition of a permit. When in the opinion of the Director of Engineering it is deemed appropriate and prior to beginning any work on, in, over or under the public right-of-way of Macon-Bibb County, the owner of the abutting property or the contractor employed by the owner to perform the work shall present to the Director a performance and completion bond for the full value of the work contemplated furnished by a corporate surety satisfactory to Macon-Bibb County, the amount of the surety being determined by Macon-Bibb County's risk manager to be adequate to either complete the proposed work impacting the public right-of-way in its entirety or to restore the public right-of-way to its condition prior to commencement of the work if the owner or the owner's contracting agent fails to complete the work to the satisfaction of the Director of Engineering. 
(5)  Indemnification insurance as a condition of a permit. Evidence of insurance shall be issued to indemnify and hold harmless Macon-Bibb County, its agents, officers and employees from all claims arising out of any injury to persons or damage to property resulting from the changes to or work on, in, over, under or within the right-of-way by the property owner or the contractor employed by the owner or any of the agents or employees of the owner or contractor. 
(6)  Signatures required of all parties to agreement. All parties required for the execution of such agreement shall be signatories thereto, as evidenced by a title certificate of an attorney licensed to practice law within this state, which title certificate sets forth the names and addresses of the owners of the property or structures to be connected by the bridge or tunnel and the names and addresses of the lessors and lessees of the property or structures, together with sufficient information as to the terms of any leases of the property or structures and the corporate names of any parties. 
(7)  Obligation to replace the area beneath the street. The granting of permission to construct an encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within any public street or public alley within Macon-Bibb County shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owner and the lessor of the tracts of land adjacent to the street or alley affected by the encroachment or excavation to remove the encroachment or excavation and to replace any area beneath the street or alley where the encroachment or excavation is constructed to a condition satisfactory to Macon-Bibb County within 90 days after being notified to do so by the Director of Engineering without cost to Macon-Bibb County. 
(8)  Performance bond required to replace the area beneath the street. When in the opinion of the Director of Engineering, the granting of permission for an encroachment or construction of an excavation on, in, over, under or within any public street or public alley within Macon-Bibb County shall be contingent upon an agreement by the owner or lessee of the building or property to furnish and maintain a bond, at no expense to Macon-Bibb County, with a corporate surety satisfactory to Macon-Bibb County, to guarantee the performance of the principal in removing the encroachment or backfill the excavation as provided for in subsection (7) of this section. 
(9)  Annual rental of space. When in the opinion of the Director of Engineering it is deemed appropriate, the granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within any public street or public alley within Macon-Bibb County shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land connected by the encroachment or excavation to pay to Macon-Bibb County an annual rental for the space occupied by the encroachment or excavation at a rate per square foot as determined by the commission, computed on the outside dimensions of the encroachment or excavation lying within the bounds of the public right-of-way of Macon-Bibb County, which rental shall be collected by the department of finance and shall be subject to change from time to time. For rental of less than 5,000 square feet, the Director of Finance may require one year's rental payments in advance. This section shall not extend to canopies, awnings, eves, ledges, bay windows, balconies, decorative lighting, flagpoles, gargoyles, architectural embellishments, stairs, area walks or similar facilities. 
(10)  Public liability insurance requirement as a condition of a permit. The granting of permission to construct an encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of Macon-Bibb County shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land permitted by Macon-Bibb County to effectuate the encroachment or excavation to hold Macon-Bibb County harmless from any and all claims arising out of the construction, operation, use, maintenance or removal of the encroachment or excavation and upon the additional agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees to maintain a policy of public liability insurance, at no expense to Macon-Bibb County, satisfactory to Macon-Bibb County and naming Macon-Bibb County as a named insured, in an amount approved by Macon-Bibb County's risk manager. The agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land to hold Macon-Bibb County harmless shall not be limited to the amount of the insurance. 
(11)  Non-waiver of Macon-Bibb County negligence. The granting of permission to construct an encroachment or excavation shall be contingent upon the agreement of the owners or lessors or lessees of the tracts of land permitted by Macon-Bibb County to effectuate the encroachment or excavation that the obligation to hold Macon-Bibb County harmless against all claims arising out of the construction, operation, use, maintenance or removal of the encroachment or excavation shall not be waived by Macon-Bibb County because of the Director of Engineering having approved by the plans and specifications for the encroachment or excavation or by the requiring or not requiring modifications thereto, even though Macon-Bibb County may be found to have been negligent as a matter of law because of its acts or failure to act in regard thereto. 
(12)  Locating all pre-existing public and private utilities. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of Macon-Bibb County shall be contingent upon the parties' seeking permission to construct the encroachment or excavation, determining at their expense the location of all aboveground and below ground public utilities and private utilities of Macon-Bibb County in the area where the encroachment or excavation is to be constructed, and making arrangements for the removal or relocation of those utilities, at the expense of the parties seeking permission to construct the encroachment or excavation and at no expense to Macon-Bibb County. 
(13)  Compliance with this chapter. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of Macon-Bibb County shall be contingent upon the agreement of the parties seeking permission to construct the encroachment or excavation to comply with all the terms of this chapter and to comply with all other ordinances and regulations of Macon-Bibb County. 
(14)  Reimbursement of damages to county. The granting of permission to construct the encroachment or excavation on, in, over, under or within a public street or public alley of Macon-Bibb County shall be contingent upon the agreement of the parties seeking permission therefore to repair any damage to the street or alley resulting from the construction, maintenance or use of the encroachment or excavation and to reimburse Macon-Bibb County for any damage to the street or alley beneath, on or above where the encroachment or excavation is constructed, because of that construction and during the construction, use and maintenance of the encroachment or excavation. 
(c)  Enforcement. The Macon-Bibb County Sheriff shall, upon request of any citizen or upon the request of the Director of Engineering, give notice to the owner of the property which may be encroaching that the owner may be in violation of this section. Alternatively, the Director of Engineering may give notice of violation to the owner. The owner shall then be allowed 30 days to resolve the conflict by removing the encroachment, entering into an "encroachment agreement" with Macon-Bibb County, or by demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Director of Engineering that the structure or property in question is not in violation. Failing compliance, the owner shall be cited to appear before the judge of the municipal court for a hearing on the charge of violation of this section. Upon finding that this section has been violated, the owner may be required by the court to remove the encroachment within a time prescribed by the court or the Director of Engineering shall be authorized to remove the encroachment and the cost of removal shall be a lien against the property. 
(d)  Penalties. Any violator of this section shall be held accountable as provided in the penalty section of this chapter. Each day of continuation of violation after notice shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-137. - Erection of bridges, tunnels, and similar structures across streets and alleys. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to erect a bridge, tunnel or similar structure which crosses any public street or public alley, whether above or below the surface of the right-of-way, for the purpose of providing a passageway between property or structures adjacent to the right-of-way except upon the approval and authorization of the Macon-Bibb County Commission by resolution and upon compliance with all applicable sections of this Code and other ordinances of Macon-Bibb County, including this section, as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to place supports for any bridge or tunnel or any other obstructions within the public right-of-way of any street or public alley or of any portion thereof set aside for or used for sidewalk purposes. 
(2)  The minimum height above or depth below street level in each instance of the construction of the bridge or tunnel shall be fixed and determined in advance by the Director of Engineering in order to provide for the safe and efficient use of the right-of-way for public transportation purposes. 
(3)  The maximum outside width and height dimensions of each bridge or tunnel shall be as fixed and determined in advance by the Director of Engineering in order to provide for the safe and efficient use of the right-of-way for public transportation purposes. 
(4)  The bridge or tunnel shall be designed by an architect or an engineer licensed to practice in the state, and the plans and specifications for the bridge or tunnel presented to the engineering department for approval shall bear the architect's or engineer's official registration seal thereon. The plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Director of Engineering for written recommendations before the council shall consider approval thereof. 
(5)  The outside appearance of any bridge permitted by this section shall not detract from the adjoining buildings or the neighborhood, and no articles of any nature, other than lighting fixtures, shall be permitted to be suspended from the outside of the bridge. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to display or place any advertisements or mercantile displays upon or attached to any outer surface of the bridge or placed upon or attached to any window or glass-like surface of the bridge so as to be visible from outside. 
(b)  The granting of permission to construct any bridge or tunnel across any street or public alley shall be contingent upon the owner or, where applicable, lessor and lessee of the property or structures between which the bridge or tunnel is to be constructed entering into an agreement with the county, which shall be executed by all the parties prior to the issuance of any building permit therefore and the covenants of which shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall remove the bridge or tunnel within 90 days after the Director of Engineering directs the bridge or tunnel to be removed without cost to Macon-Bibb County, following the commissioner's determination that such removal is required for the safe and efficient use by the public of the right-of-way for transportation purposes. 
(2)  When in the opinion of the Director of Engineering it is deemed appropriate, the owner, lessor or lessee shall furnish and maintain a bond, at no expense to Macon-Bibb County, with a satisfactory corporate surety, to guarantee the performance of the principal in removing the bridge or tunnel as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(3)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall pay to Macon-Bibb County a monthly rental for the air space or subsurface space occupied by the bridge or tunnel, as follows: 
a.  The monthly rental rate for all bridges or tunnels used for pedestrian transportation or utility purposes only shall be the fair market value of each such bridge or tunnel as determined by a certified general real estate appraiser selected by the chief procurement officer. A fee to cover the cost of such appraisal shall be paid by the owner, lessor or lessee. The appraisal shall be submitted to and shall be reviewed and approved by the facilities and engineering committee before submission to the Commission. The monthly rate as determined by the appraiser shall be for an initial period of ten years from the execution date of the agreement and shall be subject to re-appraisal every ten years 
b.  To the extent currently authorized by other applicable sections of this Code, the monthly rental rate for each bridge or tunnel used for the sale of merchandise and mercantile displays, shall be the fair market value of the space occupied by such bridge or tunnel, which rate shall be determined by a certified general real estate appraiser selected by the chief procurement officer. A fee to cover the cost of such appraisal shall be paid by the owner, lessor, or lessee. The appraisal shall be submitted to and shall be reviewed and approved by the facilities and engineering committee before submission to the Commission. The monthly rate as determined by the appraiser shall be for an initial period of ten years from the execution date of the agreement and shall be subject to re-appraisal every ten years. 
(4)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall hold Macon-Bibb County harmless from any and all claims arising out of the construction, operation, use, maintenance or removal of the bridge or tunnel and shall furnish and maintain a policy of public liability insurance satisfactory to Macon-Bibb County, naming Macon-Bibb as a named insured, in an amount approved by the county's risk manager, and the agreement to hold Macon-Bibb County harmless shall not be limited to the amount of such insurance. 
(5)  The obligation to hold Macon-Bibb harmless against all claims arising out of the construction, maintenance, use or removal of the bridge or tunnel shall not be waived by Macon-Bibb's having approved the plans and specifications for the bridge or tunnel or Macon-Bibb requiring or not requiring modifications to the bridge or tunnel or by the county's requiring or not requiring maintenance of the bridge or tunnel, even though the county may be found to have been negligent as a matter of law because of its action or failure to act in regard thereto. 
(6)  All parties required for the execution of such agreement shall be signatories thereto, as evidenced by a title certificate of an attorney licensed to practice law within this state, which title certificate sets forth the name and address of the owner of the property or structures to be connected by the bridge or tunnel and the names and addresses of the lessors and lessees of the property or structures, together with sufficient information as to the terms of any leases of the property or structures, and the corporate names of any parties. 
(7)  The owner, lessor or lessee shall determine the location of all public utilities and all utilities of the county in the area where the tunnel or bridge is to be constructed and shall make arrangements for the removal or relocation of those utilities, if necessary, all at such person's own expense and at no expense to Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit Macon-Bibb County from selling, leasing, or renting air rights above Macon-Bibb County right-of-way. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Sec. 24-138. - Erection of balconies and awning over sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to attach or erect a balcony or other structures to a building so as to extend over any portion of a public sidewalk, except upon the authorization of the Director of Business Development Services and upon compliance with all applicable sections of this Code or other ordinances of Macon-Bibb County, including this section. 
(b)  Balconies and awnings shall be designed by an architect or an engineer licensed to practice in the state and the plans and specifications for balconies presented to Macon-Bibb County for approval shall bear the official registration seal of the architect or engineer. The plans and specifications shall be submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning commission before the Director of Business Development Services authorizes the balconies or awnings. 
(c)  The granting of permission to construct these balconies or awnings so as to extend over the public sidewalks shall be contingent upon the owner, lessor or lessee of the building onto which the balconies are constructed, the owner of the land upon which the building is erected and all creditors secured by all or a part of the land or building entering into an agreement with Macon-Bibb County which shall include but not be limited to agreements by the owner or lessee of the building to which the balconies or awnings are attached to: 
(1)  Construct and maintain the balconies so as to prevent any portion thereof from becoming detached and falling to the street or sidewalk below; 
(2)  Remove any or all of the balconies without cost to the county within a 90-day period after the Commission directs such removal by mailing a notice to remove the balconies to the owner, or lessee at an address set forth in the agreement; 
(3)  When in the opinion of the Director of Business Development Services it is deemed appropriate, furnish and maintain a bond, at no expense to Macon-Bibb County, with a satisfactory corporate surety, to guarantee the performance of the principal in removing the balconies as provided for in subsection (c)(2) of this section; 
(4)  Indemnify and hold the county, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all claims arising out of the construction, maintenance, use of or removal of any and all of the balconies, including claims arising out of persons falling or jumping from the balconies or arising out of objects being dropped or thrown from the balconies; 
(5)  Furnish a policy of public liability insurance and property damage insurance satisfactory to Macon-Bibb County naming it as a named insured or an additional named insured, in an amount approved by the county's risk manager, which protects Macon-Bibb County and its officers, agents and employees from claims arising out of the construction, maintenance, use of or removal of the balconies, including claims arising out of any person falling or jumping from any such balcony or throwing or dropping any object from a balcony; 
(6)  Provide insurance covering the agreement to indemnify and hold Macon-Bibb County and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all claims arising out of construction, maintenance, use of or removal of any or all of the balconies, including claims arising out of persons falling or jumping from the balconies or similar structures or arising out of objects being thrown or dropped from the balconies, with a further agreement that the obligation to indemnify and hold the county and its officers, agents and employees harmless shall not be limited to the amount of the public liability and property damage insurance naming the county as a named insured or an additional named insured; and 
(d)  Each request for permission to erect those balconies or awnings shall be accompanied by a title certificate of an attorney authorized to practice law in the state setting forth the names and the addresses of the owner and lessee of the building and the land on which it is erected, the names and addresses of any creditors who are secured by all or any part of the land or building involved, together with sufficient information as to the terms of any leases on the land or building, the corporate names of any of the parties sufficient to accurately disclose the names of any of the parties required in the agreement between Macon-Bibb County and the parties desiring to construct the balconies or awnings, which agreement shall be executed by all the parties desiring to construct the balconies or awnings, which agreement shall be executed by all the parties prior to the issuance of any building permit for the construction of the balconies or similar structures. The agreement shall be binding on all the parties, their heirs, administrators, assigns and successors in title, and upon the execution of the agreement it shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Secs. 24-139—24-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED 

Sec. 24-151—24-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - INSTALLATION OF SPEED TABLES 

Sec. 24-165. - Speed Table Program. 
Macon-Bibb County has adopted a Speed Table Program to aid citizens in determining if their residential street has a speeding problem and to determine whether the installation of speed tables as traffic calming devices is an appropriate option. The Macon-Bibb County Traffic Engineering Division shall be responsible for implementing Macon-Bibb County's Speed Table Program. The installation and removal of speed tables shall be done in compliance with the Macon-Bibb County Speed Table Program Manual adopted by the Macon-Bibb County commission. The Speed Table Program Manual is not set out herein but is on file in the office of the Traffic Engineer. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0030, § 1, 7-21-2015 ) 
Chapter 25 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Findings and purpose. 
The commission finds and declares that the public health, safety, morality, and general welfare require harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land in the cities and counties of the state. In furtherance of this purpose, standards for the design and construction of land subdivisions, county governing authorities are authorized for the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To encourage design and construction of economically sound subdivisions and other related structures; 
(2)  To assure proper legal description, identification, monumentation and recordation of real estate boundaries; and 
(3)  To secure equitable handling of all subdivisions plans, specifications and plats by providing uniform standards and procedures. 
Sec. 25-2. - Applicability. 
These standards shall apply to land subdivisions located in that area of Macon-Bibb County that comprised the former unincorporated county. 
Sec. 25-3. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Minimum Design and Construction Standards for Land Subdivisions." 
Sec. 25-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building shall be construed as if followed by the words "or parts thereof." 
Contractor means the developer or subdivider or his authorized representative, whether doing work on a contract basis or working directly for the developer or subdivider. 
Developer means any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined by land development resolution. 
D.O.T. means the department of transportation, state of Georgia. 
Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes by the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons. 
Engineer means the duly designated Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
Final plat means a complete and exact subdivision plat prepared for official recording as required by the land development resolution. 
Health department means the Macon-Bibb County Public health department. 
Improvements means those physical additions and changes to the land that may be necessary to produce usable and desirable lots. 
Land development resolution means any legally adopted part or element of planning and zoning's comprehensive land development resolution for the Macon-Bibb County. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one or more main buildings and its accessory buildings with such open and parking spaces as are required by the provisions of this chapter and having its frontage upon a public street or streets. 
Official map means an official map of Macon-Bibb County showing the location of streets, public building sites and public open spaces theretofore existing and established by law as public streets, public building sites or public open spaces. This may include mapped boundary lines of future street narrowings, public building sites, public park playgrounds or other public open space areas or of existing sites or areas that are to be expanded. The official map may include the whole or any part or parts of Macon-Bibb County. 
Preliminary plat means a tentative subdivision plat, indicating the approximate proposed layout of a subdivision as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of the final plat and engineering construction drawings and specifications. 
Right-of-way means access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. 
Sketch plan means a general freehand drawing of the tentative subdivision plat proposal as described in the land development resolution. 
Street means a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property; roadway; highway; boulevard and land. 
(1)  Alleys means those which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(2)  Arterial streets and highways means those which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic. 
(3)  Collector streets means those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of freeways, expressways and arterial streets and highways. 
(4)  Expressways means those highways or streets which are used primarily for fast or heavy through traffic; and which are divided with full or partial control of access and generally with grade separations at intersections. 
(5)  Marginal access streets or frontage roads means those minor streets which are parallel and adjacent to freeways, expressways or arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(6)  Minor or local commercial and industrial streets means those which are primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(7)  Minor or local residential streets, including cul-de-sac means those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
Subdivision means the same as defined in the land development resolution. 
Utility or utility system means any person engaged in the transmission of energy, including electricity, gas, gasoline and water. 
Watercourse includes drain, ditch and stream. 
Sec. 25-5. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
Sec. 25-6. - Remedies. 
(a)  In case of any violation of this chapter the commission, through its attorney or other designated official, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent such violation. 
(b)  The Macon-Bibb County engineer or his designees are each hereby vested with full authority and power to enforce the provision of the minimum design and construction standards for land subdivisions set out in this chapter. Each of them is authorized to administer such provisions, to make inspections, and to take such action as is necessary, proper and convenient to cause violators of this chapter to be punished, including the initiation of proceedings in the state court of the county by summons or citation. Immediately after issuing a citation or summons, the person issuing the same shall forward a copy to the solicitor of the state court for appropriate further action pursuant to the provisions of section 1-6. 
Sec. 25-7. - Submission of preliminary plat for approval. 
The subdivider shall submit a plat in accordance with section XXV of the land development resolution. 
Sec. 25-8. - Submission of the final plat for approval. 
The subdivider shall submit a final plat in accordance with section XXV of the land development resolution. 
Sec. 25-9. - General requirements. 
(a)  Floodprone lands. Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the Macon-Bibb County planning and zoning commission to be uninhabitable for other reasons shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate a flood hazard. 
(b)  Conformity to existing maps or plans. The location and width of all proposed streets shall be in conformity with the major thoroughfare plan for Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Continuation of existing streets. Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width as prescribed in this chapter. 
(d)  Contour map. A contour map shall be provided to the planning and zoning commission by the subdivider as a part of the preliminary plat submitted (refer to the land development resolution). 
Sec. 25-10. - When construction may begin. 
Construction and installation of any required public improvement as described in this chapter shall not begin until the planning and zoning commission has given preliminary approval of the new subdivision and engineering construction plans and specifications as outlined in this chapter have been submitted to and approved by the engineer as being in conformity with these regulations. The engineer shall be sent a copy of such plat by the developer or his authorized representative with the applicable approvals certified thereon. 
Sec. 25-11. - Construction plans. 
(a)  Four copies of all plans for streets, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, sidewalks, etc. and other required improvements showing the proposed plans, profiles and applicable cross sections of each shall be submitted to and approved by the engineer's office as being in conformity with these regulations prior to commencing construction of any new system. The plans shall be prepared from an actual engineering field or photogrammetric survey, and show along with all proposed new improvements all existing applicable improvements. 
(b)  The construction plans shall be prepared on a standard plan and profile sheets and shall show the following: 
(1)  Plans. 
a.  Indicate direction of north. 
b.  Indicate right-of-way line, centerline, departing lot lines, lot numbers, subdivision limits and limits of construction. 
c.  Indicate centerline curve date, including delta, radius and tangent. 
d.  Indicate approved street name. 
e.  Indicate stations at every 100 feet at even stations on centerline. Indicate stations at point of curve and tangent at the beginning and end of all returns, at centerline intersection and at subdivision or section limits. 
f.  Indicate the width of right-of-way and relation to centerline. 
g.  Indicate state route number on all existing streets to which connection is to be made when applicable. 
h.  Indicate all existing or proposed drainage easements. 
i.  Indicate direction of drainage flow in streets, storm sewer, valley streets, streams, subdrains and the like. 
j.  Indicate all turnaround construction, with easements as indicated on the preliminary plat. 
k.  Indicate all storm sewers and appurtenances. Identify storm sewer appurtenances by type and a number. Station on plan must conform to stations shown on profile. Headwalls must be provided and shown. 
l.  Indicate the contributing area in acres at all culvert pipe, curb inlets, and other entrances. 
m.  Indicate the location of all or any springs either within or draining to street right-of-way and indicate proposed treatment of same. All springs will be capped and piped in a minimum six-inch diameter perforated pipe encased in washed gravel and connected into the nearest storm sewer, or natural drain. 
n.  Indicate location of all streams of drainage ways related to the street construction. 
o.  Indicate proposed drainage ditches for the full length in all easements. Furnish detailed typical section and type of stabilization to be provided. 
p.  Indicate proposed stream locations or relocations. Show existing and proposed locations. Furnish detailed typical section and type of stabilization to be provided. Stone or concrete rip rap will be used where stream velocity exceeds six feet per second. 
q.  Indicate size and type or class of pipe to be installed both in right-of-way and outside right-of-way. 
r.  Indicate paved ditches and easements at toe of fills, when required by design criteria. 
s.  Indicate paved roadside ditches when required. 
t.  Indicate guard post or guard rail where required. 
u.  Indicate traffic barricades and/or "no thru street" signs. 
v.  Indicate the size of all driveway entrance culvert pipe, i.e., 18 inches or 21 inches according to computed size, for each lot. 
w.  Indicate protection of ends of curb and gutter by providing for erosion control. 
x.  Indicate typical paving section designation. 
y.  Add any notes that may be necessary to explain the intent and purposes of the plan or profile. 
z.  Minimum easement widths for inplaced pipe or culverts will be determined as follows: 

 
(2)  Profiles. 
a.  Profiles to be submitted on standard plan and profile sheets. Special studies may be submitted on cross section paper 20 inches wide by 36 inches long and shall have a scale of not less than one-inch equals 100 feet. 
b.  Existing centerline profiles to be shown and identified on all proposed: 
1.  Streets; 
2.  Storm sewers; 
3.  Stream relocations; 
4.  Drainage ditches; and 
5.  Outfall of storm sewer to existing streams. 
c.  Where terrain is exceptionally rough, additional profiles on either side of centerline may be required. 
d.  Stations shown on profile must agree with stations shown on plans. 
e.  Grade line of proposed street construction must include: 
1.  Elevations at beginning and end of all vertical curves. 
2.  Length of vertical curves with elevations and stations of vertical points of intersection. 
3.  Elevations computed for every 50 feet of tangent sections, and grades computed every 50 feet. 
4.  Elevations at all centerline intersections of streets, at all street centerline intersections with boundaries of subdivision, at all culverts and storm sewer crossings, and at all curb inlets. 
f.  When proposed street is an extension of or connecting with an existing street or road, show existing centerline profiles for 200 feet minimum distance to insure proper grade tie. 
g.  If a difference exists in elevations or proposed curb grades, identify curb elevations at top of right curb, and top of left curb. 
h.  If a cul-de-sac is to be used as a temporary turnaround at the temporary end of a street the proposed grade and existing profiles shall be carried through to provide for the future extension of the proposed street, i.e., 300 feet beyond the property line. 
i.  When a proposed street parallels or is located near an existing stream or open drainageway, furnish profiles of top of bank or stream, computed water elevations and invert (or flow line) of stream or open drainageway. Show relation of proposed street grade to existing profiles of stream or open drainageway. Street construction must not encroach on the floodplain limit of the stream and must be designed to be not less than two feet above the projected 100-year flood high-water elevation. 
j.  Show proposed culvert or storm sewer crossings and sanitary sewer crossings at the proper location and grade on all street profiles. 
k.  Storm sewer to be shown in profile with the following required information: 
1.  Profile of proposed finished grade. 
2.  Profile of existing ground at centerline of storm sewer. 
3.  Percent of grade of proposed storm sewer. 
4.  Size of proposed pipe or structure. 
5.  Station to be shown every 100 feet and at all appurtenances. 
6.  Show curb inlets, etc., with proposed elevations for the tops and inverts, or tabulation in plain view may be permitted if all structures are identified. Show all existing stream crossings. 
l.  Profiles of streams that are not to be piped shall include: 
1.  Profile of top bank on both sides where difference in elevation exists. 
2.  Profile of flow line (invert) of stream bed. 
3.  Profile of computed water elevation. 
4.  Where land included in subdivision is subject to flood, cross sections, topography and spot elevations will be required as part of the floodplain study. Floor elevation for all residential dwellings shall be at least three feet above the 100-year flood level. 
m.  Show existing ground at centerline and proposed computed grade of invert on all streams where relocation of channel is proposed. 
n.  Give datum reference for elevations used. 
(3)  Additional details. 
a.  Pipe size will be determined by the use of the rational method or the peak discharge method. For drainage of 50 acres or more, the Burkli-Ziegler formula may be used. Design analysis shall be submitted with construction drawings. A one in ten-year flood frequency shall be used to determine pipe sizes where the contributing area is 100 acres or less. Where the contributing area is greater, a one in 50-year flood frequency shall be used to determine pipe size. 
b.  A registered engineer's current stamp will be on all sheets, together with the necessary certificates for same required by the state board of professional engineers and land surveyors. 
c.  The developers' names, addresses, and telephone numbers. 
d.  Proposed layout including lot lines with dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, proposed street names, right-of-way widths, street widths indicated clearly from either face to face or back to back of curblines (specify); and easements for sanitary sewer, stormwater drainage or pedestrian access. 
e.  Location and results of percolation tests for lots not to be served by sanitary sewers as required by the health department. 
f.  Location of land subject to flooding, indicated by a flood crest contour (100-year floodplain). 
g.  Location of all sanitary sewer lines and laterals with appurtenances (specify type). 
h.  Location of tract showing land district and land lot, giving acreage of tract being developed. 
i.  Any request for deviations from the above regulations or any questions concerning these, or the code or the standards will be addressed to the Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
j.  All plans shall show the total length of paved roads being dedicated as a public road. This figure, along with other applicable road construction items, will be used in establishing the value of the maintenance bond. 
k.  Plans will not be accepted for review by the Macon-Bibb County engineer unless accompanied by signed certificate from a registered professional engineer certifying that all the items above have been complied with or showing by itemized list where approved deviations exist. 
l.  The owner or developer shall obtain approval of street light layout from the Macon-Bibb County engineer prior to commencing any construction of any street light facilities. 
m.  Plans will not be accepted for review by the Macon-Bibb County engineer unless accompanied by a signed certificate from the Macon-Bibb County fire department certifying that all applicable fire protection standards have been met. 
(4)  [ Time period. ] The engineer will be given a definite date by the developer as to when construction is to begin and the anticipated time duration of the contract. 
Sec. 25-12. - Inspection, approval and authority of Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
(a)  The Macon-Bibb County engineer shall, subject to the approval of the commission, appoint inspectors to inspect all materials and all work performed. The inspector will not be authorized to revoke, alter, enlarge or relax the provisions of the referenced construction specifications, nor will he be authorized to approve or accept any portion of the completed work or to issue instructions contrary to the plans and specifications. The inspector will have authority to reject defective material and to suspend work that is being improperly done, subject to final decision of the engineer. The inspector shall have free access to all parts of the work. The work will be inspected as it progresses but failure to reject or condemn defective work at the time it is done will in no way prevent its rejection whenever it is discovered before the work is finally accepted and approved, nor will final acceptance and approval constitute waiver by Macon-Bibb County of any right of action for defective work or failure to perform construction according to approved engineering construction plans and specifications. 
(b)  The engineer shall have the duty, right and authority to inspect and approve or disapprove all road and street construction along with other such related work that is constructed in Macon-Bibb County, whether it be done pursuant to a contract between a subdivision developer and a contractor. The engineer shall stop, by written order, any work or any part of the work under any contract that provides for the construction of roads and related items of construction which are constructed in Macon-Bibb County, if he shall find that methods of construction or conditions are such that noncompliance with this chapter may result. The work shall be resumed when defective methods and/or materials are corrected as approved in writing by the engineer. For inspection purposes, the engineer will be informed by the developer as to what phases of construction are being accomplished. The engineer shall cause to be made such inspections at such intervals as are necessary to determine whether there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 25-13. - Official acceptance by the commission. 
(a)  After the completed work of all construction and installation of required public improvements, the developer shall make formal application for acceptance to the commission. This application must be made prior to plat approval. In the same application, the developer will grant a fee simple title to Macon-Bibb County for road or street rights-of-way. The engineer will notify the applicant of the acceptance or rejection of the streets. If the streets are rejected by the commission, it will be the duty of the engineer to notify the developer of what corrections or additional work will have to be accomplished for the acceptance of the streets by the commission. This may include the requirement to post a bond or letter of credit as indicated above. This requirement will not apply to those developments previously approved for private access only. 
(b)  Unless and until the commission shall have accepted the road or street, the same shall not be deemed to be a public street so as to become a part of the Macon-Bibb County street and road system or to require maintenance and improvement by Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 25-14. - Postponement of public improvements; bond. 
(a)  Developers who do not construct and/or install all required public improvements described in this chapter prior to final plat approval must post a performance bond payable to Macon-Bibb County with a corporate surety or other surety approved by the commission before such approval is given by the engineer. A cashier's check payable to Macon-Bibb County will be accepted in lieu of a bond, with the right of Macon-Bibb County to deposit the same in its treasury at interest. Macon-Bibb County will also accept a letter of credit issued by a local bank upon such terms and conditions as the engineer shall prescribe in order to permit the letter of credit to provide the same protection as a bond would have furnished. The amount of the bond, cashier's check or letter of credit shall be equal to 100 percent of the total estimated cost of the required public improvement. 
(b)  In the event that the required improvements are made within the time period specified in the bond or letter of credit and found to be acceptable to the commission, the bond or letter of credit shall be considered null and void. In such case, the amount of the cashier's check, if accepted in lieu of bond, shall be refunded to the developer with any interest earned thereon. In the event the required improvements are not made within the period specified, the engineer shall immediately report such fact to the commission for appropriate action. All decisions regarding forfeiture of a bond or letter of credit or forfeiture of the right to the return of the amount of a cashier's check shall be made only by the commission. Performance bonds or cashier's checks will be promptly transmitted by the engineer to the clerk of the commission. 
Sec. 25-15. - Maintenance of completed work. 
The developer shall maintain his completed work for a period of one-year after the official acceptance by the commission. The developer shall be required to furnish the commission a maintenance bond, cashier's check or a letter of credit issued by a local bank in an amount equaling ten percent of the entire construction cost. If the developer has obtained a maintenance bond from his contractor, such a bond will be acceptable in lieu of a separate bond from the developer if Macon-Bibb County is named as an indemnitee and the bond otherwise meets the requirements of this section. During the one-year maintenance period, the engineer shall make inspections, at least semiannually, and shall notify the developer by mail of any defects found in the work and to have such defects corrected within 60 days after notification. If the developer shall fail to promptly commence corrective action and pursue the same with diligence, the surety on the developer's bond will be notified. If the defects are not corrected by the developer within the 60 days, the engineer shall notify the surety on the developer's bond, and demand that the surety cause the defects to be corrected forthwith. Bonds, cashier's checks or letters of credit shall be delivered to the clerk of the commission for disposition as provided in section 25-14. 
Sec. 25-16. - Cost of improvements. 
The subdivider shall incur the cost of construction and installation of all required public improvements as shown upon the developer's approved engineering construction plans, including but not limited to, streets, storm drainage systems, monuments, street signs, water systems, fire hydrants and sanitary sewers. 
Sec. 25-17. - Variances. 
(a)  The commission may authorize, in specific cases, such variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardships, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variances shall not be construed as an amendment to this chapter or as a precedent for future action. Such variance may be granted in such individual cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship only upon a finding by the commission that all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions involved; 
(2)  The application of this chapter would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
(3)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(b)  All requests for variances shall be in writing and addressed to the commission. Upon receipt of the application for variance, the commission shall hold such hearing as shall be appropriate, and shall deny the application or grant the same in whole or in part or upon conditions as it shall find to be in the public interest. In all such cases, the commission shall make findings of fact and statements of reasons for its actions. 
(c)  When a license has been issued for a location which conforms to the provisions of subsection (a) at the time of the initial issue, but by reason of public developments the structure on the site is required to be relocated to a point which would render it nonconforming, Macon-Bibb County may, upon application to the commission, authorize a variance from the provisions of subsection (a). 
Sec. 25-18. - Detailed construction specifications. 
(a)  Adopted. For the construction of roads, streets, and related appurtenances in Macon-Bibb County, the "Department of Transportation, State of Georgia, Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges," dated April 20, 1972, as such document may have been or may hereafter be amended, is hereby adopted as the official construction specifications of Macon-Bibb County. Copies of the above specifications are available at the engineer's office upon request. 
(b)  Description of terms. Whenever, in the department of transportation, state of Georgia "specifications," the following terms are used, the intent will be understood as follows: 
Department means the engineer's office. 
Engineer means the engineer for Macon-Bibb County. 
Proposal form means the bid form. 
State means Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Material submittals. All material submittals called for in the construction specifications will be approved by the engineer or his authorized representative prior to incorporating into any part of the job. Submittals will be submitted by the developer or his authorized representative in triplicate to the engineer's office. 
(d)  Testing. All testing will be performed at the expense of the developer. Qualified testing laboratories will be approved by the commission. The approved testing laboratory will submit two copies of all test results to the engineer for his records. It will be the responsibility of the developer or his authorized representative to insure that all tests required are made. See table III in section 25-83 for testing requirements. Test locations will be designated by the engineer. 
(e)  Construction details. The standard construction details for the state department of transportation, as they exist from time to time, are hereby adopted as the official construction details to be exhibited on the construction plans. Copies of the above details are available at the engineer's office upon request. 
(f)  Exceptions. Exceptions to the above construction details will be curb and gutter, manholes, catchbasins, and iron castings which will comply with the Macon-Bibb County standards. Copies of these standards are available in the engineer's office upon request. 
Sec. 25-19. - Findings of engineer; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever under the terms of this chapter, the Macon-Bibb County engineer is required to make any finding or decision, he shall reduce the findings and decisions to writing and they shall contain a statement of the facts found by him and the basis of his decision as well as the decision itself. The statement of facts and circumstances shall be in such detail as will readily assure adequate review in the event the decision of the engineer is appealed. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the engineer rendered by him under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the commission, provided that such appeal in writing, stating the decision of the engineer appealed from and the grounds of the appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the commission within 30 days from the date of the decision to which appeal is taken. Except in extraordinary circumstances, to be judged by the commission, no appeal will be considered if not filed within the 30-day period. 
(c)  Where an appeal is timely filed, the commission or a designated committee thereof shall review the same and render a decision expeditiously, stating in writing its decision and the basis therefor. Such decision may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the engineer as commission or its designated committee shall find to best comport with the provisions of this chapter. 
Secs. 25-20—25-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-41. - Compliance. 
Standards for design and construction of streets, curbs, gutters, drainage, sidewalks, and fire hydrants, etc., shall comply with the standards prescribed in this article. 
Sec. 25-42. - Drainage. 
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose of drainage and maintenance, taking into account possible future development of higher land in the same drainage areas. The drainageway shall be piped when the engineer shall find that it is a hazard or that a continual maintenance problem might exist. 
Sec. 25-43. - Curb and gutter requirements. 
(a)  Concrete curb and gutter will be required if the engineer shall find that soil conditions or topography are such that the flow of stormwater drainage would be impeded or cause excessive erosion. Examples of such soil are SP, SW, SM and SC, etc., as classified in accordance with the unified soils classification system. 
(b)  Either the six-inch vertical or four-inch roll-over concrete curb and gutter with a minimum overall width of 24 inches shall be used. 
Sec. 25-44. - Utility systems. 
(a)  It will be incumbent upon all licensed utility companies within the corporate limits of Macon-Bibb County to ensure that all utility systems which are to be placed underground are in place prior to placing base material and surface course by paving contractor. All developers will notify the utility companies in advance for work scheduling. 
(b)  All utility trenches shall be compacted in nine-inch layers with a minimum compaction of 95 percent maximum dry density and the ground surface restored to its original condition. Compliance with the compaction and restoration provisions shall be the responsibility and at the expense of the utility company installing the system. If excavations are made within the paved area of a street after completion of paving or within the limits of the street right-of-way after it has been graded, grassed or sodded, the utility company making the excavation shall, at its expense, restore the surface to its original condition and provide such compaction as will prevent settlement. At design crossing points, utility systems shall install conduits, if there is to be a lag in utility construction. 
(c)  In subdivisions where all utility systems are to be placed underground, there shall be included in the underground installations for electrical service the necessary circuitry to provide for street lights. 
Sec. 25-45. - Fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the Macon-Bibb County water authority specifications. 
Sec. 25-46. - Monuments and iron pipes. 
(a)  Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established at the following points. 
(1)  Where plat boundary lines intersect with land lot lines. 
(2)  Monuments shall consist of two-inch iron pipes, 16 inches in length, or other material approved by the engineer. Monuments shall be set so that the top of the pipe shall be two inches above the ground level and properly referenced. 
(b)  Iron pipes at least one-half inch by 24 inches shall be placed at all corners of each lot and driven so as to be set one-inch above finished grade. 
(c)  Iron pins shall be required at the intersection of all street rights-of-way or placed in close proximity and properly referenced. 
Sec. 25-47. - Sanitary sewer systems. 
All sanitary sewer collection systems shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer according to specifications adopted by the Macon-Bibb County water and sewerage authority and shall be approved by the authority prior to beginning construction. All sewer laterals will be marked as to exact location where they intersect the gutter or edge of pavement. 
Sec. 25-48. - Water distribution systems. 
All new water distribution systems to be located in a new subdivision will be designed and installed in accordance with specifications adopted by the Macon-Bibb County water and sewerage authority. Approval of a water distribution system by the authority is required prior to submission of engineering construction drawings to the engineer's office. Evidence of approval is required. 
Sec. 25-49. - Street name signs. 
All street name signs shall be prefabricated and erected by Macon-Bibb County with cost being incurred by the developer. All signs shall be a minimum of seven feet in height, using six-inch width aluminum backing with green scotch-lite background and four-inch silver reflectorized lettering. All street name signs shall include the block number or house number range located on that section of road between intersections. 
Sec. 25-50. - Storm sewers. 
All longitudinal storm sewers constructed beneath the road bed will be concrete or metal structures meeting D.O.T. design standards. 
Sec. 25-51. - Subdivision signs; median strips. 
(a)  Subdivision signs meeting the requirements of this subsection may be erected. There shall be no more than two subdivision signs at each entrance to a subdivision, one on each side of the entrance and erected in accordance with the following terms: 
(1)  Subdivision signs may be placed in the street right-of-way provided the layout showing the location of the signs is previously submitted to the Macon-Bibb County traffic engineer and if he finds upon investigation that no traffic hazard will result. If the signs would unduly obstruct vision or otherwise, in the sound judgment of the traffic engineer, create a traffic hazard, the sign or signs shall not be erected. 
(2)  The location and type of construction of such signs to be placed in the right-of-way shall be shown upon the subdivision plans submitted to the Macon-Bibb County engineer and reflected upon the finally approved subdivision plat. 
(3)  All such subdivision signs shall, after approval, be installed prior to the beginning of the construction of any houses in the subdivision, shall be used only to identify the subdivision and developer, and shall not be illuminated. 
(b)  Median strips may be placed in the right-of-way of subdivision streets provided the same are reflected upon the preliminary and final subdivision plats, and meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Median strips must be grassed, and enclosed in a concrete curb or other curbing of suitable material. 
(2)  No median strips shall be installed until the plan to do so has been submitted to and approved by the Macon-Bibb County engineer who shall disapprove the same if he finds that the installation and maintenance of the median strip would constitute a traffic hazard, or an undue constriction of traffic, or shall so impede the traffic flow that the street in which the median is located is unable to carry the expected load of traffic. 
(3)  All median strips shall be maintained in good condition by the developer. 
(c)  Subdivision signs and median strips installed under the authority of this section shall be maintained by the developer in good condition. Upon 30 days' written notice from Macon-Bibb County that a subdivision sign or median strip will obstruct planned street improvements in the right-of-way or have become a traffic hazard, or for any reason their continued existence is contrary to the public interest, the developer shall remove the subdivision sign or median strip at his expense. In the case of median strips, the developer shall replace the same with suitable paving so as to make the area previously occupied by the median strip serviceable for public travel. All such work shall be done at the developer's sole expense. Upon the failure of a developer to comply with any written notice to remove a subdivision sign or median strip within the time allowed, Macon-Bibb County may effect such removal and charge the cost to the developer. If the developer shall not pay such costs within 30 days after notification of the amount due, the amount shall become a lien upon all property of the developer in Macon-Bibb County and shall have the rank and dignity and be enforced in the same manner as liens for ad valorem taxes due the county. See figure C attached to the subdivision ordinance on file in the office of the clerk of the commission. 
Sec. 25-52. - Street lighting. 
(a)  The owner, developer, or other person developing a subdivision shall be required to provide street lights that conform to all of the standards provided for in this article and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain approval of the street light layout from the Macon-Bibb County engineering department prior to the construction of any street light facilities. Approval or final acceptance of the subdivision requires compliance with this article. 
(b)  The owner, developer or other person developing a shopping center, industrial park, office park, apartment complex or like development within a designated street light district shall provide street lights along public rights-of-way adjoining that property that conform to all standards provided for in this article; and the owner or developer shall obtain approval of the street light layout from the engineering department prior to commencing any construction of any street light facilities. 
(c)  The engineering department shall not recommend the acceptance of any public streets or roads proposed to be dedicated to Macon-Bibb County for perpetual ownership and maintenance until such time as the street lights conform to the approved street light layout. 
(d)  Street lights. Street lights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions or other developments utilizing new streets or roads to be dedicated to Macon-Bibb County or existing county roads or any combination, unless waived by the commission. Unless so waived, the developer, at the time of submitting the final plat to the department shall: 
(1)  Submit a final street light layout prepared by the utility company, which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of street lights within the development or subdivision. For residential and non-residential subdivisions, this drawing must be approved by the Macon-Bibb County engineer prior to commencing any construction of any street light facilities. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company, which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities, and by the Macon-Bibb County engineer. The fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of 25 feet above the ground, and each fixture shall have appropriate arm length to illuminate the street. The Macon-Bibb County engineer may require, in additional to other requirements, a light to be located at any or all street intersections within the subdivision or other development. 
(2)  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
(3)  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the office of the Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
(4)  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
(e)  Underground cable for electric service. In subdivisions utilizing underground cable for electrical service, developers shall be required to accomplish the same items listed in subsection (d). 
(f)  Costs and assessments. The cost of providing and maintaining street light service will be chargeable to the property lot owners as set forth in chapter 29. 
(g)  Standards of illumination. Lighting service for developments or subdivisions shall be governed by the standards of illumination set forth in chapter 29. 
Secs. 25-53—25-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS 

Sec. 25-61. - General layout. 
Minor and marginal access streets in a new development shall be so laid out as to discourage through traffic. However, the provision for the extension and continuation of major and collector streets into and from adjoining areas is required. 
Sec. 25-62. - Right-of-way width. 
The minimum street right-of-way width under this chapter shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Expressways ..... 200 feet 
(2)  Arterial ..... 100 feet 
(3)  Collector ..... 80 feet 
(4)  Minor streets: 
a.  Without curb and gutter ..... 60 feet 
b.  With curb and gutter ..... 55 feet 
(5)  Marginal access streets: 
a.  Without curb and gutter ..... 60 feet 
b.  With curb and gutter ..... 50 feet 
(6)  Alleys ..... 20 feet 
Sec. 25-63. - Modification of rights-of-way. 
Where subdivision and developed abutting, existing or dedicated or platted streets and rights-of-way of such streets are inadequate, the developer shall make available rights-of-way to meet the minimum standards of these regulations. 
Sec. 25-64. - Pavement widths. 
Pavement widths excluding any curb and guttering shall be not less than the following: 
(1)  Arterials ..... 48 feet 
(2)  Collector streets (commercial and/or industrial) ..... 24 feet 
(3)  Minor streets ..... 22 feet 
If curb and gutter are used\24 feet 
(4)  Marginal access streets ..... 22 feet 
If curb and gutter are used\24 feet 
For details see figures A and B attached to the subdivision ordinance on file in the office of the clerk of the board. 
Sec. 25-65. - Grades. 
Street grades are suggested as follows: 
(1)  Street grade may not be more than 14 percent; not less than one-half of one percent. 
(2)  Grades, starting with the line of the edge of the pavement as the PVC, shall be zero percent grade for a distance of 20 feet to the PVI with a maximum 40 feet to the PVT, for street intersections. 
Sec. 25-66. - Horizontal curves. 
Where a centerline deflection angle of more than two degrees occurs, a circular curve shall be introduced, having a centerline radius of not less than the following: 
(1)  Arterial streets ..... 572.96 feet 
(2)  Collector streets ..... 477.47 feet 
(3)  Minor and marginal access streets ..... 150 feet 
Sec. 25-67. - Tangents. 
Between reverse curves there shall be not less than the following minimum tangents: 
(1)  Arterial streets ..... 250 feet 
(2)  Collector streets ..... 150 feet 
(3)  Minor and marginal access streets where there is no superelevation ..... 75 feet 
Sec. 25-68. - Slopes. 
Maximum cut and fill sections for street slopes will be as follows: 

 
Sec. 25-69. - Pavement designs. 
The following criteria will be used for pavement design: 
(1)  All asphalt pavement structures for subdivision streets will be designed in accordance with the Asphalt Institute Manual Series No. 1 (MS-1) dated August, 1970, as the same has heretofore been or may hereafter be amended, or any equally acceptable engineering design manual for asphalt pavements. 
(2)  A design analysis by a registered professional civil engineer will be submitted to the engineer for approval prior to incorporating into final engineering construction plans. 
(3)  All asphalt streets will be constructed with a hot plant-mix asphalt surface course (D.O.T. "E" or "F" mix). 
(4)  All streets will be constructed with a granular base course meeting all D.O.T. requirements for base material (soil cement, crusher-run stone, etc.). 
(5)  Streets shall be designed using, but not limited to, the following parameters: 
a.  Traffic counts will be based upon a minimum of eight and one-half one-way trips per single-family dwelling and using a traffic rate growth of four percent annually. 
b.  Design period shall be a minimum of 20 years. 
c.  Subgrade strength (plat bearing, California bearing ratio (CBR) etc.). 
d.  Drainage characteristics of the soil in the area being considered for construction. 
If concrete pavement is used, the design standards approved by the D.O.T. will be acceptable. See table I in section 25-81 for design analysis format which shall be used as a guideline. See table II in section 25-82 and table III in section 25-83 for thickness design. 
Sec. 25-70. - Visibility requirements. 
(a)  Minimum vertical visibility (measured between two points, one four feet above pavement level; and the other one-half-foot above pavement): 
(1)  Arterial streets ..... 500 feet 
(2)  Collector streets ..... 300 feet 
(3)  Minor and marginal access streets ..... 200 feet 
(b)  Minimum horizontal visibility measures on centerline shall be: 
(1)  Arterial streets ..... 500 feet 
(2)  Collector streets ..... 300 feet 
(3)  Minor and marginal access streets ..... 200 feet 
Sec. 25-71. - Intersections. 
Street intersections shall be laid out as follows: 
(1)  Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect at less than 75 degrees. 
(2)  A clear line of sight of 250 feet shall be provided and maintained at all intersections of streets, measured from two points, each four feet above grade. 
(3)  A centerline offset minimum of 125 feet shall be provided at streets jogs. 
(4)  Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets will not be allowed. 
Sec. 25-72. - Cul-de-sacs. 
Permanent dead-end street length shall not be longer than 800 feet, or as determined by the commission. These streets shall be provided with a paved turnaround having a 40-foot radius and a right-of-way radius of 50 feet. 
Sec. 25-73. - Temporary turnaround. 
A temporary turnaround, 50 feet in radius, shall be required where the logical extension of a subdivision street is terminated and the street is two or more lots deep. This shall be a paved 40-foot radius turnaround with base material provided. 
Sec. 25-74. - Street extensions, names. 
Streets that are extensions, or obviously in alignment with, existing named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. All street names shall be subject to the approval of the engineer and the planning and zoning commission. 
Sec. 25-75. - Protection of property abutting major traffic streets. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major traffic street, the planning and zoning commission may require marginal access streets, single tier lots or such treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of intersections with the major traffic street, and separation of local and through traffic. 
Secs. 25-76—25-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TABLES 

Sec. 25-81. - Table I. 
EXAMPLE WORKSHEET FOR PAVEMENT STRUCTURE THICKNESS DESIGN 
A.  TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 
1.  IDT= ____________ , with ____________ % heavy trucks, ____________ % in design lane. 
2.  Number of heavy trucks = ____________ X ____________ X ____________ = ____________ . 
3.  Estimated average gross weight of heavy trucks = ____________ lbs. 
4.  Single-axle load limit = ____________ lbs. 
5.  Initial traffic number (ITN) = ____________ (from traffic analysis chart). 
6.  Design period = ____________ 20 ____________ years. 
7.  Traffic growth rate = ____________ 4 ____________ %. 
8.  ITN adjustment factor = ____________ (table III-3). 
9.  Design traffic number (DTN) = ____________ X ____________ = ____________ . 
B.  SUBGRADE ANALYSIS 
1.  Design subgrade strength value, ____________ = ____________ . 
C.  THICKNESS OF PAVEMENT STRUCTURE 
1.  Using design traffic number and design subgrade strength value, find total asphalt pavement thickness, TA, and round off to next highest one-half inch. 
2.  TA = ____________ inches. (Use one and one-half inches of granular base in lieu of one-inch asphaltic base.) 
Note: In no case will the granular base course be less than six inches nor the surface course of asphalted material be less than one and one-half inches. 
Sec. 25-82. - Table II. 
Note to Macon-Bibb County: 
THIS WILL APPEAR IN JOB WHEN PROOFS RETURNED 
Offset chart—not set. ms. 2653 
Sec. 25-83. - Table III. 
QUALITY CONTROL REQUIREMENTS  (TESTING) 

 
NOTES: 
(1)  The developer will furnish additional test if required by the engineer. 
(2)  In all test reports, thickness of base and asphaltic concrete will be shown. 
Chapter 26 - TAXATION AND REVENUE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise required or indicated by the context, the following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the definitions indicated: 
Board means the board of tax assessors created in this chapter. 
Tax commissioner means the tax commissioner of Macon-Bibb County, who shall be the public official elected by the people as provided by the laws of the state. 
Taxpayer means the person who is or may be liable for taxes or who is or may be required hereby to take some action under the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 26-2. - Collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue. 
(a)  Any tax, fee, penalty, fine or other revenue due Macon-Bibb County which has not been paid within the time limits set for payment or where the person owing Macon-Bibb County the payment, after a reasonable period of time, refuses to pay the amount due, then Macon-Bibb County may collect the amount due by the tax commissioner or finance officer, as appropriate, authorizing the issuance and execution of a fi. fa. on any property, personal or real, of that person located within Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  Any debts due Macon-Bibb County as described in subsection (a) are hereby declared also to be personal debts of the person owning the taxed property or otherwise owing funds to Macon-Bibb County and the amount due may be collected from that person as provided generally for the collection of personal debts under general state law. 
(c)  Executions hereunder may be assigned, sold or otherwise transferred with the approval of the tax commissioner and may be collected after the transfer as provided in this section. 
(d)  All delinquent fi. fas. issued under subsection (a) as well as any interest or penalty thereon may be included as a part of and in addition to the annual ad valorem tax bill issued by the tax commissioner. 
(e)  Upon order of the mayor, any license, privilege or permit granted by Macon-Bibb County may be revoked for the failure to pay any money due Macon-Bibb County for taxes, fees, penalties, interest, fines or other revenue. 
(f)  Any tax, fee, fine, penalty, interest or other revenue due the former City of Macon or Bibb County shall be owed to Macon-Bibb County as their successor in interest and shall be collected by the tax commissioner and/or the finance officer as appropriate, accordingly. 
Secs. 26-3—26-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-21. - Definitions. 
Reserved. 
Sec. 26-22. - Opening and closing of books for return. 
The tax commissioner shall open his books for the return of ad valorem taxes on January 1 each year and shall close the same on April 1 in each year. 
Sec. 26-23. - Property subject to taxation. 
All real and personal property shall be subject to taxation to the same extent as heretofore provided by law; provided, however, that nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to affect the method of taxation of motor vehicles specified by state law. 
Sec. 26-24. - Who is required to make returns. 
Except as hereinafter provided, every taxpayer owning real or personal property within Macon-Bibb County shall make return to the tax commissioner of all property subject to taxation owned by him on January 1, next preceding. 
Sec. 26-25. - Tax return forms. 
When required, returns of property for taxation under the provisions hereof shall be made upon forms prescribed by the tax commissioner. Realty located within Macon-Bibb County and personalty belonging to owners whose residence is located within Macon-Bibb County as the same shall from time to time exist, shall be returned for Macon-Bibb County tax purposes as well as state tax purposes. 
Sec. 26-26. - Homestead exemptions. 
(a)  All applications for homestead exemption from state and Macon-Bibb County taxes shall be made during the time that the tax commissioner's books are open as provided in section 26-22, and failure to apply for a homestead exemption during such period shall constitute a waiver of such exemption; provided, however, that once a homestead exemption for state and Macon-Bibb County taxes is legally established, it need not be claimed annually thereafter so long as the same property is owned by the same taxpayer and the property remains eligible for the same homestead exemption under the laws of the state. The amount of such homestead exemption and the qualifications therefor shall be as provided from time to time by the constitution and laws of this state. 
(b)  For the taxable year 1981, and each subsequent taxable year, Macon-Bibb County does hereby grant to each person who is 65 years of age or over an exemption from ad valorem taxes, if any, levied by Macon-Bibb County that relate solely to a special tax district defined by the corporate limits of the former City of Macon, Georgia as it existed just prior to the creation of the restructured government in an amount of $2,000.00 on a homestead owned and occupied by him or her as a residence if his or her net income, together with the net income of his or her spouse who also occupies and resides at the homestead, as net income is defined by the state constitution, from all sources, except as provided in this subsection, does not exceed $8,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year for income tax purposes. For the purpose of this subsection, net income shall not include income received as retirement, survivor or disability benefits under the federal social security act or under any other public or private retirement, disability or pension system, except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual and his spouse under the federal social security act, and income from such sources in excess of the maximum amount shall be included as net income for the purposes of this subsection. The value of the residence in excess of the above-exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. No taxpayer shall receive the benefits of the homestead exemption unless he or she, or his or her agent, files or has filed, an affidavit with the tax commissioner, giving his or her age and the amount of income which he or she and his or her spouse received during the last taxable year for income tax purposes, and such additional information relative to receiving the benefits of such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to determine whether the taxpayer is entitled to an exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. The applications shall be processed in the same manner as other applications for homestead exemptions, and the provisions of law, including the provisions of this article applicable to the processing of homestead exemptions, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended, shall apply thereto. It shall be the duty of any taxpayer, however, to notify the tax commissioner in the event he becomes ineligible for any reason for the exemption provided in this subsection. 
Sec. 26-27. - Failure to file return. 
(a)  Any taxpayer who returned or paid taxes in Macon-Bibb County for the preceding tax year and who fails to return his property for taxation as provided in section 26-25 shall be deemed to have returned for taxation, for the current tax year, the same property as was returned or was deemed to have been returned, in the preceding tax year at the same valuation as the property was finally determined for the preceding year. 
(b)  Any penalty prescribed in this section for the failure of a taxpayer to return his property for taxation within the time provided by law shall apply only to the property which the taxpayer did not return prior to the expiration of making returns and which he has acquired since his last return or which represents improvements on previously existing property since his last return or any return which he is deemed to have made. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to preclude the board from raising or lowering the valuation of property for tax purposes in any proper case. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), taxpayers owning tangible personal property subject to taxation are nevertheless required to file an annual statement of such assets. It shall be reported upon a statement of business assets form as the same may from time to time be prescribed, and shall be filed on or prior to April 1 of each year as prescribed by sections 26-22 and 26-25. 
Sec. 26-28. - Board of tax assessors. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of tax assessors for Macon-Bibb County (the "board"), which shall consist of five persons appointed by Macon-Bibb County who shall serve for terms of six years each, provided that members of the joint board of tax assessors for Bibb County who are on that joint board as of December 31, 2013 shall serve out their original terms as members of that joint board on the board of tax assessors for Macon-Bibb County prior to being subject to reappointment. Assessors may succeed themselves if reappointed and may be removed by Macon-Bibb County during a term only for cause shown for the failure to perform duties or requirements or meet the qualifications imposed upon such member by law including, but not limited to, the duties, requirements, and qualifications specified pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-295, 48-5-295.1, 48-5-262(e) and 48-5-296. 
(b)  All staff and employees of the Macon-Bibb County board of tax assessors shall be positions of employment covered by the personnel policies and procedures applicable to employees of Macon-Bibb County; provided, however, that in applying the Macon-Bibb County personnel policies and procedures, any chief appraiser designated by the board of assessors pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-264(a) shall be treated as a department head and shall not be covered by the Macon-Bibb County problem solving procedure. 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Act No. 401, § 1, adopted Mar. 1, 1993, of the General Assembly of Georgia amended O.C.G.A. § 48-5-292(c) to read: 
"(c)  In any county in this state with a population of 100,000 or more according to the United States decennial census of 1990 or any future such census, no member of a county board of tax assessors shall be eligible to hold any county property appraisal staff position during the time such person holds office as a member of the county board of tax assessors, except as otherwise provided by law." 
Sec. 26-29. - Return of newly acquired or improved property. 
(a)  If any taxpayer shall acquire any taxable property which was not included in the taxpayer's return for the preceding calendar year and which is held by such taxpayer on January 1 of the current calendar year, it shall be the duty of the taxpayer to make a return thereof as provided in section 26-27. 
(b)  If a taxpayer shall make improvements to any taxable property which improvements were made since the taxpayer's return or deemed return of the property for the preceding calendar year, with respect to property held by such taxpayer of the current calendar year, it shall nevertheless be the duty of the taxpayer to make a new return and to reflect thereon the value of the improvements made or added to the property since January 1 of the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  Upon a failure of the taxpayer to make a return of newly acquired property or of newly improved property, it shall be the duty of the board to assess it in the name of the current owner thereof according to the best information available to the board. The property owner shall be given notice of such assessment and shall have the right of review thereof as provided in sections 26-25 and 26-28. 
Sec. 26-30. - Review of returns by board. 
All returns of property, real or personal, for ad valorem taxes for Macon-Bibb County or state tax purposes shall be transmitted by the tax commissioner to the board for review, and the board shall review each such return for accuracy and completeness, and for the correctness of valuations of the property returned thereon. 
Sec. 26-31. - Lien for taxes. 
The lien of taxes collectible under the provisions hereof shall date from January 1 of the year in which the taxes become due, and the lien of such taxes shall be a special lien on the property upon which the same are due and a general lien against all property of the taxpayer owning the same. 
Sec. 26-32. - Changes in returns or assessments. 
(a)  Should the board find that a taxpayer has failed to return real or personal property for taxation when he or she is legally liable to do so or that he or she has substantially undervalued property which he or she has returned for taxation or that property which he or she is deemed to have returned for taxation is substantially undervalued, the board shall cause the return to be amended or the property assessed at its correct value. 
(b)  If a taxpayer has filed a return or is deemed to have filed a return which does not provide an appropriate valuation considering improvements made to the property, the board shall likewise cause the return to be amended so as to reflect the improvements or shall cause the property to be assessed accordingly. 
(c)  Whenever, under the provisions of this article, the board amends a return or assesses property, the taxpayer shall be given written notice of the amendment or assessment. If the taxpayer filed a return or was deemed to have filed a return, such notice shall be given as provided in section 26-34. 
Sec. 26-33. - Assessment of unreturned property; improvements. 
(a)  Whenever the board shall determine that property subject to taxation is not returned or deemed to have been returned for taxation and is consequently not valued or assessed for tax purposes, or if it is substantially undervalued (if returned or deemed to have been returned) by reason of improvements not previously taken into consideration, it shall be the duty of the board to assess the same at its fair market value. 
(b)  In making such an assessment, the board shall not only assess the property for the then-current calendar year, but shall assess the same for all prior years, up to seven, that the property was not returned for taxation or was not deemed returned for taxation. 
(c)  If, during any review, the board determines that improvements have been made to property subject to taxation within the last seven years which increased the value of the property, which increased value rendered the property substantially undervalued in any return within a seven-year period or rendered it undervalued for any year during which the improvements existed on January 1 of that year for property deemed to have been returned, the board shall make a like assessment to reflect the increase in value. Payment of a tax bill for any given year shall not be deemed to preclude the subsequent assessment nor increase in an assessment of property by the board, provided that no such assessment or increase in assessment shall extend further back than seven years. 
(d)  In addition to the taxes determined to be due thereon, the tax commissioner shall add to that amount a penalty of ten percent or the sum of $1.00, whichever is greater. 
Sec. 26-34. - Notice of assessment. 
Whenever the board has assessed property at a valuation different from that at which it was returned or was deemed to have been returned, or when the board assesses unreturned property, it shall give notice to the taxpayer as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-306. 
Sec. 26-35. - Appeals; review of assessment. 
Any taxpayer may appeal from an assessment or change in valuations as returned made by the board and have a tax assessment pertaining to his property reviewed by a board of equalization. Proceedings for the establishment of the board of equalization and review of assessments shall proceed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-311. 
Sec. 26-36. - Transmission of returns to tax commissioner; preparation of tax digest. 
As soon as practicable after January 2 in each year, the board shall commence to review the valuations reflected by tax returns, the value of all property deemed to have been returned and the value of property not returned or deemed to have been returned. As promptly thereafter as practicable, the board shall transmit the returns and assessments, as finally approved by them after notice to the taxpayer, to the tax commissioner to enable him to prepare a digest. 
Sec. 26-37. - Completion of tax digest. 
The tax commissioner shall forthwith proceed to complete the preparation of a tax digest which may be in such form as he from time to time may prescribe but which will also conform to the requirements of the state revenue commissioner for tax digests generally. The tax commissioner shall, as soon as possible, advise the commission of the amount of the digest. 
Sec. 26-38. - Millage rates; tax bills. 
As soon thereafter as possible, the commission and the Bibb County board of education shall determine their respective millage rates, and such rates all be forthwith communicated to the tax commissioner to enable him to submit the digest to the state revenue commissioner. 
Sec. 26-39. - Approval of digest. 
Upon completion of the tax digest and fixing of millage rates by the commission and Macon-Bibb County board of education, the same shall be transmitted to the state revenue commissioner for his approval, and, when the same shall have been approved, the tax commissioner shall promptly prepare and mail tax bills. 
Sec. 26-40. - Due dates of taxes; executions. 
(a)  Taxes payable under the provisions hereof shall be due and payable upon receipt of the bill; provided, however, that one-half of the taxes shall be due and payable in any event 30 days following the mailing of the bills, and the remaining one-half shall be due and payable on November 15 in each year with interest at the rate of one percent per month or portion thereof, or $1.00, whichever is greater, after 60 days from the date of mailing of tax bills with respect to the first installment, and after November 15 in each year with respect to the second installment; provided, that no interest shall be due on either installment until 60 days shall have elapsed from the mailing of the tax bills. 
(b)  On December 20 of each year, the tax commissioner shall compile a list of those taxpayers who have failed to pay their Macon-Bibb County taxes in full on or before such date, and shall issue executions for such unpaid taxes in the same manner as tax executions have heretofore been issued. 
Sec. 26-41. - Interest and penalty on overdue taxes. 
A penalty of ten percent of the tax due shall accrue on taxes not paid on or before December 20 of each year, and interest shall accrue at the rate specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 on the total amount of unpaid taxes and penalty until both the taxes and penalty are paid. The tax commissioner shall issue executions for such taxes, penalty, and interest against each delinquent taxpayer in their respective counties. The ten percent penalty shall be paid over to the county fiscal authority to assist the county in paying the expense of collecting the delinquent taxes. 
Sec. 26-42. - Collection and costs of executions. 
The collection of tax executions, including levy and sale thereunder, shall thereafter proceed as provided by the laws of the state as the same shall from time to time exist, and as they apply generally throughout the state, except that there shall be added the cost of issuance of an execution in accordance with the following schedule: 

 
Sec. 26-43. - Administrative procedures. 
The tax commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe administrative procedures not in conflict herewith which are reasonably required to administer the return, assessment and collection of taxes hereunder. 
Sec. 26-44. - Taxes remitted to Macon-Bibb County. 
The tax commissioner shall remit to the treasurer of Macon-Bibb County on or before the tenth day of each month the taxes collected for Macon-Bibb County during the preceding calendar month. Taxes collected and required to be remitted to the Macon-Bibb County board of education shall be paid over in like fashion. 
Sec. 26-45. - Compensation for tax collections. 
The compensation for the tax commissioner, the board and the employees of the tax commissioner and the board shall be fixed by the commission. 
Sec. 26-46. - Matters not covered. 
While this article attempts to specify in some detail the method of returning and assessing property for taxation in Macon-Bibb County, the review of assessments and the method for billing and collecting taxes which are due, it is recognized that it may not be complete in every respect, and if matters arise not covered by or comprehended in this article, the provisions of the state public revenue code shall apply. 
Sec. 26-47. - Taxes retained by tax commissioner. 
The tax commissioner is authorized and requested to retain for the use of Macon-Bibb County ten percent of all taxes collected in excess of 80 percent of the total taxes due according to the net tax digest for the year 1951 and until further order of the board and these commissions, and such taxes shall be covered into the county treasury. 
Sec. 26-48. - Freeport exemptions. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority vested in the commission, there is hereby exempted from ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes, the following types of tangible personal property: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production, which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of a taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. This exemption shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in this state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of a taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for such finished goods shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state, and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this section shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. All property that is claimed to be exempt under the provisions of this subsection shall be designated as being "in transit" upon the official books and records of the warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, where such property is being stored. Such official books and records shall contain a full, true, and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such "in transit" property, shall at all times be open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state and of any political subdivision of this state. 
(b)  As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
(1)  Finished goods means goods, wares and merchandise of every character and kind, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted or unsevered natural resources, or raw materials, or goods in the process of manufacture or production, or the stock-in-trade of a retailer. 
(2)  Raw materials means any material, whether crude or processed, that can be converted by manufacture, processing or combination into a new and useful product, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted or unsevered natural resources. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to undertake to modify the provisions of a constitutional amendment respecting exemption from ad valorem taxation of certain agricultural products described in 1974 Ga. Laws, page 1706. 
(d)  The extent of exemption from taxation of tangible personal property described in this section shall be 100 percent thereof. 
(e)  The exemption from taxation provided in this section shall apply to ad valorem taxes for the calendar year 1984 and all subsequent years until changed by proper action of the commission. 
Sec. 26-49. - Real property deemed surplus; method of disposition. 
(a)  All real property which is purchased at tax sales in the name of the Macon-Bibb County is declared to be surplus immediately upon its acquisition, whether the property has heretofore or may hereafter be so acquired. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of state law respecting redemption of property acquired at tax sales, whenever a request is made to Macon-Bibb County to sell property, the request shall be referred to the Macon-Bibb County attorney who shall determine the minimum bid value thereof, which may be less then fair value, as determined by the current or previous tax value as set by the tax assessors, whichever is higher, and if the person interested is willing to pay such minimum bid value; the Macon-Bibb County attorney is authorized to take such action as is needful, including but not limited to, foreclosure or barring the right to redemption, to sell and dispose of the property in accordance with state law upon the stipulation that the minimum bid value as determined by the tax assessors shall be the minimum acceptable bid and that the property will in any event be sold to the highest bidder. 
(c)  The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to execute quitclaim deeds to successful purchasers at such sales and the clerk is authorized to attest the mayor's signature. 
Sec. 26-50. - Disposition of personal property. 
(a)  Whenever personal property is acquired by Macon-Bibb County at a sale for taxes, in view of the fact that under state law, title vests absolutely in Macon-Bibb County at the time of sale, the mayor shall, upon report from the tax commissioner that the property has been acquired, determine whether the property or any part thereof is useful to any department or agency of Macon-Bibb County and, if it is found to be useful, the property may be transferred to such department or agency. 
(b)  If the property or part thereof is not useful to Macon-Bibb County or an agency thereof, the mayor is authorized to declare the same surplus and dispose of it in accordance with state law. 
Secs. 26-51—26-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REFUNDS 

Sec. 26-61. - Refunds not favored. 
In recognition of the general rule that taxes voluntarily paid are not to be recovered by the payor, applications for refunds of taxes paid to Macon-Bibb County are not favored. Since the law of the state authorizes the making of refunds of taxes under certain circumstances, and in view of the obvious equity in favor of a taxpayer which may exist in certain cases, applications for tax refunds may be granted upon terms and conditions set out in this division. 
Sec. 26-62. - General rules. 
Applications for refund of taxes will not be favorably considered if the taxpayer has made a voluntary payment of taxes and no public officer or employee of Macon-Bibb County has done any negligent act which would mislead the taxpayer in making payment of taxes which he subsequently claims he did not owe. 
Sec. 26-63. - Duplication ordinarily required. 
Ordinarily, no claim for tax refunds will be approved unless the tax sought to be refunded is duplicative of other taxes paid with respect to the same property by some other person. 
Sec. 26-64. - Joint negligence or action. 
Even if the negligent act of a public employee contributed to the payment of taxes alleged not to be due, but the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County finds that, under all the circumstances, the negligence of the claimant was equal to or greater than the negligence act of the public officer or employee, the application for refund will be denied. 
Sec. 26-65. - Monetary limitation. 
If a tax refund is granted, the amount to be refunded shall not exceed the actual amount paid by the taxpayer, without interest thereon. 
Sec. 26-66. - Surrender of documents or reconveyance. 
If an applicant for a tax refund is the transferee of tax fi. fa. or has acquired the property by tax deed, it shall be a condition precedent to the payment of any refund which may be approved that the taxpayer retransfer the tax fi. fa. to Macon-Bibb County or quitclaim the property to Macon-Bibb County, as may be appropriate. 
Sec. 26-67. - Time limitation. 
No claim for tax refund shall be approved where the taxes alleged to have been erroneously paid or collected were paid more than three years prior to the date of filing of the application for refund with the governing authority, nor shall any refund be granted with respect to any taxes for any tax year, regardless of the date of payment, which is more than seven years prior to the date of filing the application for refund. 
Sec. 26-68. - Other factors may be considered. 
The enumeration of factors to be considered in determining whether or not the Macon-Bibb County will approve a refund of taxes is illustrative and not exclusive, the restructured government reserving the right to make in the exercise of sound discretion, a determination to approve or deny such applications on sound equitable principles whether or not expressly set forth elsewhere in this division. 
Secs. 26-69—26-71. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IN REM TAX FORECLOSURES PER O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq. 

Sec. 26-72. - Scope. 
This article is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq. in addition to and as an alternative to non-judicial tax foreclosure. The tax commissioner is authorized to undertake judicial in rem foreclosure of delinquent ad valorem tax executions. 
Sec. 26-73. - Conflict with state law. 
Should any portion of this division conflict with state law, the applicable state law will control. State law only controls the conflicting portion of the division; the non-conflicting portions remain unaffected. 
Sec. 26-74. - Definitions. 
Clerk means the clerk of the superior court of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
Court means the superior court of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(2)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(3)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records maintained by the tax commissioner, clerk, or other records maintained in the Macon-Bibb County courthouse. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected. 
Redemption amount means the full amount of the delinquent ad valorem taxes, accrued interest at the rate specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40, penalties as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44, and costs incurred by Macon-Bibb County in collecting such taxes as allocated in its discretion, including without limitation the cost of title examination, attorney's fees, and publication of notice. 
Sec. 26-75. - The petition. 
(a)  After an ad valorem tax lien based upon an approved digest has been delinquent for 12 months, the tax commissioner may commence tax foreclosure in accordance with this article. 
(b)  The tax commissioner may commence tax foreclosure by filing a petition in the court. Said petition must include: 
(1)  The tax commissioner as the petitioner; 
(2)  The property address; 
(3)  A legal description of the property; 
(4)  The tax identification number and/or the property and parcel number of the property; 
(5)  The calendar year(s) for which the taxes are delinquent; 
(6)  The principal amount of the delinquent taxes together with interest and penalties; and 
(7)  The names and addresses of parties to whom copies of the petition are to be sent in accordance with subsection (c). 
(c)  The tax commissioner shall mail copies of the petition by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the petition shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any, and shall be posted on the property. 
(d)  Contemporaneously with the filing of the petition, the tax commissioner shall file a lis pendens notice at the office of the clerk. 
(e)  Within 30 days of the filing of the petition, a notice shall be published twice in the official organ. Said notice shall specify: 
(1)  The tax commissioner as the petitioner and as the person responsible for collecting the delinquent taxes; 
(2)  The property address; 
(3)  A description of the property; 
(4)  The tax identification number and/or property and parcel number of the property; 
(5)  The applicable period of tax delinquency; 
(6)  The principal amount of the delinquent taxes together with interest and penalties; 
(7)  The date and place of the filing of the petition. 
Sec. 26-76. - The hearing. 
(a)  The tax commissioner shall request a judicial hearing not earlier than 30 days after the filing of the petition. At such hearing any interested party has the right to be heard and to contest the delinquency of the taxes or the adequacy of the proceedings. If the court determines that the information set forth in the petition is accurate, the court may render its judgment and issue an order finding and ordering as follows: 
(1)  The taxes are delinquent; 
(2)  Proper notice has been given to all interested parties; 
(3)  The property as described in the petition shall be sold in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq.; 
(4)  The property shall be sold free and clear of all liens, claims and encumbrances other than: 
a.  Rights of redemption provided under federal law; 
b.  Tax liens in favor of the state governmental entities other than the petitioner which are superior to the ad valorem taxes identified in the petition by virtue of O.C.G.A. § 48-2-56; 
c.  The holders of easements and rights-of-way described in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-77(1)(c); and 
d.  The holders of the benefits or burdens of any real covenants filed of record as of the date of filing of the petition. 
(5)  The sale shall become final and binding 60 days after the date thereof in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-81. 
(b)  If, upon production of evidence, the court determines that any interested party died within the six-month period of time immediately preceding the filing of the petition, the court may postpone the hearing for a period of up to six months, to allow the administrator or executor adequate time to close the estate. 
Sec. 26-77. - The sale. 
(a)  At any time prior to sale, any interested party may redeem the property by payment of the redemption amount to the petitioner, whereupon the petitioner shall dismiss the proceedings. 
(b)  Following the hearing and order of the court in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-4-79, a sale of the property shall be advertised and conducted on the date, time, place and manner which are required by law of sheriff's sales. Such sale shall not occur earlier than 45 days following the date of the order. 
(c)  Except as otherwise authorized by law, the minimum bid price shall be the redemption amount. In the absence of a higher bid, the petitioner may continue the sale to a specific advertised time on the same sale date or may resubmit advertisement to sell the following month. The commission may designate a department head to bid in an amount equal to the minimum bid price and thereby become the purchaser on behalf of Macon-Bibb County. 
(d)  From and after the moment of the sale and tender of the successful bid price, the sale shall be final and binding, subject only to the right of the owner of the property to redeem the property upon payment into the court of the full amount of the minimum bid price. Such right of redemption of the owner shall exist for a period of 60 days from and after the date of the sale and shall be in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Redemption by an owner shall result in a dismissal of the proceedings, and the petitioner shall refund to the purchaser the full amount paid by the purchaser at the sale; 
(2)  For purpose of redemption, "owner" shall mean the owner of record of fee simple interest in the property as of the date of filing of the petition, together with such owner's successors in interest by death or operation of law. This right of redemption shall not otherwise be transferable; and 
(3)  This right of redemption shall automatically terminate and expire upon failure to redeem within the 60-day period after the sale. 
(e)  If the property is not redeemed, then within 90 days after the sale, the tax commissioner shall cause to be executed and delivered to the purchaser a tax deed, together with a real estate transfer tax form. 
(f)  Within 90 days after the sale, the petitioner shall file a report of the sale with the court, stating whether a sale took place, the sale price, and the identity of the purchaser. 
(g)  If the sale price exceeds the minimum bid amount, the petitioner shall deposit the surplus into the registry of the court. Such surplus shall be distributed by the court to the interested parties, including the owner, as their interests appear and in the priority in which their interests exist. 
Secs. 26-78—26-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL AND MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 26-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in Macon-Bibb County including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either, upon which Macon-Bibb County is without power to impose the tax provided in this article. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
Sec. 26-82. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of tax commissioner. The tax commissioner shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in Macon-Bibb County to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the tax commissioner may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The tax commissioner or any person authorized in writing by the tax commissioner may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the tax commissioner may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the tax commissioner when required by the tax commissioner, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the tax commissioner may require. 
Sec. 26-83. - Purpose. 
(a)  The commission hereby finds, determines and declares that: 
(1)  The encouragement, development, growth and expansion of tourism and conventions within Macon-Bibb County are important to the economy of Macon-Bibb County and to the general welfare of its citizens; 
(2)  Macon-Bibb County should be a tourism and convention center of the state and should have the financial ability to attract and promote tourism and conventions, and to provide the necessary public facilities to compete in the domestic and international travel and convention markets; and 
(3)  The tourism and convention industry should pay for the delivery of the services and facilities requested by them to promote and attract visitors and convention delegates. 
(b)  The Macon-Bibb County Convention and Visitor Bureau, Inc. and the Macon, Georgia, Cherry Blossom Festival, Inc., are entities which encourage, develop and expand tourism and conventions within Macon-Bibb County to the benefit of the economy of Macon-Bibb County and the general welfare of its citizens and promote Macon-Bibb County as a tourism and convention center of the state and are essential to allow Macon-Bibb County to compete in the domestic and international travel and convention industry and also to promote and attract visitors and convention delegates to Macon-Bibb County. Such activities constitute promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(4). Tobosofkee Recreation Area, the Macon Centreplex, the Georgia Sports Hall of Fame and the Douglass Theatre are facilities and physical attractions which are available and open to the public and which improve destination appeal to visitors, support visitors' experience, and are used by visitors, the support of which constitutes tourism product development pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(6), as well as, to the extent applicable, promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(4). 
Sec. 26-84. - Imposition and rate of tax; distribution. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and there shall be paid a tax of seven percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in Macon-Bibb County. The tax imposed by this section shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after January 1, 2014, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. 
(b)  The proceeds of said tax shall, upon payment to Macon-Bibb County be distributed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(1) as follows: 
(1)  An amount equal to 2.125 percent of the total taxes collected, subject to the budgetary process and requirements of Macon-Bibb County, to defray the cost of administration or any other lawful purpose or both. 
(2)  An amount equal to 9.513 percent of the total taxes collected, subject to the budgetary process and requirements of Macon-Bibb County, for supporting the Tobesofkee Recreation Area or for any other lawful purpose or both. 
(3)  An amount equal to 13.252 percent of the total taxes collected, subject to the budgetary process and requirements of Macon-Bibb County, for supporting the Macon Centreplex and/or the associated lodging facility or for any other lawful purpose or both. 
(4)  An amount equal to 60.825 percent of the total taxes collected, subject to the budgetary process and requirements of Macon-Bibb County, for promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2, allocated as follows: 
a.  53.775 percent to the Macon-Bibb County Convention and Visitors' Bureau, Inc., of which 39.489 percent is pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3); and 14.286 percent is pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(5). 
b.  7.050 percent to the Macon, Georgia, Cherry Blossom Festival, Inc. 
(5)  An amount equal to 14.286 percent of the total taxes collected, subject to the budgetary process and requirements of Macon-Bibb County, for tourism product development, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2, allocated as follows: 
a.  5.354 percent to the Georgia Sports Hall of Fame, provided it remains in Macon, Georgia. 
b.  3.576 percent to the Tobosofkee Recreation Area. 
c.  5.355 percent to the Douglass Theatre. 
(6)  Some other lawful purpose or combination of purposes permitted under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(1). 
Sec. 26-85. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every operator maintaining a hotel in Macon-Bibb County and renting guest rooms in Macon-Bibb County, not exempted under section 26-86, shall collect the tax from the occupant. 
Sec. 26-86. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article with respect to occupancy by a permanent resident. 
Sec. 26-87. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in Macon-Bibb County shall immediately register with the tax commissioner, on a form provided by the tax commissioner. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of the place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the tax commissioner may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner, if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or a partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer thereof. The tax commissioner shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
Sec. 26-88. - Determination, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the tax commissioner monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth in section 26-81. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the tax commissioner showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the tax commissioner. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if that amount is not delinquent at the time of payment, pursuant to, and at the rate authorized under, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 26-89. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the tax commissioner is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to Macon-Bibb County by any person, the tax commissioner may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the account due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest of deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The tax commissioner shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the tax commissioner. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
Sec. 26-90. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the tax commissioner shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in Macon-Bibb County which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the tax commissioner. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 26-89(c). 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
Sec. 26-91. - Penalties. 
(a)  When any operator fails to make any return or to pay the full amount of the tax of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for not more than 30 days, add an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional 30 days or fraction of 30 days during which the failure continues. The penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate, whichever is greater. 
(b)  If the failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the tax commissioner in affidavit form attached to the return and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, the return may be accepted exclusive of penalties. 
(c)  In the case of a false or fraudulent return or of a failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud Macon-Bibb County of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(d)  The penalty authorized by this section shall be in addition in and not in lieu of any other penalties provided by law, including, but not limited to, the criminal penalties authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-58 through 48-13-63, inclusive. 
Sec. 26-92. - Sale or discontinuance of business. 
(a)  Final return. If any operator liable for any tax, interest, or penalty imposed by this article sells or quits the business, he or she shall make a final return and payment within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(b)  Successor to withhold amount due. The operator's successor or assigns, if any, shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase money to cover the amount of the taxes, interest, and penalties due under this article and unpaid until the former owner produces either a receipt from the tax commissioner showing that the taxes, interest, and penalties due under this article have been paid or a certificate from the tax commissioner stating that no tax, interest, or penalty is due under this article. 
(c)  Liability of successor. If the purchaser of the business fails to withhold the purchase money as required by this section, he or she shall be personally liable for the payment of any taxes, interest, and penalties accruing under this article and unpaid by any former owner or assignor. The personal liability of the purchaser in such case shall not exceed the amount of the total purchase money, but the property being transferred shall in all cases be subject to the full amount of the tax lien arising from the delinquencies of the former owner. Paid executions may be transferred and enforced as otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 26-93. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the tax commissioner may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of Macon-Bibb County to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, penalties, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees and other legal fees incident thereto. Such amounts and fees shall constitute a lien against the property in the same manner as ad valorem taxes as set forth in section 26-31. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax commissioner showing that he or she has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchase of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, he or she shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him or her to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Tax credit, or interest paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by Macon-Bibb County under this chapter, it may be offset by the tax commissioner. If the operator or person determines that he or she has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the tax commissioner, he or she will have three years from the date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the tax commissioner, the excess amount paid Macon-Bibb County may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
Secs. 26-94—26-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOCAL OPTION SALES TAX 

Sec. 26-111. - Imposed. 
Pursuant to the provisions of House Bill 281, as the same was adopted by the general assembly of the state at its 1979 regular session, and pursuant to the provisions of Georgia Retailers and Consumers Sales and Use Tax, as amended by such bill, and pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq., as revised by such bill, the joint county and municipal sales and use tax contemplated by House Bill 281 is hereby imposed effective April 1, 1979, and reimposed effective January 1, 1980. 
Secs. 26-112—26-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LICENSE FEES AND TAXES ON INSURANCE COMPANIES AND PREMIUMS 

Sec. 26-131. - Insurers' license fees. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, there is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within Macon-Bibb County in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). For each separate business location in excess of one (1) not covered by section 26-132, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within Macon-Bibb County, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0064, § 1, 12-9-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-132. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and, in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of fifty-two dollars and 50/100s ($52.50) per location. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0064, § 1, 12-9-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-133. - Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 26-131, in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each such location within Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0064, § 1, 12-9-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-134. - Gross premiums tax—Imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied, for the year 2015 and each subsequent year, an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance, designated as class (1) insurance in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. "Gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 26-131. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0064, § 1, 12-9-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-135. - Same—On all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied, for the year 2015 and for each year thereafter, an annual tax based upon the gross direct premiums on each insurer doing business within the State of Georgia at the rate of two and one half (2.5) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Insurer, as used in this section, shall mean any insurer other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated as class (1) of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. As used in this section, "gross direct premiums" shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 26-131. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0064, § 1, 12-9-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-136. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 26-131 through 26-133 shall be due and payable on the first day of January, 2015, and on January first of each subsequent year. Payment shall be made in the office of the Macon-Bibb County clerk. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0064, § 1, 12-9-2014 ) 
Secs. 26-137—26-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAX ON DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 26-151. - Purpose and interpretation. 
It is the purpose of this article to exercise the powers granted to the commission to levy a business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within Macon-Bibb County in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The terms used in this article shall have the same meanings as similar language contained in such statute. 
Sec. 26-152. - Levy of tax. 
For each year there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 26-153. - Rate of tax. 
The tax hereby levied shall be at the rate of one-quarter of a percent of gross receipts. 
Sec. 26-154. - Minimum tax. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the minimum amount hereby levied upon each depository financial institution for any year shall be $1,000.00. 
Sec. 26-155. - Returns. 
Each depository financial institution shall file an annual return of its gross receipts with the tax commissioner on or before March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue and shall be based upon the allocation method prescribed by law. The tax hereby levied shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return; provided, however, that if otherwise authorized by law, nothing contained in this article shall prohibit Macon-Bibb County or the tax commissioner from taking reasonable steps to confirm the information set out in the returns, and to make such adjustments in the tax reported to be due as the circumstances warrant. 
Sec. 26-156. - When tax payable. 
The tax levied hereby shall be due and payable on or before 30 days after the filing of the return to the tax commissioner. Taxes which are not timely paid shall be in default, and shall bear interest and be subject to such costs as are from time to time provided by this Code for delinquent ad valorem taxes. Taxes delinquent under the provisions of this article shall be subject to fi. fa. and collected in the same manner as ad valorem taxes in Macon-Bibb County. 
Secs. 26-157—26-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OCCUPATION TAXES 

Sec. 26-201. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person who is engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in Macon-Bibb County, or, to the extent required pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 and § 26-209 herein, in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation. A business registration certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in Macon-Bibb County. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Macon-Bibb County, such business tax registration shall be shown to the department of business development services of Macon-Bibb County, or their agents, upon request. 
Sec. 26-202. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax applies to all businesses and occupations not specifically excluded by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
Sec. 26-203. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
The amount of occupation tax shall be due and payable to Macon-Bibb County, at the office of the department of business development services, on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before April 1 of each year. 
Sec. 26-204. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Where the term "Macon-Bibb County" is used herein in a geographic sense, such term shall be construed to mean the area or territory of Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. The term, when used in a corporate sense, shall be construed to mean Macon-Bibb County, Georgia, or its governing body. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business registration certificate means the document issued by the department of business development services to a business, occupation or profession which gives evidence of registration required hereby. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax from such individual's compensation, or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation an IRS Form W-2, but not an IRS Form 1099. 
Location of office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person shall be deemed to include any individual, firm, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, sole proprietor, corporation, and partnership or any other form of business organization or combination acting as a unit. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioner of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Privilege license means any license or permit requiring approval of the sheriff and any license or permit wherein the business, trade or occupation is regulated and controlled by ordinance of Macon-Bibb County. Every person receiving a license for any business, trade or occupation, set forth as a privilege license, shall take such license subject to the continuing compliance with the conditions set forth in this Code, and the failure of any business, trade or occupation to comply therewith at any time may result in the automatic suspension of such license until such business, trade or occupation has complied therewith. Privilege licenses specifically include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Adult entertainer permit; 
(2)  Adult entertainment establishment; 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Bail bondsman; 
(5)  Beer or malt beverages, retail (consumed on premises or packaged to go or both); 
(6)  Beer or malt beverages, wholesaler; 
(7)  Billiard or pool hall; 
(8)  Brown bagging permit; 
(9)  Dealers in precious metals and gems; 
(10)  Landfill user; 
(11)  Liquor, retail (packaged to go); 
(12)  Liquor, retail (sales by the drink/consumed on premises); 
(13)  Liquor, wholesale; 
(14)  Massage parlor; 
(15)  Pawnbroker; 
(16)  Private detective; 
(17)  Shooting range (indoor); 
(18)  Sunday sales permit; 
(19)  Taxicab company; 
(20)  Taxicab driver permit; 
(21)  Wine, retail (consumed on premises/packaged to go); and 
(22)  Wine, wholesale. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by Macon-Bibb County. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact or permit fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
Sec. 26-205. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $65.00 shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is set forth in another ordinance and is not comprehended hereby. 
(d)  No administrative or processing fee shall be imposed upon a business or practitioner for the cost of ascertaining whether such a business or practitioner has paid occupation tax to another local government. 
Sec. 26-206. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax is hereby levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more offices located in Macon-Bibb County, and/or upon the application out-of-state business with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the average number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full time position basis or a full time position equivalent basis. For the purposes of this computation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full time employee. The average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours shall be determined and aggregated and divided by 40 to produce full time equivalent employees. 
(b)  If as a result of the computation described next above, the result is a fractional number, any fraction less than one-half shall be disregarded and fractions of one-half or more shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
(c)  The average weekly hours shall be determined upon an annual basis by computing the average number of full time employees and full time equivalent employees based upon the preceding calendar year. Businesses which have been in business for less than 12 months during such preceding calendar year shall compute their average weekly number of employees annualized to a full year. Businesses or practitioners having no operations in a prior year and which commence business on or after January 1st in each year shall pay the business occupation tax, based upon a bona fide estimate of the number of employees expected to be employed on a full time and full time equivalent basis. 
(d)  Where the estimated business occupation tax for any year proves to be inaccurate, then no later than April 1st of the next succeeding year, the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of full time and full time equivalent employees. Any over payment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business' or practitioner's account for future liability, offset against other amounts due and owing Macon-Bibb County for any reason or refunded to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the department of business development services. 
(e)  If a business or practitioner commences business in Macon-Bibb County on or after July 1st in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year, calculated as herein otherwise provided, plus the administrative fee of $50.00. 
Sec. 26-207. - Levy based on number of employees. 
The business occupation tax hereby levied shall be that amount determined by multiplying the average number of employees for a calendar year by $39.00 and plus the administrative fee levied by this article. 
Sec. 26-208. - Limitations on levy of tax; exceptions. 
(a)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(b)  No occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. 
(c)  The maximum number of employees for which any business or practitioner shall be liable to pay under the provisions of this article shall be 250. 
Sec. 26-209. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in the state. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in Macon-Bibb County and the business or practitioner has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Macon-Bibb County for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients or if the business or practitioner owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 26-210. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in Macon-Bibb County. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
Sec. 26-211. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax either: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of full time and full time equivalent employees as set forth in this article; or 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  The election and payment of the occupation tax shall be made on an annual basis and must be done on or before April 1 in each year. 
(4)  A practitioner who fails to make an election on a timely basis shall be deemed to have elected to pay the business occupation tax based upon $400.00 per practitioner. 
Sec. 26-212. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
Sec. 26-213. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter. The administrative fee and business occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by April 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in Macon-Bibb County in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration fee and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty shall be imposed. In addition to said penalty, the department of business development services shall impose interest on delinquent occupation taxes and administrative fees at a rate of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof. The business registration certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the department of business development services and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration certificate shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in Macon-Bibb County any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtain said registration certificate, such offender shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County, be punished as provided by section 1-6. 
(b)  Attorneys engaged in the practice of law shall not be required to pay the occupation tax in any calendar year beginning with and including the year 2014 until January 1 of the year following. In the event that any such attorneys commence business on any date after January 1, occupation tax and registration shall be due and payable 30 days following the commencement of the business or January 1 of the following year, whichever is later. 
(c)  In addition to the above remedies, the department of business development services or its agents may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
Sec. 26-214. - Allocation of number of employees of business with multiple intra- or interstate locations. 
For those businesses and practitioners that have multiple locations inside and outside of Macon-Bibb County, the number of employees shall be allocated to each location, number of employees used to determine the occupation tax due will be the number of employees attributed to each Macon-Bibb County location. 
Sec. 26-215. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration certificate is required or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless said business shall provide a copy of a determination letter from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service granting nonprofit or charitable status or similar documentation. 
Sec. 26-216. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before Macon-Bibb County registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each such person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
Sec. 26-217. - Evidence of compliance required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain planning and zoning permits, building inspection permits, health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or comply with any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a Macon-Bibb County business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
Sec. 26-218. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary business registration certificate for a business described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in Macon-Bibb County after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in Macon-Bibb County, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtain such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. 
Sec. 26-219. - Department of business development services; citation powers. 
The department of business development services and their agents shall have authority to issue citations for any violations of this article. 
Sec. 26-220. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
(a)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Any person engaged in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions where such involve personal assets and are not the principal occupation of the individual. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect any license fees, franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
Sec. 26-221. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to any business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
Sec. 26-222. - More than one place. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place, said business will pay an occupation tax for each location according to the number of employees engaged at such location. 
Sec. 26-223. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-224. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the department of business development services, through it officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made for the purpose of the number of employees. The department of business development services shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in Macon-Bibb County, and upon demand of the department of business development services such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of Macon-Bibb County within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in Macon-Bibb County. Adequate records shall be kept in Macon-Bibb County, for examination by the department of business development services at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under-reporting, a penalty of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof times the amount deficient will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
Sec. 26-225. - Business registration certificate to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business registration certificate granted by Macon-Bibb County under this article shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be issued by Macon-Bibb County for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the department of business development services in accordance with the provisions of this article. Businesses whose business registration certificate has been revoked shall not be authorized to do business until the default is cured. This section shall not apply in the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, but the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by Macon-Bibb County as in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
Sec. 26-226. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in Macon-Bibb County after the registration for said business has been revoked as provided in the next preceding section, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when authorized officers, agents, employees, or representatives of Macon-Bibb County request such inspection, during business hours of the taxpayer, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. 
Sec. 26-227. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the department of business development services, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in Macon-Bibb County of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances of Macon-Bibb County and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the department of business development services of Macon-Bibb County upon the property of defendant located in said jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances of Macon-Bibb County and the laws of the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. 
Sec. 26-228. - Amendment, repeal of provisions. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of Macon-Bibb County to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by Macon-Bibb County of other occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
Sec. 26-229. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
Sec. 26-230. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the department of business development services to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the department of business development services and their agents to inspect all registrations issued by Macon-Bibb County as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
Sec. 26-231. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the commission. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
Sec. 26-232. - Requirement of public hearing. 
(a)  After the effective date of this article, the commission shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year for Macon-Bibb County, the commission shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
Sec. 26-233. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
Sec. 26-234. - Violations; revocation; suspensions and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in any business in Macon-Bibb County without having first registered such business and procured a business registration certificate therefor, or to engage in any such business in Macon-Bibb County after revocation or suspension of any business registration certificate previously issued therefor. Each day during which such business is so engaged in shall constitute a separate offense. The officers and agents listed for or representing any person engaged in business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to procure a license. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any duly registered person to fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to returns or affidavits, and each day such person engages in such business without compliance with such provisions shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give, or cause to be given, submit or cause to be submitted, exhibit, or cause to be exhibited, or present, or cause to be presented to Macon-Bibb County any false, deceptive or misleading statement, affidavit, certificate, book or record of entry, or any other document or information relating to the number of employees of the business or practitioner, or any other data, records or information required by ordinance and applicable to such business. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person transacting business in Macon-Bibb County to impede, hinder or obstruct the department of business development services in the performance of their duty to inspect from time to time, during reasonable business hours of the taxpayer, all records, books, tax returns or other papers or documents, stocks of goods and merchandise, as well as the place of business, for the purpose of ascertaining information necessary for a proper classification for occupation taxation and fixing the amount of such occupation tax or specific tax. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person duly registered to transact any business within Macon-Bibb County to fail to have such business registration certificate posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business of such person as provided in this chapter and if such person has no fixed place of business within Macon-Bibb County, it shall be unlawful for such person to fail to exhibit to Macon-Bibb County's agents such business registration certificate after request for such business registration certificate during reasonable business hours. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a business registration certificate shall be granted under the provisions of this chapter to do any of the acts forbidden by this chapter or to fail to do any of the things required to be done by the terms hereof, and it shall be unlawful for any person to whom a business registration certificate shall be granted to violate any of the terms, conditions and provisions under which such business registration certificate has been granted. Every registrant shall be responsible for and subject to the penalties provided in this chapter in the event of violation of this chapter by any employee or agent of such registrant. 
(b)  Revocation, suspensions and penalties. 
(1)  Any person transacting any business within Macon-Bibb County who shall violate any of the term of this Code or commit any offense made unlawful in this section, upon conviction in the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County, shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. The conviction and payment of a fine therefor or other punishment shall not relieve any person of the duty to comply with the requirements of any of the provisions of this chapter or to pay any tax or fee applicable to such business. 
(2)  The municipal court, after affording the registrant notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if it finds this article to have been violated by the registrant, his agents or employees in the operation of the business, revoke the business registration certificate in its entirety, suspend such business registration certificate for a specified period of time, place the registrant on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the municipal court judge may deem necessary in addition to any other lawful punishment for violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 26-235. - Administration, enforcement. 
(a)  The department of business development services shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the application for an issuance of business registration certificate and the regulation of businesses under this chapter. 
(b)  It is hereby made the duty of the department of business development services and the office of the sheriff to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the department of business development services to inspect all registrations issued by Macon-Bibb County, as often as, in their judgment, it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. Summons may issue to any business found to be in violation of this chapter to appear before the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County for a determination of the matter. 
(c)  Any summons to appear before the municipal court issued pursuant to this section shall provide a statement of alleged violations which may constitute grounds for the revocation of any court business registration certificate or privilege license. 
(d)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the judge of the municipal court shall have jurisdiction by appropriate process to compel the presence of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records, or memoranda to enforce compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
Sec. 26-236. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
Sec. 26-237. - Regulation of privileged business unaffected. 
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to modify or repeal any provisions of the Macon-Bibb County Code or ordinances of the commission regulating holders of privileged licenses or levying taxes or fees with respect to the same. 
Secs. 26-238—26-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ENTERPRISE ZONES 

Sec. 26-300. - Legislative findings and intent; construction. 
Macon-Bibb County finds and determines that there is a need for revitalization in many areas of Macon-Bibb County. Revitalization will improve geographic areas within Macon-Bibb County which are suffering from disinvestment, underdevelopment, and economic decline and will encourage private businesses to reinvest and rehabilitate such areas. Macon-Bibb County recognizes that increased employment opportunities for the citizens of Macon-Bibb County will assist in the implementation of the redevelopment of Macon-Bibb County. It is the intent of Macon-Bibb County that this article be liberally construed to accomplish these purposes. 
Sec. 26-301. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Act means the Georgia Enterprise Zone Employment Act of 1997, codified at O.C.G.A. § 36-88-1 et seq. 
Ad valorem tax means property taxes levied for state, or local government operating purposes but does not include property taxes imposed by school districts or property taxes imposed for general obligation debt. 
Business enterprise means any business engaged primarily in retail, manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, processing, telecommunications, tourism, research and development industries, new residential construction, and residential rehabilitation. 
Department means the Macon-Bibb County department of business development services. 
Director means the director of the department of business development services. 
Enterprise zone means the geographic area(s) designated pursuant to section 26-302. 
Full-time job equivalent means a job or jobs with no predetermined end date, with a regular work week of 30 hours or more, and with the same benefits provided to similar employees. 
Low-income and moderate-income individual means a person currently: 
(1)  Unemployed or unemployed for three of the six months prior to the date of hire; 
(2)  Homeless; 
(3)  A resident of public housing; 
(4)  Receiving temporary assistance for needy families or who has received temporary assistance for needy families at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
(5)  A participant in the Workforce Investment Act or who has participated in the Workforce Investment Act at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
(6)  A participant in a job opportunity where basic skills are required or who has participated in such a job opportunity at any time during the 18 months previous to the date of hire; 
(7)  Receiving supplemental social security income; or 
(8)  Receiving food stamps. 
New job means employment for an individual created within an enterprise zone by a new or expanded qualified business or service enterprise at the time of the initial staffing of such new or expanded enterprise. 
Qualified or qualifying business means any business engaged primarily in retail, manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, processing, telecommunications, tourism, research and development industries, new residential construction, and residential rehabilitation. 
Service enterprise means an entity engaged primarily in finance, insurance, and real estate activity or activities listed under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes 60 through 67 according to the Federal Office of Management and Budget Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 edition, or engaged primarily in day-care activities. 
Urban redevelopment plan means the current plan prepared and adopted by Macon-Bibb County to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq. 
Sec. 26-302. - Designation of enterprise zone. 
(a)  Macon-Bibb County hereby designates the following areas as enterprise zones to be known collectively as the "Macon-Bibb County Enterprise Zone Area": 
(1)  Antioch road enterprise zone. Beginning at the intersection of Broadway and Eisenhower Parkway then heading west along Eisenhower to the intersection of Eisenhower and Houston Avenue then heading southwest along both sides of Houston Avenue to include frontage parcels on both the east and west sides of the road down to Guy Paine Road. Then at the intersection of Houston Avenue and Guy Paine Road heading east towards Broadway along Guy Paine then at the intersection of Broadway and Guy Paine heading northeast along Broadway including frontage parcels on both sides of Broadway to the point of beginning at the intersection of Broadway and Eisenhower Parkway. 
(2)  East Macon-Bibb County enterprise zone. Beginning at the intersection of Coliseum Drive and Clinton Street then heading north to Emery Highway then along Emery Highway to Jeffersonville Road heading northeast toward Millerfield Road then at the intersection of Millerfield and New Clinton Road heading north towards Shurling Drive. At the intersection of New Clinton Road and Shurling Drive heading west to Millerfield Road. Then heading northeast on Millerfield Road to the intersection of Millerfield Road and Fairway Drive then southeast on Fairway Drive to a point located at approximately 83°33'34.48" W and 32°51'41.86" N then south to follow the city limits of the previous City of Macon around the southern end of Bowden Golf Course to Recreation Road. At Recreation Road headed west to Masseyville Road then northeast at the intersection of Masseyville Road and Lakeshore Drive then following Lakeshore Drive to Recreation Road. Then heading west on Recreation Road to Jeffersonville Road to Emery Highway. Then at eastern boundary of the Ocmulgee National Monument, at a point located at approximately 83°36'15.81" W and 32°50'52.91" N, heading southwest and then south along the boundary of the Ocmulgee National Monument to Dunlap Street. Then heading south on Dunlap Street to the intersection of Dunlap and Fletcher Street then heading west on Fletcher then southwest on Fletcher to Clinton Street then heading northwest on Clinton to the point of beginning at the intersection of Clinton and Coliseum Drive. 
(b)  Macon-Bibb County finds the area(s) defined in subsection (a) meets the qualification of the Act by exhibiting the following factors: 
(1)  Pervasive poverty. The Macon-Bibb County enterprise zone area falls within several contiguous portions of census tracts block groups that have at least 15 percent poverty or greater. 
(2)  Underdevelopment. There is significant documentation of underdevelopment throughout Macon-Bibb County. Macon-Bibb County has identified many businesses closures and vacancies in both commercial and residential properties through the Macon-Bibb County enterprise zone area. 
(3)  General distress. Macon-Bibb County has documented significant general distress throughout the Macon-Bibb County enterprise zone area. Adverse conditions found in this area include code enforcement violations, crime, abandonment, dilapidated structures and infrastructure, all of which contributes to general distress. 
(4)  General blight. There is significant evidence of general blight in the Macon-Bibb County enterprise zone area and this has been documented, in part, through the adoption of the URP. 
(c)  Macon-Bibb County reserves the right to alter and amend this section so as to expand the geographic area of the existing enterprise zone or to create new enterprise zones if other geographic areas of Macon-Bibb County are found to meet the qualifications of the Act by exhibiting factors that will be outlined in the amendment of this section. 
Sec. 26-303. - Economic stimulus. 
By implementing this article, Macon-Bibb County intends that qualifying business provide "economic stimulus" by having each qualifying business or service enterprise provide increased employment of five or more new full-time job equivalents. The quality and quantity of such additional economic stimulus shall be determined, on a case-by-case basis, by Macon-Bibb County. Such business or service enterprise may be new, an expansion or reinvestment of an existing business or service enterprise, or a successor to such business or service enterprise. Whenever possible, ten percent of such new employees shall be low-income or moderate-income individuals. A minimum of five new full-time jobs must be maintained for a qualifying business or service enterprise to maintain eligibility for the incentives provided below. 
Sec. 26-304. - Enterprise zone tax incentives. 
(a)  In the area defined in section 26-302, Macon-Bibb County may exempt qualifying businesses from Macon-Bibb County ad valorem taxes, excluding property taxes imposed by school districts, that would otherwise be levied on the qualifying business and service enterprises in accordance with the following schedule hereafter referred to as the enterprise zone tax exemption schedule provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-8: 
(1)  One hundred percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the first five years; 
(2)  Eighty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next two years; 
(3)  Sixty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next year; 
(4)  Forty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the next year; and 
(5)  Twenty percent of the property taxes shall be exempt for the last year. 
(b)  A minimum of five new jobs must be maintained for a qualifying business or service enterprise to maintain eligibility for the tax exemptions, fee waivers, and abatements provided pursuant to this section. Each qualifying business or service enterprise receiving an exemption herein shall provide the director, by December 31 of each year, a written report on the full-time job equivalents maintained by the business for the calendar year. 
(c)  If the project consists of new residential construction, residential rehabilitation, or other rehabilitation of an existing structure and the value of the improvement exceeds the value of the land by a ratio of five to one, then the enterprise zone tax exemption schedule of this section shall also apply whether or not the project is carried out by a qualifying business or service enterprise. 
(d)  Failure of any qualifying business or service enterprise receiving an exemption under this section to maintain its status as a qualifying business or service enterprise shall result in revocation of all incentives granted prior to the expiration of the incentive term. 
(e)  Macon-Bibb County further authorizes the director to negotiate on a case-by-case basis additional incentives for qualified business, provided that the mayor and commission approve such additional incentives by resolution before they become effective. 
Sec. 26-305. - Reservation of authority. 
Macon-Bibb County is the authorized agency to act in all matters pertaining to the enterprise zone and reserves the power to grant the incentives listed to qualifying businesses in accordance with the authorization granted to Macon-Bibb County in the Act. The mayor and commission reserve the right to amend this article at some future time to provide additional development incentives as authorized by state law. Such additional incentives shall be applicable upon adoption of an amendment to this article and shall run coterminous with the existing tax incentives above described. 
Sec. 26-306. - Designation of liaison. 
The director is hereby designated as the liaison for communication with the state department of community affairs, other state agencies, the business community, and all other interested parties in regards to enterprise zone activities and for all communications with the qualified businesses outlined herein. 
Sec. 26-307. - Administration of program. 
Macon-Bibb County has the power to administer, require, and enforce compliance with the provisions of the ordinances and such administrative rules or regulations adopted hereinafter by way of resolution, or as contained herein, including but not limited to reports and data information, from businesses within the enterprise zone to verify compliance with this article and state law. 
Sec. 26-308. - Contract required for incentives. 
As a condition precedent to receiving the incentives provided for herein, Macon-Bibb County shall require qualifying business to enter into a contractual agreement, with Macon-Bibb County, that outlines the incentives offered to the business and a guideline for the recapture, revocation, or reimbursement should the terms of the contract be violated by the target business. 
Sec. 26-309. - Property tax exemption cap. 
In no event shall the value of the property tax exemptions granted to qualifying business and service enterprises within an enterprise zone created by Macon-Bibb County exceed ten percent of the value of the property tax digest of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 26-310. - Time limitations. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-88-10, the enterprise zone designated herein shall remain in existence for ten years from the first day of the calendar year immediately following its designation as an enterprise zone. Macon-Bibb County may enter into agreements with qualifying businesses or service enterprises in the enterprise zone to provide for modifications or termination of the tax and fee exemptions and abatements. Property tax incentives available to a qualified business or service enterprise in the enterprise zone shall remain in effect for the full ten-year period established herein, regardless of the termination of the designation of the enterprise zone. 
ARTICLE IX. - [REPAIR AND REGISTRATION OF PAVED, NON-PUBLIC, ROADS—] IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, adopted May 6, 2014 , set out provisions for use herein as art. I, "In General." For the purposes of clarity, those provisions have been included herein as art. IX, "Repair and Registration of Paved, Non-Public, Roads—In General." 

Sec. 26-311. - Constitutional Authority. 
The Commission is authorized pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VI of the Constitution of the State of Georgia to create special districts for the provision of local government services within such districts, and to levy and collect fees, assessments and taxes within such district to pay, wholly or partially, the cost of providing such services therein. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, 5-6-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-312. - Statement of Policy and Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide citizens of Macon-Bibb County with a procedure to petition for the repair and registration of paved roadways that have not been established as public roads of Macon-Bibb County so that they may be added to the Public Road Register and maintained as public road of Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, 5-6-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-313. - Definitions. 
Lot owner. The term "lot owner" as used in this ordinance shall include all persons holding fee simple title according to the real estate records of the County to real property within a proposed road repair district at the time the road repair petition and road registration deed form is submitted for the creation of said district as provided herein. For the purpose of the petitioning of the Macon-Bibb County Commission for the creation of a new road repair and registration tax district, the lot owner/owners shall have one vote per platted lot within a particular proposed road repair and registration district. "Lot owner" shall not include tenants in possession of property within the road repair and registration district. 
Road repair and registration district. The term "road repair and registration district" is a specific type of special tax district within Macon-Bibb County. A special tax district is authorized pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VI of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. Road repair and registration districts may be created in order for lot owners to amortize the cost of road repairs within the district where they are seeking to have said roads entered upon the Public Road Register. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, 5-6-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-314. - Districts; How Created; Responsibility for Costs. 
(a)  Any lot owner in Macon-Bibb County may present a Road Repair Petition and Road Registration Form to the Macon-Bibb County Engineering Department where said roadways are paved. 
(b)  The Road Repair Petition and Road Registration Deed Form must be completed in its entirety and a plat of the area to be repaired and registered attached to the form. 
(c)  The petitioner must obtain signatures from 50% + 1 (more than 50%) of the lot owners located in the potential road repair and registration tax district. The signatures must be notarized. Engineering, with assistance from the Macon-Bibb County Tax Assessors Office, will verify that the notarized signatures on the form represent the actual owners of record for each property. In addition, each form must designate a district resident as the "district contact person", responsible for communication between Macon-Bibb County and the district pertaining to its road repair and registration district. 
(d)  Unless 100% of the lot owners have signed the petition, the Macon-Bibb County Commission shall conduct at least one public hearing after having advertised the request one time in the official legal organ of Macon-Bibb County, and a sign or signs shall be posted in the proposed road repair and registration district giving notice of the hearing at least 10(ten) days before the public hearing. 
(e)  By signing the Road Repair Petition and Road Registration Deed Form, all petitioners within the subdivision or neighborhood shall be deemed to have actual or constructive notice of this ordinance and all the provisions contained herein, as well as the road repair and registration district. 
(f)  The Macon-Bibb County Engineering Department will provide an estimate for the cost of road repairs necessary to bring the roads up to standard. The estimate will be given to the property owners. 
(g)  The choice as to the type, method and time of the accomplishment of repairs shall be entirely discretionary with the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County. 
(h)  Special tax districts which shall be known as road repair and registration districts may be created upon the submission of the proper Road Repair Petition and Road Registration Deed Form to the Macon-Bibb County Engineering Department and submission of a resolution to the Macon-Bibb County Commission. Each new road repair and registration district so created shall be assigned a number and be designated by recorded plats showing each lot therein. 
(i)  A register of road repair and registration districts shall be maintained in the office of the Macon-Bibb Superior Court Clerk or his or her designee and the office of the Macon-Bibb County Tax Commissioner. Such registers shall be available to the public for inspection upon reasonable notice to either of these offices. 
(j)  The cost of repairing the paved road or roads shall be advanced by Macon-Bibb County. Macon-Bibb County shall have the authority to contract with the necessary parties to complete the job. This cost shall then be paid by the residents of the road repair and registration tax district and amortized up to a year or period of years as determined by the Macon-Bibb County Commission. The amortized cost of repairs shall be assigned to each platted lot. Each lot, whether vacant or improved, will pay the same assessment. The road repair and registration tax district shall end upon the payment of the amortized cost to Macon-Bibb County. 
(k)  Unless and until the Macon-Bibb County Commission shall have accepted the paved road(s) or street(s), the same shall not be deemed to be a public road so as to become a part of the Macon-Bibb County street and road system or to require maintenance and improvement by Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, 5-6-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-315. - Street/Road Standards. 
Street/road standards can be located in Chapter 25, Article II, Division 2 of the Code of Ordinances of Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, 5-6-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-316. - Lien of fees; payment; levy. 
(a)  The charges for road repair in each road repair and registration district shall be paid as a road repair assessment and shall be collected concurrently with the ad valorem tax billed to each lot owner within each road repair and registration tax district. The date for determining ownership of each lot shall be January 1 st of each year. 
(b)  The administration, payment and accounting of the amortized cost herein authorized shall be the responsibility of the Macon-Bibb County Commission or some department of the Macon-Bibb County government to which responsibility shall be assigned by the Macon-Bibb County Commission. Any proration of charges between the owners of lots to which title is transferred during any year shall be the responsibility of the buyers and sellers of such lots. 
(c)  The office of the Macon-Bibb County Tax Commissioner shall be responsible for the timely collection of taxes, fees and assessments assessed to each road repair and registration district and shall remit such sums to the Macon-Bibb County Commission in the same manner as other taxes are remitted. 
(d)  The fees herein prescribed shall be deemed in all respects to be governed by the rules and ordinances respecting ad valorem taxes in Macon-Bibb County. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, 5-6-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-317. - Liens. 
In addition to any other rights of collection for late or unpaid charges, Macon-Bibb County shall have all rights available under the laws of the State of Georgia for the assessment and creation of a lien upon the property of the owner receiving the service provided, together with all rights of execution, levy, foreclosure and sale. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, 5-6-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-318. - Applicability of ordinance. 
This ordinance shall only be applicable to paved road(s). Roads may become public roads by being dedicated and the County's acceptance as evidenced by resolution of the Macon-Bibb County Commission. By signing the road repair petition and road registration deed form, petitioners agree to dedicate for road purposes, the right-of-way for said roads in so far as his or her land is included in said right-of-way. The right-of-way must be surveyed and a plat of said survey shall be attached to the road repair petition and road registration form. The cost in obtaining said survey plat shall be incurred by petitioners. Where the right of way shown on the original plat of the subdivision is still valid, it will be deemed to meet this requirement. 
In order present Macon-Bibb County with fee simple title to the roads, the lot owners may have to locate the developer with the authority to deed over the roads to Macon-Bibb County. This will be at the expense of the lot owners and the lot owners may obtain representation by counsel to expedite the process at their own expense. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, 5-6-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-319. - Federal, State Laws to Prevail. 
If any provisions of this ordinance is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation, or any order of any agency of this state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this ordinance, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the Macon-Bibb County Commission that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order shall prevail such that the remaining portion of this ordinance shall be deemed to be of full force or effect. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, 5-6-2014 ) 
Sec. 26-320. - Exceptions. 
The Macon-Bibb County Commission may make exceptions to this ordinance when warranted by exceptional circumstances. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-32, § 1, 5-6-2014 ) 
Secs. 26-321—26-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MIDDLE GEORGIA EDUCATION CORRIDOR BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT (BID)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-0027, § 1, adopted June 16, 2015 , set out provisions for use herein as art. VIII. For the purposes of clarity, those provisions have been included herein as art. X. 

Sec. 26-400. - Findings. 
Section 36-43-1 et seq., O.C.G.A., authorizes municipalities to establish city business improvement districts for the purpose of providing supplemental service to such districts by imposing assessments on property. Macon-Bibb County has received a petition requesting the establishment of a city business improvement district for the Middle Georgia Education Corridor from property owners representing more than 51 percent of the total property value in the proposed district. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0027, § 1, 6-16-2015 ) 
Sec. 26-401. - Established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a business improvement district in Macon-Bibb County, Georgia known as the Middle Georgia Education Corridor Business Improvement District (the "district"). 
(b)  The legal boundaries of the district shall be set forth on an official map (the "business improvement district map") which is a part of an official plan for the district (the "district management plan") presented for final approval to the Macon-Bibb County Commission on June 16, 2015. A copy of the business improvement district map shall remain on file and available for inspection in the office of the Bibb County Tax Commissioner and the Macon-Bibb County Clerk of Commission. The business improvement district map is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0027, § 1, 6-16-2015 ) 
Sec. 26-402. - Adoption of district plan. 
(a)  The district management plan is hereby adopted and made a part of this section. A copy of the district management plan shall remain on file and available for inspection in the office of the Bibb County Tax Commissioner and the Macon-Bibb County Clerk of Commission. 
(b)  The Macon-Bibb County Commission shall have the right to amend the district management plan at such time or times as the Macon-Bibb County Commission may deem appropriate. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0027, § 1, 6-16-2015 ) 
Sec. 26-403. - Establishment of ad valorem tax rates. 
(a)  Excluding all real property classified as residential for assessment purposes, there is hereby established an annual millage rate of $0.005 Mills (Per Dollar of Assessed Value) upon all real property located within the district, which millage rate is in addition to all millage rates upon real property previously established for property located in the district. 
(b)  Notwithstanding annual assessment adjustments to reflect the annual change in the Middle Georgia Education Corridor Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all urban consumers as authorized under Section Six (6) of the district management plan, the millage rate authorized pursuant to this section shall be subject to change annually by the Macon-Bibb County Commission at the time that Macon-Bibb County approves its annual operating and capital improvements budgets, and at such other times as may be deemed appropriate by the Macon-Bibb County Commission; provided, however, that in no event shall the millage rate change authorized in this section or the district management plan exceed one (1) Mill. 
(c)  Excluding real property classified as residential for assessment purposes, the taxes established or authorized pursuant to this section shall be assessed against the real property in the district, shall be liens upon that property until paid, and such liens shall be enforceable in the same manner as other Macon-Bibb County tax liens. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0027, § 1, 6-16-2015 ) 
Sec. 26-404. - Collection and expenditure of funds. 
All funds collected pursuant to this article may only be expended for supplemental services provided in the district management plan (as may be amended from time to time and) adopted by the Macon-Bibb County Commission. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0027, § 1, 6-16-2015 ) 
Sec. 26-405. - Termination of District. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Sec. 36-43-9, the district will have a six (6) year life span beginning July 1, 2015, and ending June 30, 2021. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0027, § 1, 6-16-2015 ) 
Chapter 27 - TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - TAXICABS 

Secs. 27-1—27-25. - Reserved. 
Sec. 27-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
License means a business licensed issued under the licenses and business regulations chapter of this Code and under this chapter. 
Limousine means a motor-driven vehicle of not more than a nine-passenger capacity operated by the owner thereof, or an agent, lessee or employee of the owner and which is regularly available to the public to transport persons for profit, from point to point within and about Macon-Bibb County, the charges to be based primarily on the length of time the vehicle is used. 
Permit means a permit granting an individual the permission to operate a taxicab within Macon-Bibb County. 
Taxicab means a motor-driven vehicle of not more than an eight-passenger capacity, operated by the owner thereof, or an agent, lessee or employee of the owner and which is regularly available to the public to transport persons for profit, from point to point within and about Macon-Bibb County, the charges to be based primarily on the distance traveled. 
Taxicab business means any separately owned and operated taxicab, a fleet of owned or leased taxicabs, or fleet of taxicabs owned separately but operating under one name. 
Sec. 27-27. - License; application procedure. 
(a)  Required. Every person desiring to operate a taxicab business within Macon-Bibb County or on any Macon-Bibb County property outside Macon-Bibb County shall be required to have a license as defined in this article. 
(b)  Application information. Any person seeking a license hereunder, in addition to meeting the business license application requirements generally, shall also provide the department of business development services with the make, model, year, motor number, length of time in use, total mileage, and passenger capacity of each vehicle to be used as a taxicab in the taxicab business for which the application is being made. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Rate schedule. Macon-Bibb County shall maintain a rate schedule for the licenses to be issued under this article, such schedule to be based on the number of taxicabs to be operated in the taxicab business. 
(e)  Liability insurance. Every applicant for a taxicab business license shall, before the license is granted, deposit with the department of business development services, for each taxicab for which the privilege to operate is sought, a policy or certificate of liability insurance which meets the minimum requirements prescribed by the state for liability insurance policies on automobiles, presently contained in O.C.G.A. § 33-34-4, and as may be hereafter amended. The certificate or policy of insurance shall identify by serial number all vehicles insured under the policy and shall contain a provision obligating the insurance company issuing such policy to give at least ten days' written notice of cancellation or change in the policy to the department of business development services. In lieu of such policy or certificate of insurance, an applicant may deposit a certificate of self-insurance required from the department of public safety of the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-9-101. The license for the operation of the taxicab business shall expire upon the lapse or cancellation or termination or revocation of any policy or certificate of contract of insurance or any certificate of self-insurance covering any taxicab operated by the taxicab business. 
(f)  Issuance. Upon compliance with the requirements of this section, the payment of all appropriate license fees and business taxes, and meeting the other requirements as may be prescribed in this article, the department of business development services may issue the taxicab business license, numbered copies of which shall be provided for each vehicle. 
(g)  Penalty. No vehicle shall be operated as a taxicab upon the streets of Macon-Bibb County unless such vehicle has been licensed under the provisions of this article for use as a taxicab. The operator of any vehicle operating as a taxicab without having a current valid license for that vehicle shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00. This subsection shall not apply to a taxicab licensed in another jurisdiction which delivers a passenger to Macon-Bibb County from another city or county or picks up a passenger in Macon-Bibb County for transport to another city or county. 
Sec. 27-28. - Operator's permit. 
(a)  Every person desiring to operate a taxicab within Macon-Bibb County or on any Macon-Bibb County property outside Macon-Bibb County shall be required to have an operator's permit issued by the department of business development services officer under this Code. This subsection shall not apply to a taxicab licensed in another jurisdiction which delivers a passenger to Macon-Bibb County from another city or county or picks up a passenger in Macon-Bibb County for transport to another city or county. 
(b)  Applicants for a taxicab operator's permit shall register with the department of business development services, furnishing name, address, a valid driver's license issued by the state, a set of three photographs which clearly and accurately depict the applicant's face from full front view, and any other information the department of business development services may reasonably require. The applicant shall also allow his fingerprints to be taken by the sheriff. 
(c)  The application shall be reviewed by the sheriff for any criminal record and for any record of traffic violations. Notwithstanding the date of conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any offense described in subsections (d) or (e), the fact that an applicant is on probation or parole as a result of any such offense may be a factor considered by the issuing authority in determining whether to issue a taxicab operator's permit. 
(d)  No person shall be issued a permit to operate a taxicab in Macon-Bibb County if the records check reveals any of the following conditions: 
(1)  A conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere to an offense constituting a felony against the person of another within the five years immediately preceding the application for such permit; 
(2)  A conviction, plea of guilty, or nolo contendere to any other felony within three years immediately preceding the application for such permit; 
(3)  A conviction, plea of guilty, or nolo contendere to an offense involving prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or the illegal manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages or drugs during the three years immediately preceding the date of application for such permit; or 
(4)  A conviction, plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere to DUI (driving under the influence) during the year immediately preceding the date of application for such permit. 
(e)  An applicant having two or more convictions, pleas of guilty or pleas of nolo contendere to DUI during a three year period of time shall not be eligible to receive to taxicab operator's permit for a period of five years following the date of the most recent DUI conviction or plea. 
(f)  Applicants for a taxicab operator's permit shall be required to sign an agreement whereby they obligate themselves to meet minimum dress code requirements and standards of conduct and appearance as set out below. 
(1)  Drivers shall be clean and neat in appearance. A shirt must be worn; no sleeveless or collarless shirts or blouses; no cut-off pants. 
(2)  Drivers shall be clean-shaven or shall maintain neatly trimmed mustaches or beards. 
(g)  After investigation and approval by the sheriff, the payment of a $15.00 license fee and meeting other requirements of this chapter, Macon-Bibb County may issue the operator's permit as required by this article. 
(h)  The operator's permit shall be displayed within the taxicab being operated, in plain view of passengers, whenever the taxicab is in operation. 
Sec. 27-29. - License amendment. 
(a)  Any person receiving a license under this article shall be required to amend the license application, originally filed for the license, to include new taxicabs or exclude old taxicabs promptly upon adding or deleting such vehicles from the taxicab business so that an up-to-date list of operating taxicabs may be maintained. 
(b)  The numbered license tag issued by the department of business development services for each vehicle is not transferable and shall be turned in to the department of business development services when the vehicle for which it was originally issued is deleted from the taxicab business. When a license is amended to add an additional vehicle, the appropriate information must be furnished, an additional license fee paid (if the addition of such vehicle would put the total number of vehicles operated by the taxicab business up into the next bracket), and when other requirements of this article are met, Macon-Bibb County may issue an additional numbered copy of the original taxicab business license. 
(c)  Each licensee hereunder shall also provide the department of business development services with proof that any new taxicab added to application is fully insured as required under this article. 
Sec. 27-30. - Identification; visibility. 
(a)  Each taxicab licensed to operate in Macon-Bibb County will have the name of the company clearly and permanently displayed on each of the two front doors, and also on both front and rear of the taxicab. Each taxicab shall also have its operating number clearly and permanently displayed on both sides and on the front and rear of the vehicle. The letters and numbers required in this section shall be a minimum of three and one-half inches in height. The numbered and non-transferable license tag issued by Macon-Bibb County is to be visibly displayed in the rear window or on the rear bumper of each taxicab. 
(b)  The rate schedule for fares to be charged shall be posted on the exterior of the taxicab, so as to be plainly visible to passengers entering the taxicab. Rates calculated by a meter, pursuant to section 27-36(c) shall be posted on a mile basis; rates calculated on a zoned rate pursuant to section 27-36(d) are not required to be posted on the exterior of the taxicab but shall be displayed as required by section 27-36(i). 
(c)  Each taxicab shall display a sign with the telephone number of Macon-Bibb County's customer service coordinator on the back of the driver's seat in a manner that is easily visible to passengers. The form and content of the sign shall be in accordance with specifications on file and available for public inspection at the department of business development services. 
Sec. 27-31. - Deviation from direct route unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and also grounds for revocation of an operator's permit to proceed other than by the most practical and direct route to the destination of the passengers carried, unless specifically requested to follow another route by the passengers. 
(b)  The operator of each taxicab shall maintain in the taxicab a suitable map or street guide of Macon-Bibb County and shall make the same available to passengers upon request. 
Sec. 27-32. - Additional passengers. 
(a)  No additional person, other than the driver, shall be allowed to occupy any taxicab while picking up passengers except a driver trainee or those persons having written permission from the taxicab business. No additional passengers shall be picked up by any taxicab without the consent of the passengers first engaging transportation in the taxicab. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab to operate the taxicab with more than seven persons, exclusive of the driver. 
Sec. 27-33. - Fare disputes. 
(a)  Any fare dispute arising between any taxicab operator and any passenger shall be reported to the nearest available law enforcement officer who shall summon all disputing parties for appearance in the municipal court for a resolution of the dispute by the judge. 
(b)  The judge may find grounds to bind over the passenger for theft of services under state law or may suspend for up to 30 days the operator's permit issued hereunder for intentional overcharge or failure of consideration. If the operator has a history of intentional overcharge or failure of consideration, by having been in court for a fare dispute on two or more occasions within the 12-month period immediately preceding the current dispute, the judge may suspend the operator's permit issued hereunder for up to 90 days. 
(c)  The above-referenced penalties are intended to be inclusive only of the fare dispute, and either driver or passenger may be cited for additional Code or state law violations, as appropriate. 
Sec. 27-34. - Additional rules authorized. 
(a)  The mayor is fully authorized and empowered to adopt additional regulations respecting taxicabs, operators and drivers consistent with this Code and state law, and to designate, and from time to time change or eliminate, taxicab stands or parking areas. 
(b)  These additional regulations shall become effective after approval by the mayor and after being filed with the county clerk unless disapproved within 15 days of such filing by motion of the commission. 
(c)  The commission may, by resolution, amend these regulations at any time. 
Sec. 27-35. - License, permit revocation. 
Any license or permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the municipal court upon a finding that any provision of this article has been violated or that the person or business holding the license or permit no longer meets the standards required for the issuance of the license or permit. 
Sec. 27-36. - Rates for taxicab fares. 
(a)  The maximum taxicab rates for Macon-Bibb County are hereby established, and it shall be a violation of this Code to charge more than the maximum amounts allowed hereunder. 
(b)  Meters. 
(1)  Every taxicab operating in Macon-Bibb County shall be equipped with a meter which shall accurately calibrate the distance traveled and calculate the fare charged to the passenger in accordance with the rate scale included in subsection (c), provided that any taxicab business licensed and operating in the City of Macon in 1988 shall be allowed to continue to calculate the fare using the zoned map and schedule of charges as set forth under subsection (d). 
(2)  The meter, once calibrated, shall be closed and sealed to prevent any tampering with the meter. No person shall operate a taxicab with a meter that is not properly sealed. 
(c)  A taxicab using a meter shall not charge more than $2.25 for the initial pickup of a passenger and the first one-tenth of a mile traveled by that passenger; for each additional one-tenth of a mile traveled by that passenger, there shall be charges not to exceed $0.15. 
(d)  For those taxicabs authorized to use the zoned map, the following definitions and rates shall apply: 
(1)  East Macon shall mean the area north/northeast across the Ocmulgee River from downtown, extended to the city limits of the City of Macon as they existed immediately prior to the commencement of the government of Macon-Bibb County. 
(2)  Vineville Area shall mean any area northwest of downtown bounded by Forsyth Street and Vineville Avenue on the west and the Ocmulgee River on the east, extended out to the city limits of the City of Macon as they existed immediately prior to the commencement of the government of Macon-Bibb County. 
(3)  West Macon shall mean any area west of downtown bounded on the east by Forsyth Street/Vineville and on the west by the Eisenhower Parkway and extended out to the city limits the City of Macon as they existed immediately prior to the commencement of the government of Macon-Bibb County. 
(4)  South Macon shall mean the area south/southwest of downtown Macon bounded on the north by Eisenhower Parkway and on the east by the Ocmulgee River extending out to the city limits the City of Macon as they existed immediately prior to the commencement of the government of Macon-Bibb County. 
(5)  Downtown shall mean the area bounded on the north by Riverside Drive, on the west by College Street, on the south by Oglethorpe Street, and on the east by Seventh Street. 
There shall be roughly concentric rings drawn and overlayed over the zones hereinbefore described, and a taxicab using this rate structure shall not be allowed to charge more than the amount specified in the accompanying schedule, per ring boundary/zone boundary traversed. 
(e)  In addition to the basic rates established in this section, these additional charges are hereby authorized: 
(1)  Grocery packages, each ..... N/C 
(2)  Large containers, each ..... N/C 
(3)  Overnight bags ..... N/C 
(4)  Suitcase, each ..... 0.25 
(5)  Footlocker, each ..... 1.25 
(6)  Passenger (additional): 
a.  Under 1 year old ..... N/C 
b.  1—6 years old, each ..... 0.50 
c.  7 years and above, each ..... 1.00 
(7)  Waiting time, per hour ..... 20.00 
(8)  Wheelchairs of handicapped passengers ..... N/C 
(f)  Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit agencies of the local, state or federal government from executing informal written contracts with taxicab companies for the transportation of their handicapped patients at the expense of the agency involved. A copy of the contract shall be filed in the county clerk's office. 
(g)  Nothing contained in this article shall obligate a taxicab operator to bodily lift a handicapped passenger into or from a taxicab. 
(h)  The two methods of calculating the basic charges are exclusive of one another, and any taxicab equipped with a meter shall charge by the use of the meter exclusively. 
(i)  Those taxicab businesses electing to use the zone map shall keep a certified copy of the map and a rate schedule prepared by Macon-Bibb County in each taxicab and make the same readily available to any passenger, upon request. 
Sec. 27-37. - Inspections by Macon-Bibb County. 
(a)  Annual inspections required. In addition to any other inspections required by law, each taxicab that require a license or permit to operate in Macon-Bibb County shall be subject to an annual inspection conducted by the Macon-Bibb County vehicle maintenance department. 
(b)  Inspection prior to issuance and renewal of license. Before a license required under this article is issued or renewed, the applicant shall deliver each taxicab listed in the license application to the Macon-Bibb County vehicle maintenance department for inspection to verify compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Random inspections. Throughout the year, each taxicab shall be subject to random inspections to verify compliance with the provisions of this article. Upon reasonable notice, the Macon-Bibb County vehicle maintenance department will notify the taxicab businesses to deliver the randomly selected taxicab(s) to the Macon-Bibb County vehicle maintenance department for inspection. Random inspections shall be free of charge. 
(d)  Inspection sticker. Each taxicab passing the annual inspection shall have affixed to the lower right rear windshield an inspection sticker issued by Macon-Bibb County. The inspection sticker shall indicate the date of the inspection and the number of the Macon-Bibb County-issued license tag. 
(e)  Correction slip. If a taxicab fails to pass inspection, the Macon-Bibb County vehicle maintenance department shall issue a correction slip to the operator, listing the items that need correction and showing the status of the inspection. The Macon-Bibb County vehicle maintenance department shall forward a copy of the correction slip to the department of business development services and the taxicab business. The Macon-Bibb County license inspector may issue citations to the operator and the taxicab business for any deficiencies listed in the correction slip. 
(f)  Immediate hazard . If the items that need correction constitute an immediate hazard, the Macon-Bibb County vehicle maintenance department shall remove the previous inspection sticker, if any, and it shall be unlawful to operate the vehicle as a taxicab until it successfully passes inspection. Immediate hazards include, but are not limited to, the following deficiencies: 
(1)  Inoperable brake lights. (Section 27-39(b)). 
(2)  Inoperable door handle. (Section 27-40(a)). 
(3)  Inoperable turn signal. (Section 27-39(b)). 
(4)  Air conditioner does not cool (summer time). (Section 27-38(g)). 
(5)  Heater does not warm up (winter time). (Section 27-38(f)). 
(6)  Balding tires with thread showing. (Section 27-40(f)). 
(7)  Broken windshield. (Section 27-40(b)). 
(8)  No spare tire or jack in trunk. (Section 27-40(h)). 
(9)  Spare tire is balding with thread showing. (Section 27-40(h)). 
(10)  Excessive engine oil or other fluid leaks that may be a fire hazard. (Section 27-40(j)). 
(11)  Brake system deficiencies. (Section 27-40(c)). 
(12)  Excessive wear to suspension or steering components. (Section 27-40(e)). 
(g)  Other deficiencies. If the deficiencies in need of correction do not constitute an immediate hazard, the deficiencies shall be corrected and the taxicab shall be returned to the Macon-Bibb County vehicle maintenance department for re-inspection within 30 calendar days of the first inspection. Upon failure to correct the deficiencies and/or return the taxicab for re-inspection within the time limits stated, the previous inspection sticker, if any, shall be removed by the Macon-Bibb County vehicle maintenance department or the taxicab business, and it shall be unlawful to continue to operate the vehicle as a taxicab until it successfully passes inspection. 
(h)  Inspection fee. The fee for the annual inspection shall be $25.00 and shall be the responsibility of the taxicab business. An additional fee of $10.00 shall be charged for each required re-inspection. 
(i)  Failure to cooperate. Taxicab operators and taxicab businesses shall be prohibited from refusing to display to Macon-Bibb County license inspectors or law enforcement officers any information required by this article, and shall be prohibited from failing to cooperate with Macon-Bibb County license inspectors in performing their duties. 
(j)  Law enforcement officers. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude sworn law enforcement officers from issuing citations for deficiencies or other violations of the law that are evident upon visual inspection. 
(k)  Responsibility for compliance. It shall be unlawful for any operator to drive or move, or for a taxicab business to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any street or highway in Macon-Bibb County any taxicab that is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or that does not comply at all times with the requirements of sections 27-38, 27-39 and 27-40. 
Sec. 27-38. - Interior requirements. 
(a)  Rearview mirror. Every taxicab shall be equipped with an adjustable rearview mirror installed within the driver's compartment so as to enable the operator to obtain a reasonably clear view toward the rear. 
(b)  Upholstery. All upholstery covering in any taxicab shall be of leather or other nonabsorbent or washable material. 
(c)  Carpet and headliners. Carpet remnants cannot be used to cover holes. Dirty carpet must be cleaned; if cleaning does not remove spots, the carpet must be replaced. No staples or thumbtacks will be allowed to repair and/or replace headliners. Any holes in the carpet will require the carpet to be repaired or replaced. 
(d)  Tape. No tape or wire is allowed on any interior part of a taxicab to repair damages (e.g., seats, arm rests, dash board or headliners). 
(e)  Floor mats. Floor mats shall be provided of rubber or other washable material and shall at all times be removable. No taxicab shall have on the floor thereof any footrest, bracket or other fixture extending above the top of the floor mat. 
(f)  Heater. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a properly functioning heater sufficient to heat the interior of the cab adequately in cold weather. 
(g)  Air conditioner. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a properly functioning air conditioner sufficient to cool the interior of the cab adequately in hot weather. 
(h)  Passenger compartment light. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a passenger compartment light adequate to illuminate the interior of the passenger compartment. 
(i)  Litter. There shall be no litter in the vehicle or trunk. 
(j)  Cleaning. The interior of each taxicab shall be cleaned on a regular basis and a clean and sanitary appearance shall be maintained. 
(k)  Fire extinguisher. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a properly functioning fire extinguisher. 
Sec. 27-39. - Exterior requirements. 
(a)  Windshield wipers. In addition to complying with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-8-73, every taxicab shall be equipped with double windshield wipers, properly installed and maintained at all times in good working order. 
(b)  Lights. No red light shall be visible from the front of any taxicab operating on the streets of Macon-Bibb County. In addition to complying with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-22, 40-8-23, 40-8-25, and 40-8-26, every taxicab shall be equipped with two properly functioning headlights and standard rear lights so placed and constructed as to show a steady white light on the license plate sufficient to illuminate the figures thereon and render them discernible at night at a distance of 100 feet, and the view of such license plate shall at all times be unobstructed. Every taxicab shall be equipped with properly functioning taillights, brake lights, and directional signal lights. 
(c)  Grill. The grill must be in place and complete. 
(d)  Body. All exterior bodywork shall be maintained in good condition and free of tears and rust holes. No loose pieces such as fenders, bumpers or trim shall hang from the vehicle body. There shall be no body damage or any body condition that would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. 
(e)  Paint. All exterior paintwork shall be maintained in good condition, free of substantial paint damage, chips and abrasions. Paint must be well blended with the natural configuration and color of the vehicle. Any repairs undertaken as a result of damage, that requires repainting the vehicle, or a portion of the vehicle, must be completed within 30 days of the damage to the vehicle. 
(f)  Glass. All windshield and window glass shall be maintained free from cracks, scratches, pitting, abrasions or any other conditions that significantly reduce clarity of vision. 
(g)  Cleaning. The exterior of each taxicab shall maintain a clean and sanitary appearance. 
Sec. 27-40. - General construction and equipment requirements. 
(a)  Doors. Each taxicab shall have properly functioning doors. All doors shall open from the inside and the outside with properly functioning door handles. 
(b)  Windshield and windows. In addition to complying with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-73 and 40-8-78, the windshield and all windows in both the driver's compartment and the passenger compartment shall be of shatterproof safety glass and shall not be broken. Windows shall open and close properly. 
(c)  Brakes. In addition to complying with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-50 through 40-8-54, all taxicabs shall be equipped with properly functioning four-wheel foot brakes. Foot brakes shall be so maintained as to operate upon all four wheels and shall be capable of stopping the vehicle within 22 feet at a speed of 20 miles per hour upon a smooth, dry roadway. All taxicabs shall be equipped with a parking brake, which shall operate upon the drive shaft or the rear wheels of the vehicle independently of the foot brakes. 
(d)  Bumpers. All taxicabs shall be equipped with bumpers, both front and rear. Front bumpers shall be in one solid piece, and rear bumpers may be of one or two pieces (bumperettes) securely fastened to the frame of the vehicle. 
(e)  Suspension components. In addition to complying with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-8-6, all suspension components affecting the ride and safety of the vehicle shall be maintained such that they comply with the manufacturer's specifications. 
(f)  Tires and wheels. In addition to complying with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-8-74, tires shall have a minimum tread of three-thirty-seconds. Wheels shall not be bent or damaged. All lug nuts shall be in tact. 
(g)  Speedometer. In addition to complying with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-8-8, every taxicab shall be equipped with a standard speedometer properly installed, maintained in good working order and exposed to view. 
(h)  Spare tire, jack, lug wrench. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a jack, a lug wrench, and at least one spare tire, which shall at all times be kept inflated to the required pressure and meet the requirements of subsection (f). 
(i)  Trunk. The trunk shall be free of litter and have sufficient space for passengers' luggage. 
(j)  Fluid leaks. There shall be no leaks of engine oil or other fluids creating a fire hazard. 
Sec. 27-41. - Use of radios. 
It shall be unlawful to use a radio, compact disc player, tape player, or similar device if objected to by a passenger; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit the use of a radio used for receiving and transmitting messages from or to the office or headquarters of the taxicab business. 
Sec. 27-42. - Smoking prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab operator to smoke, or to permit any passenger to smoke, in a taxicab while such taxicab is transporting passengers. Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other smoking equipment in any manner or form. 
Sec. 27-43. - Enforcement. 
The general business license provisions of this Code, relating to regulated businesses generally, shall apply to the enforcement and administration of this article. 
Sec. 27-44. - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a taxicab or taxicab business to do any of the acts forbidden by this article or to fail to do any of the acts required by this article. Violations of this article are punishable in accordance with the general penalty provisions of the code and are grounds for suspension and revocation of any license or permit issued under this article. 
Sec. 27-45. - Age limit of taxicabs. 
Any taxicab added to a taxicab fleet shall not be more than ten model years old. No taxicab licensed by Macon-Bibb County shall be older than ten model years. 
Sec. 27-46. - Taxicab advisory committee. 
The taxicab advisory committee which shall meet as needed, but no less than semi-annually to review complaints, and make recommendations to Macon-Bibb County for improvements in the taxicab industry. The taxicab advisory committee members shall be appointed for four year terms by the mayor and members of the taxicab advisory committee shall serve as members this committee without pay and compensation of any kind from Macon-Bibb County. At the initial meeting of the advisory committee, the committee shall elect a chairperson from among its members and may establish bylaws to govern its procedures. The taxicab advisory committee shall be comprised of the following seven members: 
(1)  A taxicab company owner headquartered within Macon-Bibb County; 
(2)  A taxicab operator who resides in Macon-Bibb County and who is not in the employment of the taxicab company owner on the taxicab advisory committee; 
(3)  A representative of the Macon-Bibb County convention and visitor's bureau; 
(4)  The mayor of Macon-Bibb County, or his or her designee; 
(5)  The chairperson of the public safety committee of the commission, or his or her designee; and 
(6)  Two independent citizens that use the taxicab business services. 
Upon the receipt of a written complaint, or proposed recommendations, the taxicab advisory committee shall convene within a reasonable time to hear the complaints or to receive recommendation. Decisions and recommendations of the committee shall be by majority vote. 
Secs. 27-47—27-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WRECKERS 

Sec. 27-56. - Definition. 
The term "wrecker," as used in this article, means an automobile vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing wrecked or disabled automobiles or other vehicles, or a tilt body truck with skids (skid truck) used to tow or carry disabled automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" also includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for purposes of towing or carrying wrecked or disabled automobiles or other vehicles. 
Sec. 27-57. - License required; application; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or operate upon any of the streets of Macon-Bibb County any wrecker, as defined in this article, without first having obtained a business license issued by Macon-Bibb County under and required by this article. 
(b)  Any person, either as principal, agent or employee, that owns a wrecker or wrecker service with a principal or branch office in Macon-Bibb County or which generates 50 percent of its gross income from business within Macon-Bibb County, shall be required to meet the business license application requirements generally, and shall also provide the sheriff with the make, model, manufacturer's serial number of the vehicle, the date the vehicle was put into service as a wrecker, and the driver's license number of all operators of the wrecker. The name and address of the insurance company with which the owner and all operators have liability insurance coverage with respect to the operation of the vehicle as required by law shall be filed with the county clerk. This section shall not apply to any person obtaining a wrecker to service its own private vehicles used in the operation of the business for which it is engaged, but lettering of said wrecker as set forth in section 27-58 shall be required. 
Sec. 27-58. - Lettering on vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or operate upon any street of Macon-Bibb County any wrecker, as defined in this article, unless the vehicle shall have lettered on each side in plain view the following information: 
(1)  The name of the person owning and causing the wrecker to operate on the streets of Macon-Bibb County shall be permanently printed in letters not less than four inches in height; 
(2)  The address from which the wrecker is operating; and 
(3)  The telephone number shall be in letters not less than two and one-half inches in height. This lettering shall be in a contrasting color to the color of the wrecker. 
Sec. 27-59. - Call to accident scene required; monitoring police radio unlawful; clearing of debris. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker, his agent or employee, to go to any place where an accident has occurred for the purpose of picking up a disabled vehicle, unless called by the driver or the owner of the disabled vehicle, a law enforcement agency, or by the owner's authorized representative or employee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker, his agent, representative or employee, to go to any place where an accident has occurred by reason of information received by a police radio. 
(c)  Prior to towing a vehicle from any site where an accident has occurred, the employee of a wrecker service shall clear the road surface of all broken glass and debris resulting from the accident. 
Sec. 27-60. - Solicitation of towing work prohibited—By vehicle driver or occupant. 
It shall be unlawful to drive along any Macon-Bibb County street or bridge and solicit towing work. Solicitation of towing work by the operator or the occupant of a wrecker while parked on any Macon-Bibb County street or bridge located within Macon-Bibb County is also prohibited. A wrecker operator shall not proceed to the scene of a disabled vehicle without having been requested or notified to do so. 
Sec. 27-61. - Same—By Macon-Bibb County employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any Macon-Bibb County employee to solicit business for any wrecker owner or operator. 
Sec. 27-62. - Revocation or suspension of license for article violations. 
Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the municipal court upon finding that any provision of this article has been violated or that the person or business holding the license no longer meets the standards required for the issuance of the license. 
Secs. 27-63—27-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES 

Sec. 27-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Horse-drawn vehicle means any vehicle which is operated or pulled by a horse which may be hired for the transportation of passengers and is operated within Macon-Bibb County. 
License means a business license issued under the general business license chapter of this Code and under this chapter. 
Permit means the grant by Macon-Bibb County to operate a horse-drawn vehicle upon the public streets of Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 27-82. - License required; application information; issuance. 
(a)  Every person desiring to own and operate a horse-drawn vehicle business within Macon-Bibb County or regularly carrying on the business of a horse-drawn vehicle service within Macon-Bibb County or on any Macon-Bibb County property outside Macon-Bibb County shall be required to have a business license issued by Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  A horse-drawn vehicle business seeking a license hereunder, in addition to meeting the business license application requirements generally, shall also provide the following information: 
(1)  The kind, make, and model of the vehicles to be used in the business, together with the safety and sanitation devices and methods to be employed. 
(2)  A certificate of compliance from the animal control director stating that the applicant meets all of the standards of the animal control division concerning horse-drawn carriages. 
(3)  An insurance certificate providing that the applicant has met the insurance requirements of this article. 
(4)  Any supplementary information Macon-Bibb County shall at any time demand in order to reasonably determine whether the request for a license should be granted. 
(c)  Upon submission of all required information and payment of all appropriate license fees and business taxes and meeting all requirements hereunder, Macon-Bibb County shall issue the horse-drawn vehicle license, numbered copies of which shall be displayed in all horse-drawn vehicles of the business as well as at the place of business. 
(d)  If Macon-Bibb County finds that the application is not in order or that the preconditions to the issuance of the license have not been met, Macon-Bibb County shall deny the horse-drawn vehicle license. 
Sec. 27-83. - Operator's permit. 
(a)  No person shall operate a horse-drawn vehicle upon the streets of Macon-Bibb County unless such person shall have first obtained a permit from Macon-Bibb County and been certified as to fitness to operate such horse-drawn vehicle by the sheriff. 
(b)  Applicants for a horse-drawn vehicle operator's permit shall register with Macon-Bibb County, furnishing name, address, a valid driver's license issued by the state, driver's license number, and a set of three photographs, and any other information Macon-Bibb County may require. Upon being fingerprinted by the sheriff and receiving approval by said department, the applicant may be issued a horse-drawn vehicle operator's permit upon payment of a fee. Such fee shall be an amount to be set as provided in the business license fee ordinance of Macon-Bibb County and such fee shall be payable annually upon renewal of such permit as required by this article. Such permit shall be displayed within the vehicle in plain view of passengers when the vehicle is in operation. 
(c)  No person shall be issued a permit to operate a horse-drawn vehicle in Macon-Bibb County who has been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to an offense constituting a felony against the person of another within five years immediately preceding the application for such permit. 
(d)  No person shall be issued a permit to operate a horse-drawn vehicle in Macon-Bibb County if such person has been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any other felony within three years immediately preceding the application for such permit. 
(e)  Subsections (c) and (d) shall apply whether the offenses were committed within the state or elsewhere. 
Sec. 27-84. - Revocation. 
Any license or permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by the municipal court after affording the licensee or permittee notice of the charges and an opportunity to be heard. Upon a finding that any provision of this chapter has been violated by the licensee or permittee, his agent or employee, or that the business no longer meets the standard required for the issuance of the license, the municipal court may revoke the license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the judge may deem necessary in addition to any other lawful punishment for violation of this Code. 
Sec. 27-85. - Compliance with traffic regulations. 
A permittee, having been issued a permit under this article to operate a horse-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to all traffic provisions of this Code, and all other traffic ordinances, rules and regulations of Macon-Bibb County and state. 
Sec. 27-86. - Liability insurance required. 
Every applicant for a horse-drawn vehicle business license shall, before the license is granted, deposit with Macon-Bibb County, for each vehicle for which the privilege to operate is sought, a policy or certificate of liability insurance, providing coverage for the applicant in the sum of at least the minimum amount of liability insurance for personal injury and property damage required by the state for motor vehicles. The certificate of policies of liability insurance shall be issued by a company or companies authorized to do business in the state. The certificate or policy of insurance shall identify all vehicles under the policy and shall contain a provision obligating the insurance company issuing such policy to give at least ten days written notice of cancellation or change of the policy to Macon-Bibb County. The license for the operation of the horse-drawn vehicle business shall expire upon the lapse, cancellation, termination or revocation of any policy or certificate of contract of insurance on any horse-drawn vehicle operated under the business. 
Sec. 27-87. - Violation of animal control division regulations. 
Any violation by the licensee of any regulation of the animal control division pertaining to horse-drawn carriages shall be considered a violation of this Code and punishable in the municipal court. 
Chapter 28 - TRAFFIC AND PARKING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - State law relative to operating motor vehicle without insurance adopted. 
O.C.G.A. § 36-32-7, dealing with operating a motor vehicle without insurance, is hereby adopted by reference as part of this Code, as if such code section were published in full herein. 
Sec. 28-2. - Vehicles to be marked; exceptions. 
(a)  All motor vehicles owned, leased or operated by Macon-Bibb County or any agency or department thereof shall display at all times upon the center of the exterior door surface (or in the case of four-door automobiles, upon the center of each front door surface) and upon each side thereof a decal in such form as shall from time to time be furnished by the manager and which shall show thereon the Macon-Bibb County seal so as to identify the motor vehicle as being one owned, leased or operated by Macon-Bibb County. Excepted from the provisions hereof, however, shall be motor vehicles used by the investigators of the county sheriff's office, four surveillance cars selected by the sheriff, the cars utilized by the drug squad, the cars operated by the sheriff and deputy sheriffs of civil court, one vehicle to be selected by the judge of the juvenile court used in the apprehension of juveniles, two vehicles used by the district attorney's office other than that assigned to the district attorney, and two vans used by the Bibb County Children's Home. 
(b)  Any person who shall operate a vehicle owned, leased or operated by Macon-Bibb County which does not display a decal with the provisions required by this section shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof in the state court of the county, shall be punished as provided in the general penalty provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 28-3—28-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 28-11. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. Pursuant to chapter 6 of title 40 of the Official Code of Gerogia Annotated, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of Macon-Bibb County with like effect as if recited in this article. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this Code unless otherwise provided by state law. 
Sec. 28-12. - Use of radar. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-14-1 et seq., the commission, as the governing authority, does hereby approve of and desire the use of speed detection devices as such devices are defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-14-1. 
(b)  The commission does hereby authorize the sheriff to apply to the department of public safety for a permit to use such devices in accordance with the provisions of state law, and authorizes the sheriff to make such application in the name of and on behalf of the governing authority. Any act heretofore taken by the sheriff to that end is hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted as the action of the governing authority of Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  As required by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-3, and in pursuance of the application for permit hereby authorized and ratified, there is attached (to the ordinance adopting this section, which ordinance is on file and available for inspection in the office of the clerk of the commission) as exhibit A a list of the streets and roads on which the device is to be used together with the indicated speed limits which have been approved by the division of traffic engineering and safety of the department of transportation of the state. 
Sec. 28-13. - Load limits which exceed 8,000 pounds prohibited. 
(a)  Trucks whose aggregate weight of vehicle and load exceeds 8,000 pounds are hereby prohibited from traveling on the following: 
(1)  Augusta Avenue, from Riggins Mill Road to Talmadge Drive; 
(2)  Brunswick Avenue, from Riggins Mill Road to Talmadge Drive; 
(3)  Cordele Avenue, from Riggins Mill Road to Talmadge Drive; 
(4)  Dana Drive, from Rainey Road W & SW to a Cul-de-sac; 
(5)  Decatur Avenue, from Riggins Mill Road to a dead end; 
(6)  Michael Drive, from Fulton Mill Road to Rogers Road; 
(7)  Talmadge Drive, from Augusta Avenue to Decatur Avenue. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof in the state court of Macon-Bibb County shall be punished as provided in the general penalty provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 28-14. - Load limits which exceed 10,000 pounds prohibited. 
(a)  Trucks whose aggregate weight of vehicle and load exceeds 10,000 pounds are hereby prohibited from traveling on: 
Plaudit Road, from Knoxville Road to Bethel Church Road. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof in the state court of Macon-Bibb County, shall be punished as provided in the general penalty provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 28-15. - Vehicle cover required. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of Macon-Bibb County unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads. 
Sec. 28-16. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of Macon-Bibb County may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the sheriff may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
Sec. 28-17. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic-control devices. 
(a)  Upon adoption by resolution of the commission, the traffic engineer is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic-control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations the following: 
(1)  Speed zones, provided Schedule IX shall remain in effect until new resolutions hereunder supersede it; 
(2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; 
(3)  One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
(4)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic-control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations the following: 
(1)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; 
(4)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; 
(5)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  The traffic engineer shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic resolutions and orders under this section, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. 
(d)  All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout Macon-Bibb County. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic-control devices of Macon-Bibb County. All street name signs installed or replaced at street intersections after July 1, 2009, shall include the block number or house number range located on that section of road between intersections. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic-control device established pursuant to this section shall be a violation of this chapter. 
Sec. 28-18. - Speed regulations. 
(a)  State speed laws applicable. The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all roads and streets within Macon-Bibb County, except as this article, as authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this section when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(b)  Increasing or decreasing state speed limits in certain zones. It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law upon those streets or portions thereof described in Schedule IX is in need of adjustment for safe operation of vehicles thereon by reason of the designation and signposting of those streets as through highways, or by reason of widely spaced intersections or for other reasons, and it is hereby declared that the maximum speed limit upon those streets or portions thereof described in Schedule IX shall be as therein stated, which speeds so declared shall be effective at the time specified therein when signs are erected giving notice thereof. Schedule IX is hereby made a part hereof and the speed limits appearing on Schedule IX are hereby established as maximum speed limits. 
(c)  Regulation of speed by traffic signals. The traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within Macon-Bibb County or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(d)  Minimum speeds on streets. It shall be unlawful for any person unnecessarily to drive at such slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, or between intersections at a speed less than fifteen (15) miles per hour. Other minimum speeds on roads and streets may be so designated by ordinance and marked by the traffic engineer consistent with the standards set out in subsection (a). 
(e)  Slowly moving vehicles. Slowly moving or heavily laden vehicles shall not be driven upon the streets abreast, but one (1) must follow behind the other and keep as near the right curb as possible. 
(f)  Driving past individuals working on streets. The maximum rate of speed shall be no higher than reasonable and safe when approaching or driving past individuals working in the street, who are Macon-Bibb County employees, public utility employees, or those granted permission of the government to work in the street, provided such site is marked in accordance with the specifications of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(g)  Blanket speed zones: 
(1)  The maximum lawful speed for any person to drive in the central business district or on residential streets that are not boulevard roadways will be twenty-five (25) miles per hour unless signs are erected displaying other messages and the signs are a result of a proper engineering and traffic investigation and are otherwise a result of an authorized reduction in speed limit. The maximum speed limit on all other roads and streets within Macon-Bibb County shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour unless a different speed is established in this article or except where a street is listed on Schedule IX with a different maximum speed, in which case the maximum speed shall be that indicated in this article or shown on Schedule IX and such different maximum speed limit shall be posted. 
(2)  No vehicle shall be operated at a rate of speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour upon entering and traversing school areas and school crossings between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:15 a.m., and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., and at such other times as children are assembling at and departing from the schools, on the days the schools are in session. The special speed limit here established for school areas and school crossings shall apply to all school areas and school crossings in Macon-Bibb County, except where a different speed limit for school areas and school crossings have been determined on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation and included in Schedule IX, in which case the speed limit in Schedule IX shall be applicable and such different speed limit shall be posted. 
(3)  School areas and school crossings are defined as those sections of streets between signs or markers designating the same as school areas or school crossings, placed in the center of the streets, painted thereon, or erected at the side of the streets. The signs or markers shall clearly indicate the existence of such school areas and school crossings and shall be plainly visible to vehicle operators during applicable hours. During all hours and upon all days other than those specified in this section, vehicular travel at the maximum applicable legal speed shall be permitted in school areas or school crossings. 
(h)  Speed limits at airport. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to maintain a speed of more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour upon any roads in or upon any municipal airport. 
(i)  [Reserved.] 
(j)  Schedule IX on file. A copy of the current Schedule IX shall at all times be kept on file in the office of the clerk of Macon-Bibb County and available for public inspection. 
Sec. 28-19. - Speed limits. 
The maximum speed limits are hereby fixed on the following roads: 
Apple Valley Road, from Chestney Road easterly and southerly to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Aspen Drive, from Mount Pleasant Church Road to its end, at 25 miles per hour. 
Barrington Hall Drive, from Foster's Green Drive to Estes Road, 25 miles per hour. 
Barrington Point, from Greenview Terrace to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Broadleaf Drive, from Forsyth Road to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Burgay Road, from Knoxville Road to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Canwood Drive, from Mosely Dixon Road to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Dodd's Walk, from Thomaston Overlook Drive to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Duskmore Place, from Scarlet Oaks Drive to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Falling Creek Drive, from Thomaston Overlook Drive to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Foster Road, from a point 600 feet north of Calvin Drive to a point 600 feet south of Calvin Drive (school zone for First Presbyterian Day School), 25 miles per hour. 
General Harris Drive, from Holly Bluff Road southeasterly to Hester Road, 25 miles per hour. 
Greenview Terrace, from Barrington Hall Drive to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Hillridge Cove, from Water's Edge Drive southerly and westerly to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Lake Wildwood Subdivision, as follows: 
(1)  Greentree Parkway, in its entirety, 35 miles per hour. 
(2)  For the following roads, in their entirety, 25 miles an hour: 
Abilene Trail 
Adahi Trail 
Ahwenasa Trail 
Amadahi Trail 
Amaiyulti Trail 
Atagahi Trail 
Beauregard Drive 
Breezeview Circle 
Bridle Lane 
Bristle Cone Drive 
Campground Road 
Chickamauga Drive 
Chisholm Trail 
Clearview Court 
Clubhouse Drive 
Conestoga Trail 
Coyote Court 
Dolly Madison Court 
Edgewater Circle 
Edgewater Drive 
Excalibur Drive 
Fox Tail Drive 
Friar Tuck Lane 
Galahad Circle 
Gareth Lane 
Gawaine Circle 
Glastonbury Lane 
Guinevere Lane 
Happy Trail 
Hushpuppy Lane 
James Place 
Jefferson Circle 
Jefferson Park Drive 
King Arthur Drive 
Lacebark Drive 
Lake Wildwood Drive 
Lancelot Lane 
Levee Lane 
Little John Court 
Live Oak Lane 
Loblolly Circle 
Loblolly Lane 
Longleaf Drive 
Maid Marion Lane 
Merlin Circle 
Monterey Court 
Monticello Place 
North Confederate Drive 
North Plantation Parkway 
Natsihi Trail 
Nimue Lane 
Palomino Court 
Panorama Place 
Pelham Way 
Plantation Parkway 
Queen Ann's Lane 
Rebel Lane 
Ridgeview Circle 
Roundtable Lane 
Royalwyn Circle 
Royalwyn Court 
Royalwyn Drive 
Runnymede Lane 
South Confederate Drive 
South Plantation Parkway 
Saddle Horn Drive 
Sandy Beach Drive 
Santa Fe Trail 
Shortleaf Lane 
Springview Drive 
Steamboat Lane 
Stephen Foster Lane 
Stone Mountain Circle 
Sunshine Court 
Surrey Road 
Table Mountain Drive 
Tally Ho Lane 
Tattersall Court 
Trails End Drive 
Tristram Circle 
Tudor Court 
Unaliyi Trail 
Unadilla Trail 
Waluhiyi Trail 
Westminister Circle 
Wilderness Drive 
Will Scarlet Way 
Misty Ridge, from Barrington Hall Drive to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Mosley Dixon Road, from Claystone Park, East, 3,022 feet, 35 miles per hour. 
Northside Drive, from Tom Hill Sr. Boulevard west to Rivoli Drive, 45 miles per hour. 
Scarlet Grove Court, from Scarlet Oaks Drive to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Scarlet Oaks Drive, from Thomaston Overlook Drive to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Shady Banks Court, from Thomaston Overlook Drive to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Skipper Road, from a point 1,000 feet south of Hartley Bridge Road to a point 500 feet north of Farwell Street (school zone for Rutland Middle and High Schools), 25 miles per hour. 
Thomaston Overlook Drive, from Thomaston Road (SR 74) to its end, 25 miles per hour. 
Tucker Road, from Thomaston Road (SR74) to Foster Road, 35 miles per hour. 
Walden Road, from Hawkinsville Road (SR247) to South Walden Road, 35 miles per hour. 
South Walden Road, from Walden Road to Houston Road, 35 miles per hour. 
Water Pointe Drive, from Gates Road northwesterly to its end. 
Water Wheel Court, from Water's Edge Drive northwesterly to its end. 
Water's Edge Drive, from Gates Road northerly and westerly to its end. 
Watercress Drive, from Water's Edge Drive westerly to Hillridge Cove. 
Sec. 28-20. - Permitting another to drive vehicle while under the influence of intoxicants or drugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner of any vehicle or who is in possession of any vehicle, whether lawfully or not, to permit or procure any other person to drive or operate any such vehicle within Macon-Bibb County while the other person is under the influence of alcoholic beverages or while under the influence of illegal drugs. 
Sec. 28-21. - Skating and coasting in street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster or similar toy vehicle, except bicycles, to go upon any roadway except while crossing the street on a crosswalk. 
Sec. 28-22. - U-turns prohibited. 
The operator of a vehicle shall not reverse the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding by making a turn, commonly known as a U-turn, upon any street of Macon-Bibb County, whether at or between intersections; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit reversing direction by turning through parkways and around monuments where such turns are safely permitted. 
Sec. 28-23. - Use of horns. 
The blowing of horns, except as a warning to pedestrians or operators of other vehicles, is prohibited. 
Sec. 28-24. - Types of horns. 
All motor vehicles must be equipped with warning horns of only standard types such as are placed thereon by motor vehicle dealers and manufacturers. Horns operated by the exhaust of an engine are prohibited. This section shall not apply to ambulances and to motor driven equipment used by the police and fire departments. 
Sec. 28-25. - Passenger space. 
It shall be unlawful to ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is in motion. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of his or her duty, or within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
Sec. 28-26. - Display of lighted back-up lights unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful at any time and at any place in Macon-Bibb County for the operator of any motor vehicle to display lighted back-up lights or other white light on the rear of the vehicle when it is moving in a forward direction. 
Sec. 28-27. - Center left turn lanes. 
Traffic lanes designated in both directions by left turn arrows for both directions of traffic shall be used for prompt deceleration and left turns only. No person shall drive any vehicle in these lanes for a longer distance than is reasonably necessary to decelerate from the through traffic lane and promptly turn left at the first convenient drive, street or entrance. 
Sec. 28-28. - Truck route limitations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive, or cause to be operated or driven, or otherwise bring any motor vehicle having a gross weight, including cargo, in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds upon any street or portion of a street where signs are posted prohibiting vehicles having such weight, except as provided in subsection (b). 
(b)  The prohibition in subsection (a) shall not apply if the vehicle is travelling to or from a location in the prohibited area to pick up cargo, deliver cargo, or perform a service at said location. 
(c)  Upon request, the driver of a vehicle as described in subsection (a) shall present to law enforcement officers the driver's log books, delivery slips and other written evidence of the driver's destination and the point of origin to justify, under subsection (b), the presence of the truck on a street or portion of street from which the truck would otherwise be prohibited by this section. 
(d)  A violation of the prohibition contained in subsection (a) shall be punishable by a minimum $50.00 fine in addition to any other punishment which may be imposed by municipal court. 
(e)  The Macon-Bibb County traffic engineer is authorized and directed to designate the streets and portions of streets to be covered by the prohibition contained in subsection (a) and to order the posting of appropriate signs. The traffic engineer shall make such designations based upon safety, congestion, business operations, noise, fumes, and other similar considerations. Notice of a designation shall be forwarded to members of commission through the clerk of commission and shall become effective 30 days following such notice unless during said period the commission, on motion, second, and majority vote, rejects the designation. All streets and portions of streets where such signs existed on October 1, 2001, shall be deemed automatically designated for the purposes of this section. 
Sec. 28-29. - Driving across private property to avoid an intersection. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motorized vehicle to drive such vehicle across the private property of another, when the driver of such vehicle has no intention to stop for the purpose of carrying on business, personal or otherwise, so as to avoid entering any intersection as defined in this Code. 
Sec. 28-30. - Bicycle routes established. 
Bicycle paths or sidewalks shall be established along or near those streets as listed in the bike route street inventory, which is hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this Code by reference, a copy of which shall be maintained on file in the office of the clerk of the commission and in the office of the traffic engineer, which shall be used by bicycle riders as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-294, as now enacted or hereafter amended. Such paths or sidewalks shall be identified by appropriate signs and if consisting of part of any street or sidewalk shall be delineated to permit identification of that portion of the street or sidewalk which shall be designated as the bicycle lane of traffic. 
Sec. 28-31. - Riding bicycle on sidewalks in business district prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the central business district, unless such sidewalk shall be designated as a portion of the bike route. The central business district shall be as follows: 
Fifth Street from Riverside Drive to Oglethorpe Street (including that portion of Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard from Walnut Street to Mulberry Street); Oglethorpe Street from Fifth Street to First Street; First Street from Oglethorpe Street to Riverside Drive; Riverside Drive from First Street to Fifth Street. 
(b)  In addition to the bicycle route established in section 28-41, all city sidewalks not included in the central business district are hereby designated as bicycle routes for all persons ten (10) years of age or under. 
(c)  Any person who is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 28-41 and 28-42, subsections (a), (b) and (c), the Macon police department bicycle patrol shall be authorized to operate their bicycles on any city sidewalk to enforce all local, state and federal laws. 
Sec. 28-32. - Persons in wheelchairs and powered mobility devices shall be treated as pedestrians. 
(a)  Within Macon-Bibb County, for the purpose of traffic control and the duties and responsibilities for all persons using parts of the Macon-Bibb County or state street or highway systems, persons in wheelchairs and in powered mobility devices shall be treated as pedestrians with all the rights and duties established by article 5, Pedestrians, of the Uniform Rules of the Road, codified at O.C.G.A. § 40-6-90 et seq. 
(b)  Provided that pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-320, it shall not be a violation of this section for a person using an electric personal assistive mobility device or a powered mobility device from operating such a device on a roadway with a speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less, or in a separately striped bicycle lane, in the same direction of travel authorized for motor vehicle traffic on that roadway. 
Sec. 28-33. - Specific rights and duties of persons in wheelchairs and powered mobility devices. 
(a)  A person in a wheelchair or a powered mobility device shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer. 
(b)  A person in a wheelchair or a powered mobility device shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian control signals as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-21 and 40-6-22. 
(c)  At all other places, persons in wheelchairs shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions for pedestrians stated in O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 5. 
(d)  Persons in wheelchairs or a powered mobility device shall be subject to the same rights and duties as any pedestrian crossing a roadway in a crosswalk as established in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-91. 
(e)  Persons in wheelchairs or a powered mobility device shall be subject to the same rights and duties as any pedestrian crossing a roadway outside a crosswalk as established in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-92. 
(f)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this Chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any person in a wheelchair or a powered mobility device, shall give warning by sounding a horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper precautions upon observing any person in a wheelchair/powered mobility device in or crossing a roadway. 
(g)  A person in a wheelchair or a powered mobility device shall yield to authorized emergency vehicles making use of audible and/or visual signals as any other pedestrian is required to pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-99. 
Sec. 28-34. - Persons in wheelchairs and powered mobility devices on or along roadways. 
(a)  Where a sidewalk is provided, it shall be unlawful for any person in a wheelchair or a powered mobility device to stand or move along and upon an adjacent roadway unless there is no motor vehicle traveling within 1,000 feet of such person in a wheelchair on such roadway or the available sidewalk presents an imminent threat of injury to such person in a wheelchair. 
(b)  Where a sidewalk is not provided but a shoulder is available and capable of allowing passage by the person in a wheelchair or a powered mobility device, any person in a wheelchair/powered mobility device standing or moving along and upon a roadway shall stand or move only on the shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway. 
(c)  Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any person in a wheelchair or powered mobility device standing or moving along and upon a roadway shall stand or move as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway, and if on a two-lane roadway, shall stand or move only on the left side of the roadway. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, a person in a wheelchair or a powered mobility device upon a roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
Secs. 28-35—28-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-66. - Loading, unloading and no parking zones. 
(a)  The following designated zones for loading and unloading of freight or passengers or both, and for no parking are established in the manner provided in this section. 
(1)  Standard freight loading zones, which shall be identified by a red boundary stripe and appropriately marked by signs. The parking, standing or stopping of vehicles in these zones for periods specified on the signs is prohibited, except as follows: The parking, standing or stopping of clearly marked and identified commercial vehicles shall be permitted in these zones for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading their cargoes; provided, however, that in no event shall the continuous parking, stopping or standing of the vehicles in these zones exceed a period of one (1) hour. 
(2)  Passenger loading zones, which shall be identified by a yellow stripe and appropriately marked by signs. The parking, standing or stopping of vehicles in these zones is prohibited, except for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers and baggage, and in no event shall any vehicle be left in the zone unattended by a driver. 
(3)  Bus loading zones, which shall be identified by a yellow stripe and appropriately marked by signs. The parking, standing or stopping of any vehicle in this zone other than a commercial passenger bus is prohibited. The parking, standing or stopping of commercial passenger buses shall be permitted in these zones only for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, and in no event shall any such vehicle be left in the zone unattended by a driver. 
(4)  Taxicab or public drayage stands, which shall be identified by a yellow stripe and appropriately marked by signs. The parking, standing or stopping of any vehicle in this zone other than a licensed taxicab or public dray is prohibited. 
(5)  No parking zones shall be identified by a yellow curbline or appropriate signs or both. The parking, standing or stopping of any vehicle in these zones identified only by yellow curblines is prohibited, except that a taxicab licensed by Macon-Bibb County may stop in these zones for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes for the sole purpose of taking on or discharging a passenger, provided that the cab motor continues operating and the driver is in close proximity to the cab and if requested by any law enforcement or fire officer to move the cab, the taxicab driver promptly does so. The parking, standing or stopping of any vehicle in these zones identified by appropriate signs shall be prohibited only during the hours specified on appropriate signs. 
(b)  The traffic engineer, or persons at his direction, shall, from time to time, establish the zones designated and described in this article upon streets of Macon-Bibb County as traffic conditions may require and order the erection of the proper signs and markings or the painting of boundary stripes and curblines. 
Sec. 28-67. - Parking in white lines. 
On streets within Macon-Bibb County where white lines are shown for guidance, parking must conform to the lines and vehicles must be entirely within the boundaries designated by the lines. These markings shall be done by the traffic-control department as provided in this article. In residential sections of Macon-Bibb County, all vehicles must park parallel to the curb, except where the white lines indicate a different method of parking. 
Sec. 28-68. - Double parking; permits. 
(a)  No vehicles shall stand abreast, alongside of or lapping each other in any street in that area of Macon-Bibb County which was formerly located in the City of Macon. The method of parking herein prohibited is commonly known as double parking. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to the downtown area of the city, which, for the purposes of this section, is defined as being Mulberry Street, Cherry Street and Poplar Street from First to Fifth Street, inclusively; Second Street, Third Street and Broadway from Plum Street to Mulberry Street, inclusively; and Cotton Avenue from Poplar Street to Mulberry Street. Within the downtown area as defined in this section, double-parking shall be permitted from 7:00 p.m. until 7:30 a.m. of each day, including Saturday. Double-parking shall be permitted from 9:00 a.m. each day including Saturdays until 4:00 p.m. All trucks shall load or unload parallel to the curb and as near to the curb as possible. This section shall not authorize double-parking if a parking space is available at the curb. No vehicle shall double-park nearer than one hundred (100) feet to another vehicle which may be double-parked across the street. 
(c)  Permits may be issued by the sheriff authorizing double parking within the limits specified in this section as to time and area, to persons operating trucks for the purpose of receiving or delivering freight, express or merchandise in the downtown area as defined in this article, provided the sheriff shall first find as a fact that such double parking is necessary to the conduct of the business of the person and that no other reasonable means of conduct of the business is available. 
Sec. 28-69. - Unattended vehicles. 
No person having control of a motor vehicle shall allow the vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of the vehicle and, when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of the vehicle into the curb or side of the street or highway. 
Sec. 28-70. - Parking at crossings. 
The parking of vehicles shall not be permitted at crossings between streets and parks, unless such parking is authorized by white lines shown on the pavement. 
Sec. 28-71. - Parking in alleys; defined. 
(a)  The parking, standing or stopping of vehicles, except as provided in this article, in any alley in that area of Macon-Bibb County formerly located within the City of Macon is hereby prohibited. 
(1)  Vehicles which are clearly designated as commercial vehicles and which are at the time being used for commercial purposes shall be permitted to park, stand or be stopped in alleys which are wide enough to leave available not less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, for such time only as is necessary to load or unload their respective cargoes; provided, however, that no such vehicles shall be parked so as to block an intersection, doorway or driveway, nearer than fifty (50) feet in front of or behind another vehicle already parked on the opposite side of the alley. 
(2)  Vehicles which are clearly designated as commercial vehicles and which are at the time being used for commercial purposes shall be permitted to stand and be stopped in alleys which are so narrow that the standing or stopping of such vehicle therein leaves less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, for such time only as is necessary to load and unload their respective cargoes, provided that no such vehicle shall be so stopped as to block an intersection, doorway or driveway, and provided that an operator shall remain in such vehicle at all times and shall move such vehicle immediately when necessary to permit the passage through such alley of any law enforcement, fire or ambulance vehicles. 
(b)  An alley shall be defined as a street intended to provide access to the rear or side of a building in urban areas and not primarily for through traffic. 
Sec. 28-72. - Right-of-way while parking. 
The operator of any vehicle in the process of backing into a parallel parking space or a back-in only angled parking space shall have the right-of-way over the operator of any other vehicle attempting to enter such parking space. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0003, § 1, 1-20-2015 ) 
Sec. 28-73. - Relative rights of vehicles to single parallel parking spaces and back-in only angled parking spaces. 
(a)  Whenever the operator of a vehicle is desirous of occupying a parallel parking space which is about to be vacated, the person shall place the vehicle in a position in the lane nearest to the space desired, with the front of the vehicle to the rear of the vehicle vacating the parallel parking space. The person shall hold this position until the parking space is vacated, after which, remaining in the same lane, the driver of such vehicle shall pull forward a sufficient distance to enable the vehicle to occupy the parking space by backing into the same. While backing in the process of parking, the driver of the vehicle shall have the right-of-way prescribed in this Code. 
(b)  Whenever the operator of a vehicle is desirous of occupying a back-in only angled parking space which is about to be vacated, the person shall place the vehicle in a position in the lane nearest to the space desired, with the front of the vehicle to the left of the vehicle vacating the back-in only angled parking space. The person shall hold this position until the parking space is vacated, after which, remaining in the same lane, the driver of such vehicle shall pull forward a sufficient distance to enable the vehicle to occupy the parking space by backing into the same. While backing in the process of parking, the driver of the vehicle shall have the right-of-way prescribed in this Code. 
(c)  The right-of-way and procedure for occupying a single space which is already vacant shall be the same as that hereinabove prescribed, except that it shall not be necessary for an operator to bring the vehicle to a halt in the rear of the space to be occupied. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to parking spaces immediately adjacent to street or alley intersections. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0003, § 2, 1-20-2015 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-15-0003, § 2, adopted January 20, 2015, amended the title of § 28-73 to read as set out herein. Previously § 28-73 was titled relative rights of vehicles to single parallel parking spaces. 
Sec. 28-74. - Fireplugs and intersections. 
No vehicle shall be parked within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant, nor within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of curblines, or, if none, then within ten feet of the intersection of the roadway edges at an intersection, except at an alley. 
Sec. 28-75. - Blocking another vehicle. 
No vehicle shall be parked or stopped in such a position as to prevent convenient movement of another vehicle already stopped. 
Sec. 28-76. - On sidewalks or blocking driveways. 
No vehicle shall be parked in a manner to prevent convenient access to a private driveway or on a sidewalk. 
Sec. 28-77. - Near obstructions. 
No vehicle shall be parked alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
Sec. 28-78. - Use of parking space for business and repairs. 
Garages, filling stations, repair shops, transit lines or other such places of business shall not use the streets for parking vehicles for more than sixty (60) minutes, day or night, and all work done on vehicles must be carried on inside the premises, and no vehicle shall be kept on the sidewalk. 
Sec. 28-79. - Area reserved for use of county vehicles of sheriff's department. 
The area along the curb northwest of Second Street running from Mulberry Street to Walnut Street Lane is hereby designated as a parking zone for the exclusive use of official vehicles owned by Macon-Bibb County operated by the sheriff of the county and the sheriff of the civil court of the county, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, other than official vehicles operated by the sheriff of the county or by the sheriff of the civil court of the county, in that area. The traffic engineer shall have the power and authority to prescribe and designate the signs to be used to indicate said zoned area. 
Sec. 28-80. - In housing project. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle or any other vehicle in or on the roads or highways through or in any of the projects of the Oglethorpe Homes, Tindall Heights Homes, or Bowden Homes or any other place therein, except parking areas designated by the traffic engineer where such vehicles may be parked. 
Sec. 28-81. - Owner or operator responsible. 
In all cases where the vehicle is illegally parked by an agent or the representative of the owner or person having at the time actual or constructive possession and control of such vehicle, the owner or person having such possession and control shall be deemed to be guilty of such violation. 
Sec. 28-82. - Maximum parking time on streets. 
No vehicle shall remain parked on any streets within Macon-Bibb County longer than seventy-two (72) hours consecutively. Vehicles so parked shall be impounded. 
Sec. 28-83. - Parking on Macon-Bibb County property. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to regulate parking on any property owned or leased by Macon-Bibb County by executive order or administrative policy statement and it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or other equipment on property owned or leased by Macon-Bibb County except in accordance with the mayor's regulations and except as designated by signs or painted on the pavement. 
Sec. 28-84. - One-hour parking restrictions; exceptions. 
(a)  (1)  No person shall park or allow to stand any bus, truck or other freight or passenger-carrying vehicle in excess of one (1) ton capacity, upon any street or highway located in a residential zone within that area of Macon-Bibb County formerly located within the City of Macon for a period of longer than one (1) hour at a time during the day or night, except when actively loading or unloading goods or passengers. 
(2)  No person shall park or allow to stand any bus, truck or other freight or passenger-carrying vehicle in excess of 10,000 pounds, upon any street or highway located in a residential zone within that area of Macon-Bibb County formerly located within unincorporated Bibb County for a period of longer than one hour at a time during the day or night, except when actively loading or unloading goods or passengers. 
(b)  No person shall park or stand any camper trailer, motor home, boat or boat trailer on any residential street or public place for more than one (1) hour at any time during the day or night. 
(c)  No person shall park or allow to stand any truck or trailer designed or used to transport petroleum products or other flammable or explosive material on any residential street, unless such vehicle is making a delivery at the address where it is parked, or it is disabled, provided that in either event, such vehicle shall be removed from such residential street within one (1) hour. No vehicle described in this subsection shall be operated upon any residential street unless such street is a state or federal highway or a direct connector to a commercial area in which the vehicle's destination is situated, or unless a delivery is being made on such residential street. No vehicle described in this subsection shall be parked or allowed to stand on any private property zoned for residential use, unless a delivery is being made at the address where the vehicle is being parked. If a delivery is being made it shall be completed and the vehicle shall be removed from such zoned residential area within one (1) hour. 
(d)  Any vehicle in violation of this section, which remains parked in violation of this section for a period of seventy-two (72) hours or more, shall be presumed to be abandoned and may be impounded by the sheriff. 
(e)  No person shall park or allow to stand any vehicle described in this section when such vehicle is parked or standing on any street zoned commercial if parked or standing within five hundred (500) feet of a public or private elementary or secondary school or school grounds, except when actively loading or unloading goods or passengers. 
(f)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a minimum fifty dollar ($50.00) fine in addition to any other punishment the municipal court may impose. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to work crews engaged in street repairs or emergency utility repairs. 
Sec. 28-85. - Parking on roads and streets in former unincorporated area. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle within the right-of-way of the public roads or streets of Macon-Bibb County outside the limits of any current or former incorporated areas therein unless every part of such motor vehicle is a minimum of 18 feet from the centerline of the pavement on said roads or streets; or if there is no pavement, within 18 feet of the centerline of the traveled portion of such road or street. 
Sec. 28-86. - Parking on certain segment of State Route 11 prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle within the right-of-way of State Route 11 on each side thereof beginning at mile post 2.80 in the area that was formerly unincorporated Bibb County, and continuing north for a distance of 1,000 feet to mile post 3.00, a distance of 0.20 miles. The prohibition contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit parking on the above-described segment at any time. 
Sec. 28-87. - No parking on Lawrence Drive South. 
(a)  All vehicles shall be prohibited from parking on Lawrence Drive South from School Road to its end. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in the general penalty provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 28-88. - Further regulations respecting parking on certain roads and streets. 
(a)  Whenever the Macon-Bibb County traffic engineer, after investigation, determines it to be in the best interests of the government and the public to regulate or prohibit the parking of motor vehicles on the rights-of-way of county streets and roads or segments thereof in that area of Macon-Bibb County that was formerly unincorporated Bibb County, he shall be authorized to record his findings and conclusions and to issue a work order directing that appropriate signage mark the roads and street or segments thereof at each end of such road or street or segment thereof as to which he makes such determination. 
(b)  The Macon-Bibb County traffic engineer shall forthwith forward to the mayor and each commissioner a copy of the determination so made and shall hold in abeyance the erection of signs prescribed above for a period of 30 days. 
(c)  If the governing body of Macon-Bibb County fails during such 30-day period to disapprove or to modify the action of the traffic engineer, the conclusions and findings of the traffic engineer shall be deemed to have been adopted, ratified and confirmed as the action of the governing body and the same shall become effective for all purposes. 
(d)  The parking of motor vehicles on streets or roads or segments thereof which are marked as no parking areas shall be prohibited and any such parking shall be deemed to be a violation of this section. 
(e)  At the expiration of such 30-day period, if the governing body of Macon-Bibb County has not disapproved or modified the findings of the traffic engineer, this section shall be of full force and effect and a violation thereof shall be punishable as provided in the general penalty provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 28-89. - Fines. 
(a)  Overtime parking in violation of any section of this article except section 28-84 shall be punishable by a ten dollar ($10.00) fine. 
(b)  The fee for any overtime parking ticket not paid within twenty (20) days from the date that it is issued shall be increased to thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(c)  Any vehicle parked in a metered or time-controlled parking space governed by article III with one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more in unpaid overtime parking fines shall be immobilized in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 28-93. 
Sec. 28-90. - Illegal use of notice or summons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, after incurring a violation of any of the provisions of this article, to display, at a time controlled parking space or location upon the streets of Macon-Bibb County different from the space or location at which the violation was incurred, upon the windshield or other exterior portion of the vehicle involved in the violation, or upon the windshield or other exterior portion of any other vehicle, the official parking violation notice or summons of the municipal court placed upon the vehicle involved in the violation by deputy sheriff, whether the notice or summons be so displayed at such different space or location on the date of the issuance of the notice or summons or on a date subsequent thereto. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any official parking violation notice or summons, or any other official notice or summons of the municipal court, from the exterior or interior of any vehicle not owned by that person or not in his legal possession, unless he or she is duly authorized by the owner or person in legal possession of the vehicle to remove it. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display, affix or to place upon any portion of the exterior of any vehicle parked at any location in Macon-Bibb County, any official parking violation notice or summons, or any other official notice or summons of the municipal court which has not been issued by an employee of the office of the sheriff. Possession by any unauthorized person of any such official notice or summons, which has not been issued by an authorized member of the office of the sheriff, shall be unlawful. 
Sec. 28-91. - Service of summons when driver of illegally parked vehicle is present. 
When any driver is found with a motor vehicle parked or stopped in violation of any overtime parking provision of article III, the sheriff or any law enforcement officer designated to give such parking violation notices as part of their official duties, finding such vehicle, shall take the name, address and driver's license number of the alleged violator and the registration number of the motor vehicle involved and shall issue in writing and serve personally upon the violator a notice and summons, which shall include: 
(1)  The date and time of the violation, 
(2)  The location of the violation, 
(3)  The amount of the fine, 
(4)  The date by which the fine shall be paid, and 
(5)  The manner and time in which the violation may be contested in court. 
Sec. 28-92. - Notice affixed to illegally parked vehicle. 
(a)  When any motor vehicle without driver is found stopped or parked in violation of any overtime parking provision of article III, any law enforcement office designated to give such parking violation notices as part of their official duties, finding such vehicle, shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice and summons, which shall include: 
(1)  The date and time of the violation, 
(2)  The location of the violation, 
(3)  The amount of the fine, 
(4)  The date by which the fine shall be paid, and 
(5)  The manner and time in which the violation may be contested in court. 
(b)  If the violator does not respond to the notice and summons within the five (5) day period set in such notice and summons by either paying the fine or appearing before the municipal court to contest the charges, the municipal court clerk shall send a second notice and summons by certified mail to the registered owner of the vehicle to which the first notice and summons were affixed. If the violator does not respond to the second notice and summons within fifteen (15) days of the date the notice and summons were issued by either paying the fine or appearing before the municipal court to contest the charges, the fine for the violation shall become twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(c)  If at any time the number of violations and unpaid fines total one hundred dollars ($100.00), the vehicle which is the subject of the violations may be subject to immobilization. The violator has the right at any time specified in the notice and summons to pay the fine or appear before the municipal court to contest the charges. 
Sec. 28-93. - Immobilization of vehicle. 
(a)  If any vehicle is found parked in violation of section 28-89(c), officers of the office of the sheriff are authorized to temporarily and for a period of forty-eight (48) hours, immobilize such vehicle by installing on, or attaching to such vehicle, a device designed to restrict the normal movement of such vehicle. 
(b)  If such vehicle is so immobilized, the deputy so installing or attaching such device shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice, in writing, on a form provided by the sheriff, which shall advise the owner, driver or person in charge of such vehicle that: 
(1)  Such vehicle has been immobilized by Macon-Bibb County for violating section 28-89(c), 
(2)  The date and time of the violation, 
(3)  The location of the violation, 
(4)  The violation of section 28-89(c) and immobilization may be contested in municipal court within forty-eight (48) hours, 
(5)  Release from such immobilization may be obtained at the municipal court by paying a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) immobilization fee and all unpaid overtime parking fines within forty-eight (48) hours, 
(6)  If the vehicle is not released within forty-eight (48) hours, the vehicle will be removed from the streets to the city impound lot at the violator's expense, and 
(7)  Removing or attempting to remove the device before a release is obtained is unlawful. 
(c)  Release from immobilization may be obtained at the municipal court by either: 
(1)  Successfully contesting the violation and immobilization in a hearing before the municipal court within forty-eight (48) hours, or 
(2)  Paying a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) immobilization fee and all unpaid overtime parking fines to the municipal court within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(d)  If the vehicle has remained immobilized for a period of forty-eight (48) hours and release has not been obtained, the deputy or employee of Macon-Bibb County causing such immobilization shall have the vehicle towed and stored at the violator's expense. 
(e)  While a vehicle is immobilized, the parking restrictions and fees, if any, otherwise applicable shall not apply. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove any such immobilization device before a release is obtained as herein provided or to move any such vehicle before the same is released by the municipal court. 
(g)  Release of an impounded vehicle may be obtained at the municipal court by either: 
(1)  Successfully contesting the violation and impoundment in a hearing before the municipal court within thirty (30) days of the date of impoundment, or 
(2)  Paying a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) immobilization fee and all unpaid overtime parking fines to the municipal court within thirty (30) days of the date of impoundment. In addition, the violator shall be responsible for the payment of all towing and storage fees prior to release of the vehicle from the impound lot. 
Sec. 28-94. - Private use of immobilization devices prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Vehicle immobilization device, device, or boot shall mean any mechanical device that is designed or adopted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. 
(2)  Operator shall mean any person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, operating vehicle immobilization devices for a vehicle immobilization service but shall not include law enforcement officers or employees authorized by the sheriff to employ such devices. 
(3)  Vehicle immobilization service shall mean a person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, offering services anywhere in Macon-Bibb County whereby vehicles are immobilized by the installation of a vehicle immobilization device. 
(b)  Prohibition. Immobilization of the vehicle of another by use of a boot or other similar device is prohibited in Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Violations. In addition to the penalties described in subsection (e), any person(s), operator or vehicle immobilization service found to have violated this provision may be prosecuted for trespass to chattels. 
(d)  Enforcement. The office of the sheriff of Macon-Bibb County shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section. 
(e)  Penalty. The operator cited pursuant to this section shall be liable for a monetary penalty not to exceed $500.00. 
Sec. 28-95. - Time limit for idling. 
No person shall stop or stand any Macon-Bibb County-owned motor vehicle and idle for more than fifteen (15) minutes while not in traffic. This limitation shall not apply under the following conditions: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles, construction and maintenance vehicles where the engines must run to perform the needed work; 
(2)  Motor vehicle is being used to supply heat or air conditioning necessary for passenger safety or comfort, in which case idling shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25) minutes; 
(3)  If the ambient temperature is less than thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit, idling shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25) minutes; 
(4)  Any motor vehicle for which the primary source of energy during idling is natural gas (CNG) or electricity shall be exempt from the idling limitations set forth in this section. 
Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to five hundred ($500.00). 
Sec. 28-96—28-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - UNMETERED TIME CONTROLLED PARKING 

Sec. 28-101. - Unmetered parking. 
(a)  There shall be unmetered time controlled parking permitted in the downtown area of Macon-Bibb County. The sheriff is hereby authorized and directed to establish unmetered time controlled parking zones in those zones which were formerly parking meter zones, excluding the Medical Center of Central Georgia metered zone. 
(b)  The sheriff is additionally authorized and directed to establish from time to time hereafter, as traffic conditions require, additional unmetered time controlled parking zones. 
(c)  The sheriff shall cause unmetered time controlled parking spaces to be designated as provided in this division, and shall fix the time limitations for legal parking in these zones. 
Sec. 28-102. - Signs shall be posted. 
Macon-Bibb County shall cause notices to be posted in the unmetered time controlled parking zones indicating the legal free parking time as established by this division in the downtown district. 
Sec. 28-103. - Parking lines. 
The traffic engineer is instructed to mark off and identify all unmetered parking spaces. These spaces will be marked by white lines or markings painted or placed upon the street or curb for the purpose of designating the parking spaces. Each vehicle shall park within the lines or markings so established. 
Sec. 28-104. - Method of parking in time controlled, unmetered spaces. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way street in the area of the former City of Macon shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels parallel to and within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb, or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within twelve (12) inches of the left-hand curb, or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, every vehicle parked in angled unmetered parking spaces on a street in the area of the former City of Macon shall be parked with the front of the vehicle facing the curb or shoulder and parked as close as practicable to the curb or edge of the shoulder. 
(d)  Every vehicle parked in back-in only angled unmetered parking spaces on a street in the area of the former City of Macon shall be parked with the rear of the vehicle facing the curb or shoulder and parked as close as practicable to the curb or edge of the shoulder. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0003, § 3, 1-20-2015 ) 
Sec. 28-105. - Maximum parking time; illegal parking. 
(a)  Any automobile or vehicle parked in any time controlled unmetered parking space for a longer period than is designated by the provisions of this section, is illegally parked. 
(b)  No automobile or other vehicle shall occupy an unmetered parking space in any controlled parking zone on Macon-Bibb County streets continuously between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. from Monday through Saturday, in excess of the legal parking time posted pursuant to section 28-102. 
(c)  A vehicle parked in excess of the maximum time limit for any unmetered parking zone shall be parked overtime. A vehicle parked beyond the period of legal free unmetered parking shall be in violation of this section. 
(d)  No person employed by, or operating a business or profession in that area of Macon-Bibb County designated as the downtown area by this subsection, and where on street parking is controlled by this section, shall park a privately owned or company owned vehicle in any controlled parking space for the purpose of using such space as a substitute for a parking garage or other off-street parking facility, by leaving or storing such vehicle in such controlled on-street parking space while the owner or operator performs his duties at his regular place of employment. For purposes of this section the downtown area is defined as that area enclosed by the following streets: Riverside Drive from Broadway to Spring Street, inclusively; Spring Street from Riverside Drive to Mulberry Street, inclusively; Mulberry Street, from Spring Street to New Street, inclusively; New Street from Mulberry Street to Cotton Avenue, inclusively; Cotton Avenue, from New Street to Spring Street, inclusively; Spring Street, from Cotton Avenue to Orange Terrace, inclusively; Orange Terrace, from Spring Street to First Street, inclusively; First Street, from Orange Terrace to Poplar Street, inclusively; Poplar Street, from First Street to Second Street, inclusively; Second Street from Poplar Street to Plum Street, and back to Poplar, inclusively; Poplar Street from Second Street to Third Street, inclusively; Third Street from Poplar Street to Plum Street, and back to Poplar, inclusively; Poplar Street from Third Street to Broadway, inclusively; Broadway from Poplar Street to Riverside Drive, inclusively. The provisions of this subsection shall be effective between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday of each week, except on those days designated as official holidays of Macon-Bibb County. Upon conviction, plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere to a violation of the provisions of this section, the violator shall pay a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to any other punishment or penalty imposed by the municipal court. 
Sec. 28-106. - Illegal tampering with time controlled monitoring devices. 
(a)  To maintain control and accessibility of time controlled spaces to customers of downtown businesses, unmetered parking spaces shall be monitored by the sheriff and parking enforcement personnel of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, erase, conceal or attempt to conceal, any marks placed on a vehicle or the tire thereof, by a sheriff's deputy or parking enforcement personnel for the purpose of measuring the time the parking space is occupied by that vehicle. 
(c)  Violation of subsection (b) shall be punishable by a minimum $25.00 fine. 
Sec. 28-107. - Use of downtown parking spaces by vehicles owned and operated by public utility companies franchised by Macon-Bibb County. 
A utility vehicle owned and operated by a public utility company franchised by Macon-Bibb County may park in unmetered time controlled zones in excess of the time limits set out in section 28-105 if it is: 
(1)  A clearly and permanently marked regulated service vehicle; 
(2)  Parked no further than two hundred (200) feet from the company assigned work site; and 
(3)  Operated by an employee of the utility company who is engaged in carrying out assigned company duties. 
Secs. 28-108—28-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING ON MEDICAL CENTER GROUNDS 

Sec. 28-116. - Designation of parking areas; parking meter specifications. 
(a)  The areas designed by the Macon-Bibb County hospital authority as parking areas on the grounds of the Medical Center of Central Georgia are hereby declared to be public areas and public property. Such areas may be controlled by metered parking or unmetered time controlled parking. 
(b)  Parking meters and designated spaces on Medical Center of Central Georgia grounds shall be controlled and maintained by the security division of the Medical Center of Central Georgia. The hospital authority shall cause white lines or markings to be painted or placed upon the curb adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space for which a parking meter is to be used. Each vehicle parked adjacent or next to any parking meter shall park within the lines or markings so established. 
(c)  Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking places described in this division. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking space adjacent to the meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend, the legal parking time established by the city, and when operated shall indicate on and by its dial and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking, and on the expiration of the period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
Sec. 28-117. - Method of parking near meters. 
(a)  When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in the parking space shall be parked so that the foremost part of the vehicle shall be nearest to the parking meter. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in the marked space shall be parked with the foremost part of the vehicle nearest to the meter. 
(b)  When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this division, the operator of the vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited a coin of the United States in the parking meter of the denomination indicated by the meter for the selected period of parking. Failure to deposit the coin shall constitute a violation of this section. Coins shall be deposited in meters on Medical Center of Central Georgia grounds on all days. 
Sec. 28-118. - Illegal parking. 
(a)  Upon the deposit of a coin in the meter and placing the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by a vehicle during the period of parking time which has been prescribed for the space adjacent to the meter. If the vehicle shall remain parked in any parking space beyond the parking time limit fixed for the parking space, the parking meter shall, by its dial and pointer, indicate the illegal parking. In that event, the vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and shall be in violation of this section. 
(b)  The maximum time which can be indicated at one (1) time on the parking meter adjacent to a parking space shall be the maximum time that an automobile or other vehicle may continuously occupy the parking space, and no automobile or other vehicle shall occupy a parking space on Medical Center of Central Georgia grounds continuously for a longer period of time than the maximum time which is provided by one (1) operation of the parking meter to which the parking space is adjacent, and when the maximum time has expired, the automobile or other vehicle shall vacate the space. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section or of this division, if any vehicle shall occupy or remain parked in any parking space for a longer continuous period than can be indicated at one (1) time on the parking meter adjacent to the parking space, the vehicle so parked shall be considered parking overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time even though the meter shall indicate the vehicle is legally parked. A vehicle so parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time shall be in violation of this section. It is the intention of this subsection to provide that parking spaces adjacent to two-hour parking meters shall not be occupied continuously for more than two (2) hours and parking spaces adjacent to one-hour parking meters shall not be occupied continuously for longer than one (1) hour, and the same intention applies to parking meters of different available time durations now installed or which may be hereafter installed. 
Sec. 28-119. - Prohibited parking. 
(a)  The parking, standing or stopping of any vehicle in any manner so as to block ingress to and egress from either the ambulance entrance or emergency entrance to the Medical Center of Central Georgia, by vehicles engaged in transporting patients, is prohibited. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in the public parking lot of the Medical Center of Central Georgia, unless the person has parked the vehicle for the purpose of visitation or transaction of business in the Medical Center of Central Georgia. In no event shall any person park any vehicle in that public parking lot for a continuous period of time in excess of three (3) hours without express written authority from the hospital administrator. 
Secs. 28-120—28-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 28-131. - Authority to set up vehicle pound and to provide for towing contract. 
The mayor of Macon-Bibb County is hereby authorized and empowered to issue administrative directives providing for the maintenance of a vehicle pound on suitable public property. The mayor is further authorized and empowered to enter into a contract upon such terms and conditions as the mayor deems appropriate to provide for the towing of vehicles in conjunction with the impounding thereof. 
Sec. 28-132. - Authority to impound illegally parked vehicles. 
Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any place within Macon-Bibb County where parking is not permitted at that time, or whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the terms of this Code, such vehicle may be removed from the place of parking at the instance of any police officer observing the same, and impounded. 
Sec. 28-133. - Record of impounding to be made. 
It shall be the duty of the sheriff to keep a permanent record of all vehicles impounded by the office of the sheriff, together with the names and addresses of the owners of the vehicles, where available, numbers of their state license tags, description of the vehicle including motor numbers and the circumstances surrounding the impounding of the vehicles. 
Sec. 28-134. - Protest and bond. 
In case protest is made against the payment of any towing charge or storage costs, the sheriff may authorize the discharge of the vehicle if the protestant shall be charged with a violation of the traffic ordinance and shall be required to make bond for his appearance and trial before the municipal court judge. Whereupon, the sheriff shall authorize the release of the vehicle to the protestant. If such person is convicted of violating the traffic ordinance by the municipal court judge, in addition to other costs, the municipal judge shall assess as costs the storage costs and towing charges which have accumulated in connection with the impounding of the vehicle. 
Sec. 28-135. - Release of impounded vehicles. 
Any person claiming the impounded vehicle shall produce evidence of his identity and ownership or right of possession to the sheriff. Upon payment of storage costs and towing charges, and the execution of a release and receipt of the city for the vehicle, the sheriff shall issue an order authorizing a release of the vehicle to the claimant. 
Sec. 28-136. - Disposition of unclaimed vehicles. 
(a)  If any impounded car is not claimed within thirty (30) days from the date it is impounded, Macon-Bibb County shall dispose of the property as provided for abandoned automobiles. 
(b)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, whenever the vehicles to be sold cannot be moved under their own power, or whenever the governing authority shall find as a fact that the sale of the vehicles can be more expeditiously had by conducting the sale where the vehicles are stored, the sale may be had at the place of storage provided that the advertisement of the sale shall give notice that the vehicles are to be sold at the place of storage. 
Sec. 28-137. - Impounding does not preclude other prosecution. 
The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude other prosecution for violation of the provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 28-138. - Reserved. 
Division 5. - Downtown Parking Accessibility[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 , set out provisions for use herein as div. 5, §§ 28-140—28-153. Inasmuch as similar section numbers existed at the time of codification, those provisions have been renumbered as §§ 28-139—28-139.13. 

Sec. 28-139. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms are defined for the purpose of this division only: 
Downtown Area , for the purposes of this division, is defined as being all that area along and inclusive of the following boundaries: From the intersection of Spring Street and Riverside Drive, running along Riverside Drive to Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd., along Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd. to Fifth Street, branching along Fifth Street to Oak Street, running along Oak Street as it becomes Hemlock Street to the intersection of Spring Street and along Spring Street back to Riverside Drive. 
Parking Enforcement Officer as employed in its singular or plural form in this division shall refer to any person(s) as designated individually or by job description classification by the Macon-Bibb Count Commission, employees of the Bibb County Sheriffs department, or employees employed by an agency which has a contract with the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority for parking enforcement purposes, as having authority to enforce sections of this division pertaining to regulations and enforcement of provisions pertaining to the parking of vehicles in the downtown area and residential parking areas adjacent to the downtown area as designated from time to time by resolution of the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority, provided such person has satisfied the standards of the parking management company as to training in the enforcement duties permitted to be undertaken by that person relating to this section. Any such contract with a company hired by Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority to enforce the provisions of this division shall require such owner to be responsible for the duties and supervision of any such Parking Enforcement Officer, shall indemnify and hold harmless both Macon-Bibb County and the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority from any acts of any such person, and shall require that the owner maintain contractual obligation liability insurance for its undertakings pursuant to that contract. The Mayor shall be authorized to terminate the authority of any person designated as a Parking Enforcement Officer by the company pursuant to this division immediately and without any right to any hearing or other appeal at any time upon written notice delivered to such company. 
Metered Parking , for the purposes of this division, is defined as a parking zone designated by the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority in which a vehicle may be properly parked, which shall be indicated by clearly painted lines or otherwise, and which is regulated by parking time limits designed to improve downtown parking accessibility. 
Metered Parking Device , for the purposes of this division, is defined as any technology device used for the regulation of parking by authority of this division and shall include, but not be limited to, single space meters, pay stations, pay and display, and pay by plate. 
Operator , for purposes of this division, is defined as every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof, or as the agent, employee, or permittee of the owner. 
Vehicle, for purposes of this division, is defined as any device upon by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a highway, road, or street, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. 
Zones, for purposes of this division, shall include those parking spaces on streets and in parking lots designated for Metered Parking by the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.1. - Purpose; downtown parking accessibility plan. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to improve parking accessibility so as to aid, assist, and improve retail and commercial opportunities in the Downtown Area; to reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of streets within the Downtown Area; to protect such areas from polluted air, excessive noise, litter and refuse caused by the circulation of such vehicles; to protect the customers, employees, and residents of such areas from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to businesses and their residences; to preserve the character of the downtown and residential areas; to promote efficiency in the maintenance of streets in such Downtown Area in a clean and safe condition; to preserve the value of the property in such areas; and to preserve the safety of children, other pedestrians and traffic, as well as the peace, good order, comfort, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  The Commission does hereby authorize, assign, and designate the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority with the responsibility for developing, implementing, and managing a Downtown Parking Accessibility Plan designed to aid, assist, and improve retail and commercial opportunities and development in the Downtown Area to include, but not be limited to, implementation of a comprehensive Metered Parking management and enforcement services accessibility program for on-street, off-street, and residential parking in designated Zones. 
(c)  The Commission does hereby authorize the Authority to put out an RFP and select a vendor to provide the services required for implementation of said Plan and to manage and maintain any equipment, meters, signage, devices, computer programs, apps, or other devices required for implementation of the Downtown Parking Accessibility Plan. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.2. - Metered parking zones. 
(a)  The Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority shall develop and implement regulations necessary to establish and implement the Downtown Parking Accessibility Plan within the Downtown Area, which regulations must conform to the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Whenever by this division or any other ordinance of Macon-Bibb County any parking time limit is imposed in designated Zones, it shall be the duty of the Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority and/or the parking management firm selected by said Authority to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and such regulations shall not be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(c)  The Macon-Bibb County Urban Development Authority shall designate which Zones in the Downtown Area shall be designated for use of Metered Parking and shall be responsible for installing or providing the necessary Metered Parking Devices. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.3. - Deposit of charges. 
When any vehicle is located in a Metered Parking Zone, the operator of the vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited into a Metered Parking Device the charges, as provided by this division, in legal United States funds and other acceptable forms of payment as provided for said parking space. Upon the deposit of the charges in the Metered Parking Device, the parking space for which the charges were remitted may be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the period of parking time which has been prescribed. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.4. - Use of parking meter revenue. 
Metered Parking fees are hereby levied and assessed to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic and the parking of vehicles upon the public streets and to defray the costs of the total on-street and off-street parking management program, including the cost of acquiring, installing, operating, maintaining, supervising, regulating, and controlling Metered Parking devices. Any revenue derived from fees, fines, parking rentals, or other accessibility plan components shall be used by the Macon-Bibb County Development Authority to pay for the cost of implementation of the plan as described above and to provide streetscape improvements designed to improve parking accessibility. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.5. - Defacing, tampering with, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any Metered Parking Device installed under the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.6. - Parking overtime. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any Metered Parking Zone as described in this division. 
(b)  The exceeding of each segment of time or fraction thereof beyond the initial lawful unit of time shall constitute a separate violation of this division. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.7. - Loading zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park to park any vehicle in a designated loading zone except for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicle, which vehicle must be properly identified showing that it is a delivery or pick-up vehicle. A delivery or pick-up vehicle may park in a designated loading zone only during such time as materials are being loaded and/or unloaded from the vehicle, and in no case may such vehicle remain parked in a designated loading zone for longer than 30 minutes, unless a different time is indicated by a sign or permitted under the Downtown Parking Accessibility Plan. A vehicle must be removed from the loading zone immediately upon completion of loading and/or unloading materials from such vehicle or the expiration of time limit for that loading zone, whichever occurs first. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.8. - Parking in no parking zone. 
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, or motorcycle or any other motorized vehicle, to be parked on the sidewalk or other public right-of-way in any space that is not a designated marked parking space nor shall any such vehicle be parked in front of any driveway so as to block access to the public portion thereof or within ten feet of such driveway. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.9. - Parking outside the lines of designated parking space. 
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, or motorcycle or any other motorized vehicle, to be parked outside the lines of a designated parking space. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.10. - Parking in the wrong direction for a designated parking space. 
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, or motorcycle or any other motorized vehicle, to be parked in the wrong direction for a designated parking space. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.11. - Notice to be attached to vehicle. 
A Parking Enforcement Officer finding a vehicle parked in violation of this division shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this division and instructing such owner or operator of the manner in which such citation is to be paid or otherwise resolved. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.12. - Legal parking violations. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle shall be subject to the following civil fines for the violations enumerated herein. Except as otherwise specified, all other violations under this chapter shall be within the limits permitted under section 1-6. Any violations enumerated herein that are not otherwise punishable by section 1-6 shall be deemed non-criminal, shall be determined by a showing of preponderance of the evidence, and shall not be deemed to be a conviction. Such civil violations are inapplicable to a person's motor vehicle driving record for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. 
(b)  The civil fine for the following legal parking zone violations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Parking overtime ..... $10.00 
(2)  Loading zones ..... $50.00 
(3)  No parking zone ..... $50.00 
(4)  Parking outside the lines of a designated parking space ..... $25.00 
(5)  Parking in the wrong direction for a designated parking space ..... $25.00 
(c)  Court summons; bond for failure to appear. If the value of accumulated unpaid parking tickets is more than $50.00, a vehicle owner shall be issued a summons to appear in the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County. If the owner fails to appear at the appointed time and date as specified in the summons, he or she shall be subject to arrest and shall post a $50.00 bond plus an amount equal to all fines and penalties accrued to date. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
Sec. 28-139.13. - Construction permit parking fees in downtown area; penalty for violation. 
(a)  There shall be a construction permit parking for the use of parking spaces in the Downtown Area by contractors in the performance of their work as follows: 
Per parking space, per day\$6.00 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park their motor vehicle in any space which has been designated for construction parking. 
( Ord. of 11-15-2016(1), § 1 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - INSTALLATION OF SPEED TABLES 

Sec. 28-140. - Speed table program. 
Macon-Bibb County has adopted a speed table program to aid citizens in determining if their residential street has a speeding problem and to determine whether the installation of speed tables as traffic calming devices is an appropriate option. The Macon-Bibb County traffic engineering division shall be responsible for implementing the county's speed table program. The installation and removal of speed tables shall be done in compliance with the Macon-Bibb County speed table program manual adopted by the commission. See Bibb County Speed Table Program Manual, attached to Ord. No. VV-09-9 as exhibit "1." 
Editor's note— The manual referred to in this section is not set out at length herein, but is on file in the offices of the Macon-Bibb County clerk of commission. 
ARTICLE V. - MOTORIZED CARTS 

Sec. 28-141. - Findings and definitions. 
(a)  The Board of Commissioners finds that certain public streets located within Macon-Bibb County are designed and constructed so as to safely permit the use of regular vehicular traffic and also the driving thereon of motorized carts. The Board of Commissioners further finds that the use of motorized carts is a convenient and safe form of short distance travel that conserves resources and enhances the quality of life of the citizens of Macon-Bibb County. However, to ensure the public safety and welfare, the operation of motorized carts must not only comply with normal regulations regarding vehicles but should comply with special safety regulations intended to protect the operator and passengers in a motorized cart. This Article establishes the basic, minimum standards of care to be used by the operators of motorized carts on public roads and streets. Likewise, public safety requires that motorized carts, when used as a means of transportation, must also meet certain minimum safety standards that can only be assured through a system of regulation and inspection. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized Street means all such streets which have been authorized for motorized cart travel by the Board of Commissioners and are on file with the Sheriff's Office. The list of authorized streets is subject to amendment from time to time by the Board of Commissioners, and the public shall be allowed to submit written requests that the Commissioners review streets for approval of such designations. Each such street which has been designated as an authorized street must receive approval by the Board of Commissioners prior to such designation. A full list of authorized streets shall be maintained by the Sheriff's Office. 
County means Macon-Bibb County, Georgia. 
Motorized Cart means all electric and gasoline-powered pleasure carts, which are commonly called golf carts, and which are not capable of exceeding twenty (20) miles per hour. Within this article, the terms "motorized cart," "golf cart" and "cart" shall have the same meanings; these are the only carts authorized for use under this Article. Other All-Terrain Vehicles, including Four-Wheelers, shall not be allowed under this Article. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0010, § 1, 2-3-2015 ) 
Sec. 28-142 - Registration of motorized carts. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized cart that is operated over authorized streets to register the motorized cart with the County prior to operating said motorized cart on said authorized streets. The application for registration shall be filed with the Sheriff; or to his/her designee, on forms provided by the Sheriff's Office. The application may, among other things, require the following information: owner's name; street address, mailing address, and telephone number; make, model, and identification, and serial number of the motorized cart; and such other information as may be reasonably required, as well as a general release statement and/or disclaimer of any liability by the County for accidents involving the registered motorized cart. Two (2) decals shall be issued upon registration; and a record of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner, shall be maintained by the Sheriff's Office. 
(b)  The decals provided upon proper registration must be affixed to the sides or windshield of the motorized cart in such a manner as to be fully visible at all times. The failure to have a current registration decal on a motorized cart shall be a violation of this section and subject the owner/operator of such cart to penalties. The decal issued by the Sheriff's Office shall be non-transferrable from the motorized cart for which it is obtained. 
(c)  Only those persons eighteen (18) years of age and older may register a motorized cart. Motorized cart registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(d)  The fee to register a motorized cart shall be set at fifteen dollars ($15.00) per motorized cart. The registration is good for a period of one (1) year from the issuance date and shall be renewed annually so long as the motorized cart is in use on authorized streets. 
(e)  Prior to issuing the initial registration permit or any renewal thereof, the golf cart shall be physically inspected by the Sheriff's Office to determine that: 
(1)  The golf cart is equipped with a rear vision mirror and at least two (2) red rear reflectors which are at least three (3) inches in height and width; and 
(2)  The golf cart is equipped with a reflective "slow moving" sign, caution sign, and/or flag on the rear of the cart; and 
(3)  The brakes provided by the manufacturer of the golf cart are in proper working order; and 
(4)  The golf cart has all of the standard safety features provided by the manufacturer and has not been modified to exceed a speed of twenty (20) miles per hour nor otherwise modified in any way that creates a hazard; and 
(5)  The golf cart is equipped with all mechanical systems and safety equipment required by this Chapter. 
(f)  Any owner or operator registering a motorized cart with the County agrees to abide by all of the requirements of State law and this Code. By registering a motorized cart with the County, the owner or operator verifies that the motorized cart qualifies to be classified as such under State law. 
(g)  Upon occurrence of a sale of the motorized cart to another person who shall operate the cart over the authorized streets of the County, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten (10) business days of the change in ownership at a cost of ten dollars ($10.00). The motorized cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the ten (10) business-day period. Dealers acquiring a registered cart exclusively for resale (non-rental) shall not be required to pay the transfer charge, but shall notify the County of the transfer within ten (10) business days of receiving the cart, and of the ultimate disposition of the cart within ten (10) business days of sale. 
(h)  The initial registration of a golf cart may be denied or subsequently revoked by the Sheriff's Office if it is determined that: 
(1)  The application contains any material misrepresentation; or 
(2)  The motorized cart is not in compliance with the requirements of this Article; or 
(3)  The motorized cart has been altered or customized and no longer meets the definition of a motorized cart as defined by this Article; or 
(4)  Equipment supplied by the manufacturer, especially safety equipment, has been removed from the golf cart or the vehicle identification or serial number has been removed; or 
(5)  Other good cause shown, including repeated violations of this Article. 
(i)  All-terrain vehicles, 4-wheel utility vehicles and other similar utility vehicles which are not manufactured for operation on a golf course, and golf carts that have been modified so that they no longer meet the definition of a motorized cart as defined by this Article may not be registered as a motorized cart nor shall such vehicles be operated on the public roads, streets and highways within the County unless such vehicles are otherwise registered with and allowed under the motor vehicle laws of the State of Georgia. 
(j)  The Board of Commissioners may, at its discretion, waive registration requirements for special events of limited duration during which persons may bring motorized carts as participants. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0010, § 1, 2-3-2015 ) 
Sec. 28-143. - Operation of gasoline-powered motorized carts. 
(a)  Every motorized cart which is powered by gasoline shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to, and including, the muffler(s) and exhaust pipe(s); and 
(2)  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened; and 
(3)  The engine of every motorized cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned, as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart which is powered by gasoline to operate, or permit the operation, of such motorized cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a motorized cart by the manufacturer, has been altered, rendered unserviceable or removed. 
(c)  Motorized carts which are powered by electric means are exempted from this Section. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0010, § 1, 2-3-2015 ) 
Sec. 28-144. - Operating regulations. 
(a)  Any person who possesses a valid motor vehicle driver's license issued by any State or Territory of the United States of America, and is at least sixteen (16) years of age, may operate a motorized cart on the authorized streets. Any passengers on a motorized cart on an authorized street must be at least eight (8) years of age. 
(b)  Any person who possesses a valid motor vehicle learner's permit issued by any State or Territory of the United States of America, and is at least fifteen (15) years of age, may operate a motorized cart on the authorized streets, so long as such person is accompanied in the front seat by a person who possesses a valid motor vehicle driver's license issued by any State or Territory of the United States of America and who is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(c)  No person less than fifteen (15) years of age shall be permitted to operate a motorized cart on the authorized streets under any circumstances. 
(d)  All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the authorized streets. Furthermore, all laws regarding the use of motor vehicles in the State of Georgia and all ordinances regarding the use of motor vehicles in the County, not inconsistent therewith, shall be observed by all motorized carts, except that no motorized carts may be operated at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(e)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(f)  Motorized carts may be operated over authorized streets only during daylight hours, unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights and any other such equipment regulations which may be promulgated by the Commissioner of Public Safety of the State of Georgia. 
(g)  No person shall operate a motorized cart on a public road unless that road has been authorized for motorized cart use by this Article and appropriate signs giving notice are posted along said public road. 
(h)  Motorized carts may not be operated on any streets or sections of streets, except for areas designated as crossing at a signalized intersection or at a perpendicular crossing at a through intersection, where: 
(1)  Any street where the posted speed limit is more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour; or any street designated as a State Route. 
(2)  Any Interstate highway, including Interstate 16 and Interstate 75. 
(i)  Motorized cart owners shall maintain their motorized carts in a manner which ensures that an unobstructed view from the driver's seat to the rear is maintained at all times the motorized cart is in operation on public roads. 
(j)  The maximum occupancy of a motorized cart traveling on any authorized street or public property shall be one (1) person per designated seat. The operator and passenger of a motorized cart shall remain seated at all times in which the motorized cart is in motion. 
(k)  Motorized carts may not be used for the commercial purpose of transporting passengers, and may not be used as a taxi, bus, or any other commercial transportation service. 
(l)  Motorized cart operators shall yield the right-of-way to overtaking motor vehicles. 
(m)  Motorized carts may be parked in the same manner and at the same places designated for the parking of motor vehicles. The stopping, standing, or parking of motorized carts in areas where parking is not allowed or in any place that impedes the flow of traffic, pedestrian walkways, or a passageway is prohibited and subject to penalty. 
(n)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart to operate, or permit the operation of, such cart over the authorized streets in violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0010, § 1, 2-3-2015 ) 
Sec. 28-145. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
No individual or group shall engage in hazardous activities on the authorized streets. Such hazardous activities include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Racing of any kind, except for special events approved by the County; and 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the County; and 
(3)  Motorized carts shall not loiter or park on bridges or in underpasses; and 
(4)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and the use thereof, including open container laws, apply to motorized carts; and 
(5)  Motorized carts may not be used to for the purpose of towing another cart, trailer, vehicle of any kind, or any person on skates, bicycles, or any other object. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0010, § 1, 2-3-2015 ) 
Sec. 28-146. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The operation of motorized carts under the following circumstances shall not be subject to the provisions of this Article: 
(1)  The operation of motorized carts at golf courses, private clubs, or on private property, with the consent of the land owner; and 
(2)  The operation of golf carts on private streets within gated or limited access communities; and 
(3)  The operation of golf carts in connection with a parade, festival, or other special event authorized by the County, provided that the consent of the event sponsor is obtained and provided that such use only occurs during the special event; and 
(4)  The use of golf carts by the Sheriff's Department on official police business or by other Macon-Bibb County personnel for official business on County controlled property, including cemeteries, parks, green space, and other property as needed. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0010, § 1, 2-3-2015 ) 
Sec. 28-147. - Liability. 
The owner and/or operator of a motorized cart is liable for his or her own actions and assumes all responsibility for any such use. Any person who operates or owns a motorized cart is responsible for procuring liability insurance and verifying coverage in terms enough to cover risk involved in using such motorized cart on authorized streets. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0010, § 1, 2-3-2015 ) 
Sec. 28-148. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the terms of this Article shall be cited to appear before the Municipal Court or other Court of appropriate jurisdiction, and upon conviction, be punished in accordance with Section 1-6 of the Macon-Bibb County Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  In addition to enforcing sanctions against the operator of the motorized cart, any violation of this Article shall also be charged against the registered owner of the motorized cart, and all fines and penalties shall be levied against the registered owner of the motorized cart as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($150.00). 
(2)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(3)  For a third offense committed within one (1) year of conviction for a second offense for a motorized cart, a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and the registered owner's motorized cart registration shall be revoked. The registered owner or family member cannot thereafter register a motorized cart for use in the city for a period of two (2) years following the third conviction. 
( Ord. No. O-15-0010, § 1, 2-3-2015 ) 
Chapter 29 - UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 29-1. - Use of rights-of-way; petition; advertisement. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to operate a utility, within Macon-Bibb County, including but not limited to the operation of railroads, street railways, urban transportation companies, electric or light power companies, gas companies, steam-heat companies, telecommunications or cable companies, or water companies without first having obtained a franchise agreement from Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  Any person who seeks the right to exercise a franchise in Macon-Bibb County which contemplates or makes necessary the erection and construction of any building, poles, wires, conduits, tracks or other similar equipment, in, upon or over any street located in Macon-Bibb County, shall file a written petition therefor. The petition shall contain an accurate description of the rights sought to be secured, and shall be accompanied by a plat showing the exact location or proposed location of the building, poles, tracks and the like, together with all streets upon or over which it is sought to exercise the franchise. 
(c)  The petition shall be filed with the clerk of commission accompanied by a deposit sufficient to cover the cost of advertising the petition as provided in this chapter, and no petition shall be received, filed, or presented to the commission until the full amount of the cost of the advertising shall have been first paid to the clerk of commission, who shall keep a record thereof. The petition shall be advertised in the official newspaper of Macon-Bibb County at least once a week for four weeks before it shall be considered by the city council commission or any committee thereof. 
(d)  Existing franchises from the City of Macon and/or Bibb County shall continue in force and effect in Macon-Bibb County until such time as said franchises expire, are renewed, or new franchises are issued by the commission. 
(e)  (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except a franchisee, to place any telephone, telegraph or other wires, cables, conduits, pipes, or other equipment used for telecommunications, cable or other communications purposes upon, under or above the rights-of-way of any street without first having obtained an access agreement with Macon-Bibb County as allowed by state law. Such agreement shall specify the name of the street involved, the purpose for which the wire, pipe, cable or conduit is run, the type and length of wire, cable, pipe, or conduit to be run, the extent of the construction to be performed, and the time allowed for performance of the work. The installation of such telephone or telegraph wires, cables or conduits shall be done by a licensed contractor and such work shall be done in a workmanlike manner in accordance with any specifications provided in regulations adopted by the Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
(2)  Such access agreement shall be granted only for a specified portion of particular streets and shall provide for compensation to Macon-Bibb County in an amount not to exceed the maximum amounts specified or allowed by state or federal law. 
Sec. 29-2. - Installation of aboveground and belowground utilities. 
(a)  The words "public utility," for the purposes of this section, shall include but shall not be limited to water lines, gas lines, sewer lines, pipelines, telephone lines, power lines, telecommunication cables, conduits and every other structure or device which by physical or electronic means conveys energy or substance, whether overhead or underground, along with supporting pedestals, poles and equipment. 
(b)  No person shall install or relocate any utility without compliance with this section. 
(c)  Before any public utility may be installed or relocated, application for a permit shall be made to the engineer of Macon-Bibb County. The application for the permit shall contain the name and address of the applicant, a description of the location and nature of the public utility and such other information as the engineer may reasonably require. The engineer shall issue a permit for such installation or relocation which conforms to this chapter. 
(d)  The Macon-Bibb County engineer shall not approve any permit for the installation or relocation of an underground utility where the topmost portion of the conduit, cable, wire, pipe or other feature is less than 30 inches below the surface of the ground at the time of completion of the installation, nor shall the engineer permit installation or relocation of an overhead utility where any aboveground fixture, pole, pedestal, or feature is not behind the ditch in a rural section, or behind the curb in an urban section, upon completion. 
(e)  The engineer may make other reasonable requirements governing the installation or relocation as shall be necessary to provide reasonable protection to the utility and to persons and property, both public and private. No public utility, once installed, shall be relocated without application for and receipt of a permit, and then only so long as its relocation meets the location requirements outlined in subsection (d). 
(f)  Whenever any person shall desire to change the conditions which were present at the time a public utility was appropriately installed (by grading, installing a driveway or private street, piping a ditch, etc.) in such fashion as to reduce the depth of an underground utility, or to otherwise necessitate relocation of any public utility, such person shall make prior arrangements for such relocation so as to comply with the location parameters required by subsection (d). The cost of such relocation shall be borne by the person desiring to change the conditions which would necessitate a relocation, unless otherwise agreed between the person and the utility; provided, however, that whenever it shall become requisite to relocate a utility by reason of necessity to grade, widen or otherwise improve a public roadway, drainage system, or sidewalk then in existence, the cost of such relocation of the utility shall be the expense of the owner of the utility unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
(g)  Any person who is installing an overhead wire or cable requiring an access agreement across a street or highway shall at all times maintain a minimum 18-foot clearance above the surface of such street or highway. 
(h)  Any person who is installing an underground wire, cable, pipe, or conduit requiring an access agreement shall also comply with the provisions of chapter 18 which deals with excavations into a public street. 
(i)  The Macon-Bibb County engineer shall be authorized to require a holder of an access agreement to relocate their wire, cable or conduit if such relocation is a public necessity. The engineer may also require an overhead wire or cable to be relocated if the street involved should convert from an overhead telephone system to an underground telephone system. 
Sec. 29-3. - Placement of poles; supervision by engineer; removal. 
(a)  Telegraph, telephone, and electric poles shall only be erected in a manner that best promotes pedestrian mobility and the work shall be done under the supervision of and subject to the approval of the Macon-Bibb County engineer. On failure of any company or person to locate these poles as required by this section, the mayor shall have power to remove such poles, and the expense of the removal shall be collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes are collected. It shall be the duty of every public utility company to apply to the engineer for directions as to the streets and alleys through which poles are to be placed and the engineer shall also regulate the distance between the poles. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to order the removal of or to remove all unsightly or dangerous poles in Macon-Bibb County, belonging to the several public utility companies. The cost of the removal to be collected as provided in subsection (a). Such removal shall be accomplished within 90 days of notification. 
Sec. 29-4. - Name of company stamped on poles. 
All public utility companies doing business in Macon-Bibb County are hereby required to place on each pole six feet above the base thereof a metal tag with the name of the company to which the pole belongs stamped thereon. 
Sec. 29-5. - Poles installed at expense of company. 
For the purpose of reaching the premises of users of electric service furnished by any company or person operating within Macon-Bibb County under a franchise therefrom, the necessary poles for the service shall be placed at the expense of the company or the person to the property line of the consumer. 
Sec. 29-6. - Removal of poles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the streets or sidewalks of Macon-Bibb County any telegraph, telephone, or other poles so as to leave any part of the pole exposed above the surface of the street or sidewalk. 
Sec. 29-7. - Manner of removal. 
With the exception hereinafter referred to and described, all poles shall be removed in the following manner: 
(1)  Where that portion of the sidewalk or street from which the pole is to be removed has not been paved, the pole shall be taken from the ground and the hole from which it is so taken shall be filled and the dirt placed therein securely packed so as to avoid settling. 
(2)  When the portion of sidewalk or street from which the pole is to be taken is paved, the pole shall be removed and repaired to the satisfaction of the Macon-Bibb County engineer. The pole shall be removed in its entirety and the resulting hole in the pavement shall be repaired with the same kind of material as that surrounding it. 
(3)  No holes shall be left unfilled unless barricades are placed to ensure the safety of the public. Final repairs shall be made within 30 days of the pole removal. 
Sec. 29-8. - Wires to be underground in certain area. 
Public utility companies shall maintain underground power on those streets in the urban core that currently have underground power. Underground utilities shall not be converted to overhead power without approval of the Macon-Bibb County commission. 
Sec. 29-9. - Requirements for placement of underground wires. 
All persons to whom permission may be granted for renewing or laying underground conduits, tubes, or pipes for electrical conductors, cables, or wires, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  No streets shall be broken or occupied by any person for the purpose of laying down conduits, tubes, or pipes for electrical conductors, cables, or wires, except by written permission of the engineer. 
(2)  During the construction or laying down of the underground conduits, tubes, or pipes, conductors, cables, or wires, no streets shall be opened or the pavement broken for a greater distance than 500 feet at any one opening, and no section of the 500 feet shall be kept open for a longer period than ten days, and the opening shall not be of greater width than four feet except where permitted by the Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
(3)  As the work progresses the pavement shall be properly relaid and the street put in good condition. 
Sec. 29-10. - Application to lay underground wires; permit required; access by Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
Prior to making any opening in any street, for the laying of conduits, tubes, or pipes for electrical conductors, cables, or wires, the person desiring to lay the same shall make application to the Macon-Bibb County engineer, in writing, and shall file plans and specifications showing the location, the route, and the length of the proposed conduits, pipes, and tubes. The engineer shall have authority to issue the necessary permit for the opening of the street, as set forth in the application and plans. The opening of the street, without a permit having been first obtained, shall forfeit the right of any person to use or occupy the street. The work of laying any underground conduits, tubes, pipes, electrical conductors, cables, and wires shall be under the direction and approval of the Macon-Bibb County engineer, who shall at all times have free and unobstructed access to the conduits, tubes, pipes, electrical conductors, or cables, for the purpose of inspecting the same, or making connections therewith for wires or conductors in use or to be used by Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 29-11. - Cutting of wires unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except employees of a telephone, telegraph, or electric light or power company, acting under orders, to cut a wire or alter its position without the knowledge or consent of the Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
Sec. 29-12. - One free duct for governmental purposes. 
Any person placing conduits under the foregoing provisions shall furnish to Macon-Bibb County on demand one duct in the same location for governmental purposes, without charge, provided no electric light or power wire shall be used in a telephone or telegraph conduit. 
Sec. 29-13. - Annual report on underground wires. 
All persons having telegraph, telephone, or electric wires, electrical conductors, or cables placed underground shall, in writing on or before January first of each year, report under oath to the mayor and to the Macon-Bibb County commission the actual number of wires, the location, and the miles of wire and electrical conductors underground, owned or leased or controlled by that person in Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 29-14. - Forfeiture. 
Should any person, to whom the right of franchise has heretofore been or shall hereafter be granted to lay underground wires, electrical conductors, cables, or tubes, dispose of such right of franchise, or lease to, consolidate, or merge with any other company, corporation, firm, or person, without first obtaining permission of the mayor and commission to so dispose of or lease, consolidate, or merge, the person shall forfeit all franchise rights and privileges granted. 
Sec. 29-15. - Liability for damage; bond. 
(a)  All persons occupying any street with underground conduits, tubes, pipes, cables, electrical conductors, or wires, shall be liable for all damages to gas and water main service and storm or sanitary sewer connections, and also liable for any damage caused by the opening of trenches, or the defective condition of streets, resulting from such laying of conduits, tubes, pipes, electrical conductors, cables, or wires, for which damage Macon-Bibb County might otherwise be held liable. 
(b)  A sufficient indemnity bond, certificate of liability insurance, or other approved security shall be given, subject to the approval of the mayor, at the time of granting permission for the underground activities, in the minimum sum of $10,000.00 to cover such damage, and save Macon-Bibb County harmless. 
(c)  The access agreement issued under section 29-1(e) shall also specify that the holder of an access agreement shall at all times be responsible to the public and hold the city harmless for any property damage or personal injury caused or occasioned by the installation, maintenance or occupancy of any wire, cable or conduit under, upon or above a street or highway right-of-way as permitted in this article. 
Secs. 29-16—29-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRIC SERVICE 

Sec. 29-36. - Authority of utility company to install and maintain distribution system. 
Authority, right, permission, and consent are hereby granted to the Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees, and assigns, for a period of 99 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys, and public places of the city within its present and future limits as from time to time the Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees, and assigns, may deem proper or necessary for the erection and maintenance of underground circuits or ducts, poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, insulators, transformers, and all appliances or connections for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying, and distributing electricity for light, heat, power, and other purposes for which electric current may be useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon the streets, alleys, and public places from time to time as may be necessary for the extension, operation, repair, and renewal of the same or any portion thereof, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the company, to insure safe and efficient service. 
Sec. 29-37. - Consideration, terms and conditions. 
(a)  The rights, permission, and consents herein contained are made for the following consideration and upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The Georgia Power Company, its successors and assigns, shall pay into the treasury of the city on or before the first day of March each year, beginning with the year 1966, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential and commercial rate schedules (as prescribed by the state public service commission), within the corporate limits of the city for the preceding calendar year so long as the city itself shall not engage in any such competing utility business, and on condition that in the event the shall grant to any other corporation the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, that use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained, including the payment of a license, privilege, or occupation tax in an amount at least equal to that herein specified. On and after January 1, 2014, the Georgia Power Company shall pay to Macon-Bibb County as the successor government to the City of Macon the sum of four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under the residential, commercial, and industrial rate schedules (as prescribed by the state public service commission), within Macon-Bibb County for the preceding calendar year so long as Macon-Bibb County shall not engage in any competing utility business, and on the condition that in the event Macon-Bibb County shall grant to any other corporation the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, that use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained. 
(2)  The payment of the percentage of gross sales provided for shall be in lieu of all other occupation, license, excise, and special franchise taxes, and in full of all money demands and charges, except ad valorem taxes on property and business taxes on the sale of appliances; and whatever amount, if any, shall at any time be required or exacted for the benefit of Macon-Bibb County on any of the accounts or on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and business taxes on the sale of appliances, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount due from the percentage above provided for. 
(3)  Should the city Macon-Bibb County ever at any time construct, purchase, lease, acquire, own, hold, use, or operate an electric lighting or power plant and distribution system, with the single exception of a power plant for water pumping and pumping station lighting purposes and none other at the present location of the Macon-Bibb County water pumping station then and in that event the payment of the percentage of gross sales herein provided to be paid by the Georgia Power Company, its successors and assigns, shall abate, cease, and be no longer due, and shall forever thereafter be uncollectible. 
(4)  The work of erecting poles and all other work upon the streets and public places of Macon-Bibb County shall be done under the supervision of the mayor and commission as may be provided by this Code, and all sidewalks or street pavements or street surface which may be displaced by reason of such work shall be properly replaced and relaid by the Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees, and assigns, to the satisfaction of Macon-Bibb County. 
(5)  The Georgia Power Company, its successors and assigns, shall fully protect, indemnify, and save harmless Macon-Bibb County from all damages to person or property caused by the erection or maintenance of poles, wires, or other works, or condition of streets, alleys, or public places resulting therefrom for which Macon-Bibb County would otherwise be liable or on account of which judgment may be rendered against it. 
(6)  The Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees, and assigns, shall further, in constructing and maintaining its system of overhead lines, poles, wires and other structures, submit and be subject to all laws, rules, and regulations of Macon-Bibb County for the regulation or control of such structures. 
(7)  Macon-Bibb County shall have the right to attach fire alarm and police telephone and telegraph service to the poles belonging to Georgia Power Company, it successors and assigns, at all times without expense to the government; and none of the wires or other appliances belonging to Macon-Bibb County, after having been affixed to the poles, shall be interfered with by any employee of the company, its successors, and assigns. 
(b)  The written agreement between Georgia Power Company and the City of Macon, dated May 7, 1965, and all supplemental agreements between Georgia Power Company and the City of Macon, specifically including a letter dated December 12, 1975, and any such agreement entered into between Georgia Power Company and Macon-Bibb County are incorporated by reference. Official copies of these agreements are on file in the office of the clerk of Macon-Bibb County. 
Secs. 29-38—29-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAS SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - FRANCHISE EFFECTIVE MAY 27, 1975 

Sec. 29-61. - Continuation of gas company's franchise. 
(a)  Atlanta Gas Light Company shall exercise for a period of 40 years from the date of approval of this chapter [May 27, 1975], the franchise under which Atlanta Gas Light Company is now conducting its business of selling natural gas and any other type of gas for any and all uses to which the same may be put advantageously in the city limits of the City of Macon and on and after January 1, 2014, in Macon-Bibb County within the geographic area of the former City of Macon as well as unincorporated Bibb County, and for these purposes Atlanta Gas Light Company may, and is hereby granted the right to, lay, construct, extend, maintain, renew, replace, and repair pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages under, along, through and across any streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in Macon-Bibb County, and to use and occupy the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places for the purpose of therein laying, constructing, extending, maintaining, renewing, replacing and repairing mains, pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances and all appurtenances and appendages thereto, used and useful for the manufacture, transmission, distribution and sale of gas, within and through the present or future territorial limits of Macon-Bibb County, such right, when exercised as herein provided, to continue for 40 years from the date of approval of this chapter [May 27, 1975]. 
(b)  In constructing, laying, maintaining, repairing, replacing, enlarging, and extending its pipes, mains, and necessary accessories in the streets and other public places, the company shall be subject to, and comply with, all ordinances, rules, and regulations of Macon-Bibb County, now or hereafter in force applicable to the use of streets and other public places. 
(c)  No excavations or work shall be done by Atlanta Gas Light Company in the streets or other places of Macon-Bibb County until a permit has been applied for by the company and granted by the official of Macon-Bibb County charged with that duty, except in emergencies, when the permit shall be obtained for the emergency work at the earliest practicable time. No permit shall be refused where the request is made in conformity to the general ordinances, rules, and regulations of the government and the purpose for which the permit is desired is not in violation of the general ordinances, rules, and regulations nor in violation of the terms of this article. 
(d)  In addition to complying with all ordinances, rules and regulations of Macon-Bibb County, where the use of the public streets and other public places are involved, the company shall at all times be subject to and comply with all other ordinances, rules and regulations of Macon-Bibb County enacted or promulgated under the police powers of Macon-Bibb County for the safety and protection of the general public. 
Sec. 29-62. - Removal or relocation of facilities. 
If any streets, roads, rights-of-way, or other public places owned by Macon-Bibb County or any water lines or mains or sanitary sewer lines or mains owned by Macon-Bibb County water and sewerage authority necessitating the removal or relocation of the Atlanta Gas Light Company facilities located therein in the furtherance of any governmental purpose, the removal or relocation shall be done by Atlanta Gas Light Company at its expense after reasonable notice, provided that the foregoing provisions of this section shall not be applicable where the street alteration or abandonment is done for the convenience of another public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, or for the convenience of any abutting landowner or any governmental agency. 
Sec. 29-63. - Rates. 
Atlanta Gas Light Company shall be entitled to charge for gas furnished by it, any rates as are prescribed by the public service commission or other lawful regulatory body of the state. 
Sec. 29-64. - Quarterly payment; right of inspection; exclusion for industrial gas. 
(a)  Atlanta Gas Light Company hereby agrees and covenants, for and in consideration of the rights and privileges herein granted to it, to pay, within 60 days following the end of each quarterly period, Macon-Bibb County three percent of the gas sales receipts received by Atlanta Gas Light Company from residential and commercial, but not industrial customers, within the territorial limits of Macon-Bibb County during the preceding quarterly period (hereinafter referred to as the quarterly period), provided, however, that should Macon-Bibb County require Atlanta Gas Light Company to pay any license fee or tax, excise tax, indirect tax, occupation tax, franchise tax, privilege tax, regulation charge or related fees, these taxes or charges shall be deducted in full by Atlanta Gas Light Company from the quarterly payment or payments subsequently accruing to Macon-Bibb County. The quarterly periods for which these payments shall be made shall commence upon the first day of the month immediately following proper adoption and approval of this article [May 27, 1975]. The commission, through its authorized representative or representatives, shall have the right to inspect and audit the books and records of Atlanta Gas Light Company for the purpose of determining the amount of its revenues received from the sale of gas to residential and commercial, but not industrial customers within Macon-Bibb County limits. 
(b)  "Industrial gas" or "gas sold to industrial customers," as to which Atlanta Gas Light Company shall pay no part of its revenue to Macon-Bibb County hereunder, is defined to be gas sold to manufacturing, assembling and processing businesses such as textile, and cotton mills, brick and tile manufacturers, glass manufacturing plants, cement plants, foundries, electric generating plants, steel and other metal plants, cotton oil mills, ice plants, bottling plants and other manufacturing plants, automobile and other assembling plants, kaolin processing plants, rubber processing plants, meat packing plants, laundries, bakeries, dairies, food processing plants, and other processing plants; and gas sold to governmental and institutional customers consuming more than 150,000 cubic feet of natural gas on any one-day during the customer's contract year and billed on an interruptible rate schedule, or under a special contract filed with the Georgia Public Service Commission, (or any successor state regulatory group). 
Sec. 29-65. - Increase in consideration. 
Should Atlanta Gas Light Company have in force on and after August 17, 1979, a contract to pay and actually be paying to any other municipality in the state receiving gas service under the same rates and similar conditions as those in effect at that particular time in Macon-Bibb County, a percentage greater than the three percent set out in this article, the three percent shall be increased to such greater percent, which greater percent shall become effective with the commencement of the next following quarterly period and remain effective so long, and only so long, as the Atlanta Gas Light Company shall pay the greater percent to another municipality. 
Sec. 29-66. - Repairs to streets. 
All excavations, construction, repair and other work done by any company in the streets or other public places of Macon-Bibb County shall be at the expense of the company, and all parts of streets and other public places shall be restored by the company so as to leave them in the same condition as before such acts on the part of the company, subject however to existing or future provisions of this Code which may provide that the restoration or replacement of pavement shall be done by Macon-Bibb County at the reasonable cost thereof to be borne by the company. The company shall compensate Macon-Bibb County for all damage to streets and other public places caused by acts or omissions of the company in making excavations, and in constructing, laying, maintaining, repairing, replacing, enlarging and extending the company's pipes, mains and other accessories. 
Sec. 29-67. - Company to indemnify city. 
Atlanta Gas Light Company shall save and keep harmless Macon-Bibb County from any and all liability by reason of damage or injury to any person or persons whomsoever, on account of negligence, wrongful act or omission, of Atlanta Gas Light Company in the installation, maintenance and repair of its mains and pipe lines along said streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks and other public places in Macon-Bibb County, provided the Atlanta Gas Light Company shall have been notified in writing of any claim against Macon-Bibb County on account thereof and shall have been given ample opportunity to defend the same. 
Sec. 29-68. - Transfer of franchise. 
Any franchise granted hereunder shall not be transferred, assigned or otherwise alienated except with the express consent of Macon-Bibb County; provided, however, that the franchisee shall have the full right and power to transfer the franchise in connection with any merger, consolidation or reorganization of the franchisee or as a part of securing the payment of any indebtedness now existing or hereafter created by the franchisee, its successors or assigns, with or without the consent of Macon-Bibb County. Each and every right and obligation of Atlanta Gas Light Company contained in this article shall extend and apply to its successors and assigns, and wherever Atlanta Gas Light Company is used herein it shall be construed to contain a specific reference to such successors and assigns. 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE FEE CALCULATION AMENDMENT EFFECTIVE NOVEMBER 1, 1998 

Sec. 29-69. - Definitions. 
Base year means the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998. 
Base year franchise fee factor means the total franchise fees paid during the base year divided by the design day capacity as recorded by Atlanta Gas Light Company on the last day of the base year. 
Design day capacity means the sum of the individual capacity in dekatherms (Dt) attributable to all firm customers located within the geographic limits of Macon-Bibb County as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
Firm customers means all residential and business customers who purchase gas service that ordinarily is not subject to interruption or curtailment. 
Fiscal year means the 12 months ending September 30 of each year. 
Inflation index means the percentage change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or any successor index, for the period from September 30, 1997, to the beginning of the then current fiscal year. The percentage shall be reduced by any productivity factor adjustment for the same time period determined by the state public service commission for Atlanta Gas Light Company. 
Sec. 29-70. - Franchise fee. 
The total dollar amount of franchise fees paid by Atlanta Gas Light Company to Macon-Bibb County shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  The current fiscal year total franchise fee shall equal the product of the design day capacity and the current franchise fee factor. The current franchise fee factor shall be equal to the product of the base year franchise fee factor and one plus the inflation index expressed as a decimal to three significant digits. 
(2)  The following formula quantifies this payment: 
FFc = FFFby × (1 + (CPI − PFA)) × DDc 
Where FFc = total franchise fees due the city for the current fiscal year 
FFFby = the base year franchise fee factor 
CPI - PFA = the inflation index based on the cumulative change in the consumer price index less the productivity factor adjustment determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
DDCc = the design day capacity as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
FFFby = FFby/DDCby where 
FFby = the total franchise fees paid in the base year 
and DDCby = the design day capacity of the base year. 
Sec. 29-71. - Responsibility for payment of franchise fee. 
(a)  Atlanta Gas Light Company as the holder of the franchise privilege hereunder is responsible for the payment of all franchise fees payable hereunder and shall file such reports and returns as required by this article. In addition, Atlanta Gas Light Company shall report annually the names of all gas marketers for which Atlanta Gas Light Company is transporting natural gas on the distribution system within Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  Franchise fee payments required hereunder shall be in lieu of any franchise fee, license fee, occupation tax or other payment for use of the rights-of-way by Atlanta Gas Light Company for the provision of gas service, but shall not prohibit imposition of a license fee or an occupation tax on gas marketers. 
Sec. 29-72. - Quarterly payments. 
(a)  Effective for the fiscal year 1999, and for each fiscal year thereafter during the term of the franchise ordinance, Atlanta Gas Light Company shall remit to Macon-Bibb County quarterly franchise fee installments. The installments shall be equal to one-fourth of the total annual franchise fee calculated in accordance with this division. 
(b)  The quarterly payment is due and payable on or before the 30th day following the last day of each calendar quarter. 
Sec. 29-73. - Annual return. 
Atlanta Gas Light Company shall file a return with its first quarterly installment in each fiscal year showing the details of the calculation of the annual franchise fee. 
Sec. 29-74. - Delay of inflation adjustment. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this division, any inflation adjustments shall be made to the franchise fee only when Atlanta Gas Light Company changes its rates. 
Sec. 29-75. - Conflicts. 
In the event of a conflict between divisions 1 and 2, division 2 shall control. All terms, conditions and stipulations contained in division 1 shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that they do not conflict with division 2. 
Secs. 29-76—29-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE 

Sec. 29-91. - Franchise renewed. 
(a)  The provisions of Ordinance No. 0-81-66, enacted July 21, 1981, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. Copies of such ordinance, which provides for the renewal of the presently existing nonexclusive CATV franchise to Cox Communications Inc., are on file and available for reference in the office of the Macon-Bibb County clerk. 
The provisions of Ordinance No. ____________ , with Suburban Cable, Inc. adopted December 19, 1989 and Ordinance No. ____________ , with Dimensions Cable T.V., adopted on January 2, 1990, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. Copies of such ordinances which provide for nonexclusive CATV franchises to the aforementioned companies are on file in the office of the Macon-Bibb County clerk. 
The provisions of Ordinance No. ____________ , executed September 4, 2002, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. Copies of such ordinance, which provides for a nonexclusive CATV franchise to Cox Communications Inc. are on file and available for reference in the office of the Macon-Bibb County clerk. 
(b)  Ordinances number X-74-22, X-77-17, AA-87-31, and KK-98-50 relating to cable television franchises in the county are incorporated by reference. The aforesaid ordinances are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect. Official copies of such ordinances are on file in the office of the Macon-Bibb County clerk. 
Sec. 29-92. - Franchise fee for state-issued cable or video franchise. 
(a)  Macon-Bibb County hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within Macon-Bibb County for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state. 
(b)  Macon-Bibb County hereby authorizes the office of the Macon-Bibb County attorney, upon receipt of notice to Macon-Bibb County of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state cable or video franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state and each applicant for or holder of a state cable or video franchise within the service area that wholly or partially located within the limits of Macon-Bibb County of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
Secs. 29-93—29-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TELEPHONE SERVICE 

Sec. 29-116. - Franchise. 
The provisions of Ordinance No. O-04-0027 enacted July 14, 2004, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein. A copy of such ordinance, which provides for the renewal of the pre-existing nonexclusive telecommunications franchise to Bell South Communications, Inc. is on file and available for reference in the office of the Macon-Bibb County clerk. 
The provisions of Ordinance No. C-04-0113 adopted July 7, 2004, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set forth herein. A copy of such ordinance, which provides for a nonexclusive telecommunications franchise to Bell South Communications, Inc. is on file and available for reference in the office of the Macon-Bibb County clerk. 
Secs. 29-117—29-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEWERS AND DRAINS 

Sec. 29-131. - False information on application. 
No person shall file an application for connection with any sewer line owned by Macon-Bibb County or the Macon water authority, which to the knowledge of the applicant contains false or erroneous information or which results in the payment of a tap-on fee smaller than that required by Macon-Bibb County or by the Macon water authority, as the case may be. 
Sec. 29-132. - Payment of tap-on fee. 
No person shall connect directly or indirectly to any sewer line owned by Macon-Bibb County or by the Macon water authority without having paid in full the tap-on fee required by Macon-Bibb County or the authority, as the case may be. 
Sec. 29-133. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by section 1-6. 
Secs. 29-134—29-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DRAINAGE AND PAVING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 29-141. - Creation of special districts by resolution. 
(a)  Whenever the board of commissioners of Macon-Bibb County shall determine that, pursuant to and in accordance with an amendment to the constitution of the state, proposed by the general assembly of the state (1943 Ga. Laws, page 8) and ratified at a general election held in June, 1943, a special drainage and/or paving district is to be established, the board of commissioners shall adopt a resolution describing such area constituting a special drainage and/or paving district, and the following provisions of this article shall in all instances apply to such drainage and/or paving district. The authority granted by the above-mentioned amendment shall apply only in that area that, prior to consolidation, encompassed the unincorporated area of Bibb County. 
(b)  In addition, the commission may, pursuant to article IX, section II, paragraph VI of the state constitution, create by resolution additional special districts for drainage and/or paving improvements for any area of Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall apply whether there are one or more districts created by such resolution or resolutions. 
Sec. 29-142. - Adoption of resolutions. 
Whenever the board of commissioners of Macon-Bibb County shall create a drainage and/or paving district, it shall do so by a resolution which shall define the limits of such drainage and/or paving district and any such resolution so establishing such district may by reference to this article incorporate the same therein and this article shall be as much a part of the resolution creating such drainage and/or paving district as if fully set forth therein. 
Sec. 29-143. - Purposes of resolutions; costs. 
(a)  Any resolution creating a drainage and/or paving district shall constitute a finding that, in the opinion of the board of commissioners of Macon-Bibb County, it is to the interest of the safety, convenience and health of the people residing in such district so established to improve the drainage and the condition of the streets in such district and such district shall thereby be condemned for drainage and paving, and it is hereby ordered that upon the effective date of such a resolution creating such drainage and/or paving district, that the drainage in such district be improved by the installation of storm sewers of adequate size, and that such district be paved with an asphalt surface on an adequate base, together with the necessary grading and incidental work. 
(b)  The prorata cost of the improvement described, as such portion as provided by section 29-149, as well as the costs provided by sections 29-147 and 29-148, shall be charges against the respective owners of the properties affected by the improvement and a continuing lien from the date of the resolution creating such special drainage and/or paving district to the date of full payment, against all of the properties of such owners whether affected by the improvements or not, the board of commissioners having the right and power, for and in behalf of Macon-Bibb County, to make collection from such owners or to pursue and subject for payment the properties affected by such improvements or any and all other properties of such owners. 
Sec. 29-144. - Improvements by government or contract. 
Such improvements shall be done in whole or in part by Macon-Bibb County forces or by contract as then existing conditions may dictate and be determined by the Macon-Bibb County engineer, with the approval and consent of the governing body. It is therefore ordered that such work shall be so accomplished, and the clerk of the Macon-Bibb County commission shall be authorized and directed, as to that portion of work to be accomplished by contract, to advertise for bids for furnishing all labor and materials for doing such work, as required by law. 
Sec. 29-145. - Plans, specifications and supervision of work. 
Such work shall be done in accord with plans and specifications prepared and/or approved by the Macon-Bibb County engineer, and subject to the approval of the Macon-Bibb County commission, and the work shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
Sec. 29-146. - Publication of notice; appeals. 
The clerk of the Macon-Bibb County board of commissioners shall cause to be published at least twice before work is commenced under this article, in the official advertising organ of Macon-Bibb County, notice of the passage of the resolution, and of the intention of Macon-Bibb County to cause the described work to commence and be completed. Such notice shall also advise that any owner of property or other person affected by the proposed work, may within ten days after the last published notice, appeal to the Macon-Bibb County commission and show cause, if any he has, why such proposed work should not be done, such persons being heard upon any material or pertinent matter, affecting the validity or reasonableness of such work, and the manner and means by which it is to be accomplished. 
Sec. 29-147. - Adjustment of utilities. 
Whenever the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall notify the owners of properties abutting on any district coming under this article or of any area where a drainage and paving project will occur, to move all water meters and lower all water and gas connections, or sewer connections, necessary to the proper construction of such drainage and paving project, each property owner shall immediately have all connections adjusted according to the plans and to the satisfaction of the engineer, and should the property owner within ten days after receiving such notice, fail to have such connections properly adjusted, or notify the engineer in writing that he does not intend to have such adjustments made, the Macon-Bibb County engineer will have adjustments made, and the cost of same, plus a $15.00 charge for handling shall be added to the assessments against the properties or owners and collected in the same manner as the original assessment, and whenever the engineer shall notify the public utility companies having utilities within the districts or adjacent to any planned drainage and paving project to move, lower or adjust such utilities as may be necessary to the proper construction of such drainage and paving project, the utility companies shall immediately have all utilities adjusted according to the plans and to the satisfaction of the Macon-Bibb County engineer. Such notice may be served either by leaving same at the residence of the respective property owners or at the office of the respective utilities or by depositing the same in the U.S. mail enclosed in an envelope properly stamped and addressed to the owner. Such notice shall also advise that any person affected may within five days of the date of such notice, appeal to the Macon-Bibb County commission for an extension of time for completing such work directed in such notice. 
Sec. 29-148. - Removal of artificial obstructions. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the Macon-Bibb County engineer, there shall exist artificial obstructions within or upon the areas of the right-of-way to be improved or needed as work area for the improvement, he shall notify the property owner whose property abuts the portion of the right-of-way so obstructed to remove such obstructions within ten days of the receipt of such notice and upon failure to do so Macon-Bibb County will remove the same without responsibility or liability therefor, and will charge and assess the entire cost of such removal against the property and owner affected in all instances where the obstructions have been created or maintained by such property owner. The notice provided for in this section shall be served and an appeal allowed as provided in section 29-147. 
Sec. 29-149. - Assessment of costs. 
Immediately upon the completion of any drainage and/or paving improvement made in any area of Macon-Bibb County, the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall certify to the Macon-Bibb County commission that the work of drainage and paving has been completed; and thereupon it shall become the duty of the commission to assess the cost of the work as follows: The real estate abutting on each side of such drainage and/or paving project shall be assessed and shall together pay two-thirds of the entire cost, including the drainage, each piece of real estate to be assessed in proportion that the frontage of such realty bears to the entire frontage so paved and/or drained as by law provided. In determining the entire cost of such work to be proportionally assessed, the commission shall have the right to include the cost of construction, replacement, or repair of steps, driveways, or lateral walks whether or not situated within the right-of-way, where in the judgment of the commission, the same are necessary to ingress and egress to and from abutting property. 
Sec. 29-150. - Payment of costs. 
(a)  Immediately after the cost of paving and/or draining under this article shall have been prorated and assessed by the Macon-Bibb County commission, the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall prepare a list of the property owners whose property abuts on the paving and/or drainage project and provide it to the Macon-Bibb County tax commissioner who shall mail to the property owners a written notice or statement of the amount so assessed in a properly addressed and stamped envelope. Thereupon each property owner shall make payment for such paving and drainage so assessed against each respectively within 30 days from the date of such notice unless the board of commissioners shall have determined that extenuating circumstances exist. If the board of commissioners in its sole discretion determines that extenuating circumstances exist, the board may permit the property owners to pay the assessment in monthly or quarterly installments over a term not to exceed five years. In such instance, the written notice or statement shall be mailed to the property owners as required herein immediately after approval of the installment payment and term and the property owners shall make such payments each month during the approved term until such assessment shall have been paid in full. 
(b)  In the event that any property owner shall fail to pay the Macon-Bibb County tax commissioner his assessment within 30 days from the date of such notice, or in the case where payment is approved in monthly or quarterly installments as set forth in subsection (a), each month or quarter during the approved payment term, then the Macon-Bibb County board of commissioners or its designated agent shall issue an execution against such delinquent property owner for the amount due and unpaid, together with all costs thereon, and each execution shall bear interest at the rate then in effect and applicable to executions for delinquent ad valorem taxes; provided, however, that in computing interest, a fraction of a month shall be charged as a full month. Any property owner failing to pay the tax commissioner his assessment within the time provided for in this section shall pay, in addition to the principal amount, such interest as is currently applicable from time to time. 
(c)  The execution issued by the Macon-Bibb County board of commissioners or its designated agent, as provided for in this section shall bind and be a lien upon all property of such delinquent owner abutting on such improvements or served thereby and shall be a special lien superior to all other liens except for taxes upon such property. The execution shall be collected and defenses thereto may be made in the manner provided by law with respect to ad valorem taxes. 
Sec. 29-151. - Article cumulative. 
The action taken in this article and the method provided for the collection of the assessments shall be cumulative of all rights of Macon-Bibb County otherwise afforded by law, including any and all contracts and petitions of property owners for the paving and drainage. 
Sec. 29-152. - Errors in assessments. 
Any errors made in the assessments provided for in this article may be corrected at any time by reassessment. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL SANITARY SEWERAGE DISTRICT 

Sec. 29-153. - Creation of special districts to facilitate expansion of sanitary sewerage service for Macon-Bibb County Residents. 
This section and the following sections, through and including section 29-165, provide for the means by which there may be created and established special districts for the acquisition of all necessary easements for, and construction and installation of, all infrastructure necessary to provide sewerage for sanitary sewage conveyance services to properties within said districts, and to provide a means of funding therefor through fees, assessments, and taxes that may be levied and collected within such districts to pay, wholly or partially, the cost thereof. These sections of this Code may be collectively referred to as the "Special Sanitary Sewerage District Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-154 - Purpose for special district. 
The special districts shall be created for the following purposes: 
To provide a means funding acquisition of all necessary easements for, and construction, and installation of, all infrastructure necessary to provide sewerage for sanitary sewage conveyance services to properties within the special districts. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-155. - Requesting creation of district. 
(a)  When sanitary sewage conveyance services are desired by residents and property owners of an existing neighborhood or subdivision that received final plat approval at least two (2) years prior to the submission of the application fee described in subsection (b), those residents and property owners may, by application submitted to the Board of Commissioners, request the creation of a special district to fund the construction and installation of all infrastructure necessary to provide the services throughout the following procedure: 
(b)  The application referred to in subsection (a), forms for which will be available from the Macon Water Authority, shall be signed by the owners of more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots in the requesting neighborhood or subdivision and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee equal to one hundred dollars ($100.00) multiplied by one-half (½) the number of lots in the development to be served by the special district, but in no event shall the application fee be less than twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). The Clerk shall verify that the application and fee satisfy the criteria set forth in this subsection. 
(c)  If the application and fee satisfy the criteria set forth in subsection (b), the Clerk shall deliver the fee and a copy of the application to the Macon Water Authority with a request that the Macon Water Authority conduct a feasibility study to determine the appropriate boundaries of the special district, to prepare a plat showing the proposed special district, to estimate the cost of providing sewer service to the district including but not limited to engineering, easement acquisition, construction, construction observation, permits, and debt service, to estimate the necessary millage rate for the special district and the number of years the district must exist to provide the funding for the project, and to render an opinion as to whether the project is otherwise appropriate for a special district. The Macon Water Authority will deliver a copy of the report of the feasibility study to the Board of Commissioners and to each applicant whose signature appears on the application. The Macon Water Authority may retain the application fee to help defray the cost of the feasibility study and dissemination thereof. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-156. - Public hearing required. 
Following dissemination of the report of the feasibility study as aforesaid, the Board of Commissioners shall conduct a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not to create the proposed special district, giving consideration to the report, to the comments by interested members of the public, and any other health, safety, and welfare concerns. The public hearing shall be advertised one (1) time in the official organ of the County; and at least one (1) sign shall be posted in the proposed special district giving notice of the hearing, at least fifteen (15) days before the public hearing. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-157. - Petition to establish special district. 
Following the public hearing, the Board of Commissioners shall determine by a majority vote whether to accept a petition, from owners of the property within the boundaries of the proposed district as described by the report of the feasibility study, to establish a special district fitting the criteria specified in the report of the feasibility study. If the Board of Commissioners vote to accept a petition, the Board of Commissioners may establish a deadline by which the petition must be submitted. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-158. - Special district established. 
If the owners of sixty-five percent (65%) of the lots in the proposed special district sign the petition for the creation of a special district conforming to the criteria set forth in the report of the feasibility study, the Board of Commissioners shall declare that the district is created. Once created, the district shall continue to exist until the cost of the project and the indebtedness of the Macon Water Authority for the completion of the project is retired. A plat describing the district shall be filed with Clerk of the County Superior Court and the County Engineer. Plats shall also be available to the public for inspection at the Macon Water Authority and at the offices of the Board of Commissioners. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-159. - Project construction. 
Whenever a special district is created, the County shall enter into a contract with the Macon Water Authority for the construction of the project. The contact shall include a statement of the scope of the project, and shall provide that responsibility for funding and managing the project shall belong to the Macon Water Authority. The contract shall provide that upon completion of the project, title to the infrastructure and any necessary easements shall be in the name of the Macon Water Authority. It shall further provide that responsibility for the maintenance of the completed sewer infrastructure shall belong to Macon Water Authority. It shall further provide that the assessments collected in the special district will be paid over to the Macon Water Authority to fund the full cost of the project, to reimburse the County for its costs and expenses incurred in performing its responsibilities set forth in Sections 29-155 through 29-158 with respect to the special district, and to retire any indebtedness incurred by the Macon Water Authority to fund the project. The contract shall contain a commitment obligating the Board of Commissioners to utilize all reasonable means, including but not limited to execution, levy, foreclosure, and sale, to collect any delinquent assessments imposed pursuant to this Special Sanitary Sewerage District ordinance. If the project as proposed includes excess capacity, the contrast shall include a statement explaining how any basin specific fee would be established and how said fees would offset the construction cost owed by the special district. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-160. - Assessments imposed, how collected. 
The Board of Commissioners shall establish an annual assessment to be imposed upon each of the lots in the district. Payment of the first assessment shall be due concurrently with the due date for payment of ad valorem taxes for the calendar year in which the district is created. Payment shall be due annually thereafter until the cost of the project and the indebtedness of the Macon Water Authority for the completion of the project are retired. The office of the Tax Commissioner shall be responsible for the collection of the assessments for each special district. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-161. - Lien created. 
In addition to any other rights of collection for late or unpaid charges, the County shall have the rights available under the laws of the State for assessment, including the creation of a lien upon the property the assessment for which is not timely paid, together with all rights of execution, levy, foreclosure, and sale. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-162. - Property owners' expenses associated with connecting to installed sewerage infrastructure. 
No part of the assessments collected in the special district shall be used to defray the cost of connecting to installed sewerage infrastructure. All such costs shall be borne by property owners' who desire to make such connection, in accordance with policies and practices of the Macon Water Authority in effect from time to time. Connection to the infrastructure is not required as a condition of the establishment of the district, but every property against which assessments are made shall have the right to connect to the infrastructure, in accordance with said policies and practices of the Macon Water Authority. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-163. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Special Sanitary Sewerage District ordinance is, for any reason, held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Special Sanitary Sewerage District ordinance. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-164. - Conflict of laws. 
If any provision of this Special Sanitary Sewerage District ordinance is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation, or order of any agency of this state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this Special Sanitary Sewerage District ordinance, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the Board of Commissioners that the state or federal law or rule, regulation, or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this Special Sanitary Sewerage District ordinance shall be deemed to be of full force and effect. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Sec. 29-165. - No wavier. 
If the intent of this Special Sanitary Sewerage District ordinance to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of all properties and persons in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the unincorporated boundaries of the County. The County expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to imposed monetary damages upon the County, its officers, employees, and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection, or similar act is required by the County as a condition precedent to any activity by or upon property not owned by the County, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation, or rule of the County or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall such issuance afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the County, its officers, employees, or agents. 
( Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 1, 8-19-2014 ) 
Secs. 29-166—29-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - WATER SYSTEM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 2, adopted August 19, 2014, renumbered art. VIII, §§ 29-171—29-189, as art. IX, §§ 29-171—29-189. 

Sec. 29-171. - Permit for water or gas main. 
No person shall hereafter lay any water pipe or main, gas pipe or main, or any other main upon any part of the public streets or highways within Macon-Bibb County without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Macon-Bibb County engineer as provided in section 29-2. 
Sec. 29-172. - Depth of pipe or main. 
No such pipe or main shall be laid upon any such street or highway unless the same is at least 30 inches below the grade of such street or highway, and any pipe so laid shall be upon condition that the same will be changed wholly at the expense of the property owner or applicant, to conform to any new grade which may be hereafter established for the street or highway on which it is located, so as to be at all times at least 30 inches below the grade of such street or highway. 
Sec. 29-173. - Depth of present pipes and mains. 
The owners or users of any mains or pipes now existing within the area of Macon-Bibb County are permitted to continue the use of such highways only on condition that such mains or pipes now are, or shall be within 30 days of the direction of the Macon-Bibb County engineer as needed to protect the existing road and drainage system, placed at least 30 inches below present grade, and upon the change of grade in any such highway hereafter, such owner or users will likewise be required at his own expense to adjust such mains or pipes so that they at all times will be at least 30 inches below the grade of such highway. 
Sec. 29-174. - Pavement repair charge. 
Before the Macon-Bibb County engineer shall issue to any person a permit to lay any water, gas, sewer pipe or any other pipe or conduit on any public road or street of Macon-Bibb County which is paved in such a manner as to necessitate the disturbing of the pavement, such person shall pay to the Macon-Bibb County engineer an inspection fee to be established by the Macon-Bibb County engineer, which amount is set as the minimum charge for replacing or repairing the pavement damaged by the excavation, and no portion of which shall be returned to the holder of the permit. 
Sec. 29-175. - Conditions and regulations. 
All permits shall be issued and all pipe and conduits shall be installed subject to and in accord with the following conditions and regulations: 
(1)  No pipe nor conduit shall be installed less than 30 inches deep. 
(2)  No excavation shall be made under the pavement larger than the hole in the pavement. 
(3)  The excavation shall be properly backfilled and the backfill material thoroughly tamped into place, the material being left slightly higher than the pavement to allow for settlement, and should settlement occur, the party making the excavation shall keep same filled up with satisfactory material until pavement is repaired. 
(4)  Adequate barricades, proper signage, and lights shall be provided by the party making the excavation at all times during construction and until pavement is repaired. 
(5)  Upon completion of construction and the proper filling of the excavation the contractor shall notify the Macon-Bibb County engineer that the work is complete and that the pavement may be repaired. 
(6)  After, in the opinion of the Macon-Bibb County engineer, sufficient time has elapsed for the backfill to properly settle, the pavement shall be repaired by Macon-Bibb County forces. 
(7)  No parties other than Macon-Bibb County forces shall repair or replace any pavement without the express consent of the Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
(8)  No pipe or conduit shall be laid at such a grade or in such a manner as to disturb any existing cross-drain, culvert, pipe, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, side-drain pipe or other existing pipe, nor less than four inches above the top or below the bottom of any existing pipe or culvert. 
Sec. 29-176. - Duties of Macon-Bibb County engineer. 
The Macon-Bibb County engineer shall have prepared proper forms for the applications for permits, and for the permits, and the engineer shall keep a complete and accurate record of all permits issued, all charges made and all payments received. 
Sec. 29-177. - Removal of pipe or conduit. 
The Macon-Bibb County engineer is hereby authorized and instructed to remove from the right-of-way of any public road or street, any pipe or conduit which is not installed in accordance with the foregoing regulations or which is installed without a permit having first been obtained even though it be otherwise properly installed, and to replace the roadway in the same condition as it was before the installation. 
Sec. 29-178. - Water line connections regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect to the water lines constructed by the Macon water authority without having previously obtained a permit so to do from the Macon-Bibb County engineer; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to connections for fire suppression lines. 
Sec. 29-179. - Water meter required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect to a water line belonging to the Macon water authority without having installed a water meter for the purpose of measuring the water consumed through the tap so made; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to connections for fire suppression lines. 
Sec. 29-180. - Tampering with meter prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any meter installed by the Macon water authority or by the former board of water commissioners of the City of Macon so as to render it inoperable, or otherwise impair its proper operation. 
Sec. 29-181. - Bypassing meter prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install any water service line or to alter any previously installed water service line so as to cause the same to bypass any meter located upon a service line which itself is connected with a water line owned by the Macon water authority. 
Sec. 29-182. - Consumption of water regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying business or residential premises to permit the consumption of water upon such premises, if such water has been obtained through the water system operated by or for the account of the Macon water authority, unless such water so consumed has passed through a water meter in good operating condition which accurately measures the amount of water passing through such meter; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to fire suppression lines. 
Sec. 29-183. - Payment of bills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay, promptly when due, any bills for water consumed or for other charges rendered by the Macon water authority, or by its agent. 
Sec. 29-184. - Payment of money due authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act or to omit to do any act whether or not specifically hereinabove set forth which results in the failure of such person to pay any sums of money due to the Macon water authority, or to its agent for the account of the authority which are properly due and owing. 
Sec. 29-185. - Each day a separate offense. 
Each day that any such person remains in violation of this resolution [chapter] shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
Sec. 29-186. - Penalty. 
Any person charged with the violation of this chapter shall be tried in the municipal court of Macon-Bibb County, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by the laws of the state pertaining to that court except that the penalties and punishment shall be as provided in section 1-6. 
Sec. 29-187. - Findings and purpose. 
Macon-Bibb County finds that there is an imminent need to foster a culture of water conservation and to plan for water supply enhancement during future extreme drought conditions and other water emergencies; and that reasonable restrictions on the outdoor watering of landscape are necessary in furtherance of addressing this need. 
The purposes and intent in enacting sections 29-187 through 29-189 are as follows, and to these ends the said regulations are hereby adopted: 
(1)  To address outdoor watering of landscape to promote conservation of water and enhance water supply; and 
(2)  To comply with the mandate of the Georgia General Assembly (Senate Bill 370) that all counties adopt an ordinance limiting outdoor watering of landscape to the hours between 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. (with certain exceptions) to take effect not later than January 1, 2011. 
(3)  This section is enacted pursuant to authority granted under O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7, to regulate the outdoor watering of landscape in Macon-Bibb County. 
Sec. 29-188. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in Macon-Bibb County may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aqua cultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable Macon-Bibb County ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property. If such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydro seeding. 
Sec. 29-189. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(b)  The Macon water authority shall be the enforcement authority for the ordinance from which this section derives. The Macon-Bibb County board of commissioners may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
Secs. 29-190—29-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESIDENTIAL STREET LIGHTING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-16-0027, § 1, adopted March 1, 2016 , repealed art. X, divs. 1, 2, §§ 29-201—29-206, 29-211—29-215, in its entirety; and enacted a new art. X to read as set out herein. Former art. X pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Original Code and Ord. No. O-14-0045, § 2, adopted August 19, 2014 . 

Sec. 29-201. - Statement of policy. 
(a)  Macon-Bibb County recognizes that residential street lighting is necessary to illuminate public streets and pedestrian infrastructure. It is the policy of Macon-Bibb County to assist residents in the installation and maintenance of essential residential street lighting in order to provide such services. It is the intent of Macon-Bibb County that all areas receive consistent treatment and requests for lighting shall be considered in order to ensure that areas are safe for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Any secondary benefit such as perceived personal security, or the lighting of yards, driveways, or private property is considered coincidental. 
(b)  Unless installed by a utility company, Macon-Bibb County shall be responsible for the costs associated with the maintenance, installation, and operation of all approved residential street lights located on public streets. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0027, § 1, 3-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 29-202. - Petition for installation of street lighting on existing public streets. 
This policy follows the standard County process for citizen response to provide uniformity and ensure responsiveness and accountability. 
(a)  Requests for new street lights and/or changes in existing street lights on existing roadways must be made in writing to the Director of Facilities Management. Requests should include the primary concern, an individual contact person for follow up, and a non-refundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the administrative costs of review of the area. Requests will be logged and included on the County's list of street light requests. 
When an organized group is active, i.e., homeowners association (HOA), civic association or other, the request shall be submitted by that entity. If no formal group exists, the request may be made by an individual or group of individuals. 
Requests for street light changes may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
• Additional/fewer lights 
• Rearrangement of lights 
• Refurbishing of lights 
(b)  Upon receipt of the street light request, a field survey shall be conducted by Facilities Management, or its designee, to determine the existing lighting conditions including number of street lights, locations, spacing, fixture types, poles, and any other pertinent information. An inspection may take place at night hours if deemed necessary to properly assess the area. 
(c)  Macon-Bibb County shall only approve petitions in areas that have above-ground utility poles, with lighting sources attached. Pole installation may be done by agreement of the property owners with the power company serving the district, or by any other method which Macon-Bibb County determines to be satisfactory. All existing poles or installed poles must be approved by the Macon-Bibb County Engineer, or their designee, prior to installation. 
(d)  If installation is recommended by the Director of Facilities Management, or their designee, upon review of the area, the community shall circulate a petition to the impacted neighboring property owners. The impacted neighboring property owners are defined as any property owner that has all or a portion of their property within a 300 foot radius of a requested street light modification. The requestor must obtain approval of at least 65% of the property owners petitioned unless a single light is requested, at which point 100% of the property owners must be in favor of the additional street light. All properties in the impacted area must be contacted. If a property owner does not respond, it will be counted as a no vote. If a legitimate safety problem can be documented, the Director of Facilities Management, or their designee, shall have the authority to waive the petition process. 
(e)  Once the petition is verified, a map shall be drawn of the area showing any existing street lighting. Facilities Management, or their designee, shall prepare a recommendation and estimated costs of such work, including installation of lights, maintenance costs, and electricity costs. 
(f)  All findings, costs, and recommendations shall then be submitted via resolution to the Macon-Bibb County Commission for consideration and approval of installation. The Macon-Bibb County Commission shall assess each petition individually on the merits and shall be required to identify funding for any approved projects. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0027, § 1, 3-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 29-203. - Petition for installation of street lighting on existing private streets. 
Macon-Bibb County shall not be responsible for the installation, operation, or maintenance costs associated with the installation of street lighting on private streets. Facilities Management and/or County Engineering staff may work with the neighborhood association and/or utility company to design a plan that shall meet County specifications, if directed by the Macon-Bibb County Commission. Neighborhood associations or other private entities will be responsible for the cost of installation and all ongoing maintenance and power costs for street lights on private streets. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0027, § 1, 3-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 29-204. - Installation of lighting in new developments. 
(a)  Prior to the commencement of subdivision construction and prior to any permits being issued, all developers of new subdivisions and other new projects in Macon-Bibb County shall provide for street lighting in such development and shall submit to the Director of the Facilities Management Department and the County Engineer plans as to the proposed location, type and installation specifications of all street lights in the subdivision for a determination as to compliance with the lighting requirements of Macon-Bibb County. 
(b)  Upon completion of the street lighting system and prior to formal acceptance by Macon-Bibb County for the maintenance and operation of the street lighting system, all developers must provide the Director of the Facilities Management Department and the County Engineer with proof that all costs of installation of the street lighting system have been paid, and obtain written approval from the Director of the Facilities Management Department and the County Engineer that the street lighting system complies with the lighting requirements of Macon-Bibb County. In addition, developer must submit a copy of the final "as-built" drawings to the Director of the Facilities Management Department and the County Engineer prior to such written approval being granted. Costs of installation of the street lighting system in new developments are to be paid by the developer. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0027, § 1, 3-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 29-205. - Lighting requirements for area formerly known as the unincorporated Bibb County. 
For street lighting installed in the area formerly known as the unincorporated Bibb County, the following standards are required: 
(a)  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of residential street illumination shall comply with the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting, dated July 1, 1973, referred to above. 
(b)  Luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as "security lights" or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public street shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from such street and shall be oriented in such a manner that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. Such security lights shall not be installed without the prior approval of Macon-Bibb County. 
(c)  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or without public rights-of-way for any purpose whatever shall be installed in such a manner as to prevent glare from being a hazard, or interfering with the normal use of public rights-of-way. 
(d)  Fixtures for illuminating areas adjoining the public streets, roads, etc., such as parking areas, driveways, etc., will be mounted in such a manner as to insure that the light pattern is kept off the public roadway. When street or roadway lighting luminaries are to be used for "security lighting," they will be mounted on the side of the pole that is opposite from the public street and will be mounted to insure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution at the initial light source is perpendicular to the street. 
(e)  If lighting fixtures of a type other than those in the classification of street or roadway luminaries are to be used or if the proposed lighting is to be for other than drives, parking areas or other similar area lighting, the plans and specifications submitted will be sufficiently detailed to clearly show that such a proposal is in compliance with these standards and will not cause a hazard to, or interfere with, the normal use of the public streets, roads or highways. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0027, § 1, 3-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 29-206. - Lighting requirements for area formerly known as City of Macon. 
For street lighting installed in the area formerly known as the City of Macon, the Urban Code of Street Lighting is hereby adopted by reference and all requirements of such Code shall be abided by. A copy of the code is on file with the Macon-Bibb County Clerk and additional copies of the code may be obtained from the Director of Facilities Management. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0027, § 1, 3-1-2016 ) 
Sec. 29-207. - Abolishment of all previous street lighting districts. 
(a)  All previously enacted and approved street lighting districts located in Macon-Bibb County are hereby abolished and terminated. The fees incurred by such street lighting districts are hereby discontinued and said fees shall prorated and cease to accrue as of July 1, 2016. 
(b)  Any fees or outstanding balances due on previously approved street lighting districts accrued prior to July 1, 2016 shall remain collectable and due, however, no further fees or obligations shall be incurred. 
( Ord. No. O-16-0027, § 1, 3-1-2016 ) 
Secs. 29-208—29-2015. - Reserved. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
Beginning with Supplement No. 1, this table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 