THE CODE OF THE CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA ____________ Published in 2007 by Order of the City Council ____________ OFFICIALS of the CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Barry Blount, Mayor Walton Grant Eloise Paschal Eddie Rhea Walker Lou Chase Steve Jones Lorenzo Johnson City Council ____________ Charlotte D. Cotton City Administrative Officer ____________ Paula Martin City Clerk ____________ James Skipper City Attorney PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Americus, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior Code, and any ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Charlotte Cotton, Chief Administrative Officer, Ms. Paula Martin, City Clerk, and Mr. James Skipper, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. © ;hg;Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. 2007. 
Chapter 22 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— City Business Improvement District Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-19. - Established. (a)  There is hereby established a central city business improvement district in the downtown development authority area of the city, effective January 1, 2003, said city business improvement district being established pursuant to the provisions of the City Business Improvement District Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.). (b)  The legal boundaries of the city business improvement district hereby established are more particularly described as follows: Start at the intersection of the north right-of-way line of West Church Street with the east right-of-way line of Hampton Street in the City of Americus as the point of beginning of the boundary description described herein; thence run in an easterly direction along the north right-of-way line of Church Street to the west right-of-way line of Prince Street; thence run in a northerly and westerly direction along the west right-of-way line of Prince Street to the west right-of-way line of North Jackson Street; thence run along the west right-of-way line of North Jackson Street in a southerly direction to the north right-of-way-line of West Jefferson Street; thence run in a westerly direction along the north right-of-way line of West Jefferson Street to the east right-of-way line of North Hampton Street; thence run in a southerly direction along the east right-of-way line of North Hampton Street to the north right-of-way line of West Church Street and the point of beginning of the boundary description herein. There is excluded from the boundary of said district any property on which is located a telephone central office and switching facilities which serve an area exceeding the boundaries of the district. (Code 1986, § 14-80; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-20. - Adoption of district plan. (a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-43-4, the district plan for the provisions of supplemental services to the district presented to the city council on December 9, 2002, is hereby approved until amended by the city council. A copy of such district plan as adopted, and as hereafter amended, may be obtained from the office of the clerk of the city during reasonable business hours. (b)  The city council shall have the right to amend the district plan adopted at such time or times, as the city council may deem appropriate. (Code 1986, § 14-81; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-21. - Establishment of ad valorem tax rates. (a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-43-4, there is hereby established an annual millage rate of one mill upon all real and personal property located within the district, which millage rate is in addition to all millage rates upon real and personal property previously established for property located in the city. (b)  The millage rate authorized pursuant to this section shall be subject to change annually by the city council at the time that the city approves its annual operating and capital improvements budgets, and at such other times as may be deemed appropriate by the city council; provided, however, that in no event shall the millage rate authorized in this section exceed five mills. (c)  The taxes established or authorized pursuant to this section shall be assessed against the real and personal property, shall be liens upon that property until paid, and the city shall be authorized to enforce such liens in the same manner as other city tax liens are enforced. (Code 1986, § 14-82; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-22. - Business license and occupation tax surcharge. (a)  The city shall also collect a surcharge on business license and occupation taxes upon businesses and occupations located within said district and such business license and occupation taxes shall be considered tax liens and may be collected in the same manner as other city taxes. (b)  All surtaxes are to be paid during the occupational license tax period annually from January 1 to March 15 of each year. There will be no prorated city business improvement district surtaxes. (c)  The business license surtax and occupation surtax shall equal 50 percent of the existing business license and occupation tax. (d)  No business license or occupation license shall be issued by the city until all business license and occupational taxes for such business or occupation has been paid, including the surtax authorized by this section. (Code 1986, § 14-83; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-23. - Design and rehabilitation standards.     The design and rehabilitation standards set out in article VII, of chapter 14 shall remain in effect and be fully enforceable in the city business improvement district. (Code 1986, § 14-84; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-24. - Contracts with downtown development authority. (a)  The city shall be authorized to approve a contract, on an annual basis, with the city downtown development authority established pursuant to the Downtown Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.) in connection with the special services to be provided to the city business improvement district. Such contract may include provisions authorizing the downtown development authority to expend funds collected by the city pursuant to this article for the provision of supplemental services to said district and may further authorize the downtown development authority to enter into a contract with third parties, including for profit and nonprofit corporations, for the provision of such supplemental services. (b)  There shall be established in the city budget a line item for the receipt and expenditure of the funds collected pursuant to this article, and no such funds may be expended without such budget authorization. (c)  In the event that the city council enter into a contract with the downtown development authority in connection with the administration of the city business improvement district and the expenditure of funds collected pursuant to this article in connection therewith, the city council shall be required to review and approve, on an annual basis, the budget of the downtown development authority for the expenditure of such funds. (Code 1986, § 14-85; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-25. - Collection and expenditure of funds.     All funds collected pursuant to this article may only be expended for supplemental services provided in the city business improvement district plan adopted by the city council. (Code 1986, § 14-86; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 26-1. - Residence requirements.     In the event a member of the council moves such member's residence to without the district from which such member was elected, such office will become vacant immediately. There shall be no durational residency requirement as a condition to qualifying as a candidate for the council from a particular district other than what is already expressed in the city charter or general law of the state, except that all candidates for the council must attain their residency in the district they seek to represent at least by the time they qualify themselves as candidates. (Code 1986, § 9-7; Court Order, § 8) 
Sec. 26-2. - Nonpartisan elections.     Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices, and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designated. (Code 1986, § 9-9; Court Order, § 10; Ord. No. O-94-06-17, 6-23-1994) 
Sec. 26-3. - Charter and state law govern elections.     The city Charter and the state law will continue to govern elections for the city and the powers and duties of the officers of the city. This chapter shall not affect in any way the validity of any action taken by the city or by an officer or agent thereof. (Code 1986, § 9-10; Court Order, § 11) 
Sec. 26-4. - Voting machines.     Voting machines are authorized and directed to be used for recording and computing the vote at all municipal elections held by this city. (Code 1986, § 9-13; Court Order, § 7A-7) State Law reference— Voting machines, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-310 et seq. 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 30-1. - False alarms. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in an alarm of fire except in the case of actual or threatened fire. (b)  The term "accidental false alarm" shall be defined as the transmission of an audible or electronic message or signal by a residence or business or is caused by accidental activation by the owner, resident, manager, or employee of a residence or business, is caused by a malfunction or other reason where the responding public safety personnel find no evidence of entry, attempted entry, or indication of smoke or a fire. Personal security devices activated manually, weather-related activations due to severe weather, and power outages resulting in the transmission of false alarms shall not be considered accidental false alarms for the purpose of this section. (c)  It shall be unlawful for a person or business to allow, cause, or fail to repair or maintain any alarm which transmits a false alarm more than three times in a single calendar month. Such false alarms shall be deemed a nuisance alarm. (d)  A penalty of $25.00 shall be assessed for each nuisance alarm transmitted after the third nuisance alarm in any calendar month. A penalty of $25.00 shall be assessed for each accidental false alarm after the third such accidental false alarm in any calendar month. Such fines may be assessed by the municipal court upon the issuance of a citation therefor and a finding of guilt by said court. (Code 1962, § 9-6; Code 1986, § 11-3; Ord. No. O-02-03-08, 3-21-2002) State Law reference— False alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 
Secs. 30-2—30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 30-21. - Emergency management organization and plan.     The city participates in the countywide emergency management organization and plan. 
Sec. 30-22. - Unlawful acts.     It shall be unlawful during an emergency: (1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in enforcement of a lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performances of any duties imposed by virtue of this chapter. (2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil or delay operations hereunder. (3)  To wear or carry or display, without authority, any mark or identification specified by the emergency management organization. (Code 1962, § 7-8; Code 1986, § 7-8) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 34-1. - Permit required to dig well within city. (a)  No person shall dig or cause to be dug any well within the city without a written permit from the city. The city shall only be authorized to grant such a permit under the following circumstances: (1)  If the city finds that city water service is not available or will not be available within 12 months from the date of application for the permit to the particular location sought to be served by the proposed well; (2)  If the city finds that an existing or proposed business facility for which access to a water well is sought by the owner thereof, or is the type of business which requires regular access to nontreated water to the extent that the business would not be able to carry out its business if it were required to connect to the existing water service; (3)  If the city finds that the person requesting a permit to dig a well within the city intends to use the well water solely for the purpose of filling and maintaining a pond or ponds located in the city which the owner thereof intends to stock with fish for his own personal use, and not for commercial purposes. Any such well shall not be utilized to provide drinking water to any person, residence or business. (b)  Any person desiring to dig a well within the city shall first apply in writing to the city, setting forth in the application information concerning the location of the proposed well, the anticipated depth of proposed well and the proposed uses of the well. No person shall dig, or shall hire, employ or contract with another to dig a well within the city without such permit as herein provided. (c)  Each application for a permit shall be submitted to the city manager, or his or her designee, for review. If, after review, it is determined that a well permit is authorized under the terms of this section, then such well permit may be issued by the city manager, or his or her designee, as an administrative matter. In the event that the application for a water well permit is administratively denied, then the applicant shall be authorized to appeal such denial to the governing body of the city, and such appeal shall be heard by the governing body of the city at a date and time established by the governing body which is not more than 30 calendar days after the date that the applicant's written appeal has been received by the city manager. The governing body of the city shall hear such appeal and base its decision upon the facts, testimony, and other evidence presented at the appeal hearing. (Code 1962, § 12-3; Code 1986, § 12-1; Ord. No. O-94-07-23, 7-21-1994; Ord. No. O-11-08-15, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. O-2014-26, 11-20-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 34-2—34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
Sec. 34-21. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter loadbearing wall shall be considered new construction.     Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.     Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.     Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.     Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.     Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.     Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.     Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment.     Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event.     Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before December 16, 1988.     Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 16, 1988.     Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.     Flood or flooding means the general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.     Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A.     Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community.     Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood.     Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding.     Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.     Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building.     Historic structure means any structure that is: (1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.     Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code.     Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.     Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD).     National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) means as corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after December 16, 1988, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure.     New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 16, 1988.     Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: (1)  Built on a single chassis; (2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.     Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.     Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank.     Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.     Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building should be: (1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project.     Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.     Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article that permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (Code 1986, § 5-50; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-22. - Findings of fact. (a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation that results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. (b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. (Code 1986, § 5-51; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-23. - Statement of purpose.     It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: (1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; (2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; (3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development that may increase flood damage or erosion; (4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and (5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers that are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. (Code 1986, § 5-52; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-24. - Objectives.     The objectives of this article are: (1)  To protect human life and health; (2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; (3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; (4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; (5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; (6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and (7)  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. (Code 1986, § 5-53; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-25. - Lands to which this article applies.     This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (Code 1986, § 5-54; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-26. - Basis for area of special flood hazard.     The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 16, 1988, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. (Code 1986, § 5-55; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-27. - Establishment of development permit.     A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. (Code 1986, § 5-56; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-28. - Compliance.     No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (Code 1986, § 5-57; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-29. - Abrogation and greater restrictions.     This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Code 1986, § 5-58; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-30. - Interpretation.     In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1)  Considered as minimum requirements; (2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and (3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Code 1986, § 5-59; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-31. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.     The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Code 1986, § 5-60; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-32. - Penalties for violation.     Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the city in the case. Each day such violation continues, shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation hereof. (Code 1986, § 5-61; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-33. - Permit procedures. (a)  Required. A development permit shall be obtained in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. (b)  Forms furnished; plans to scale. Application for a development permit shall be made to the building official on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: (1)  Plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question; and (2)  The nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. (c)  Application stage. Specifically, the following information is required: (1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level or highest adjacent grade of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; (2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; (3)  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 34-36(2); (4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. (d)  Construction stage. (1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. (2)  Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. (3)  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. (4)  The building official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. (5)  Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. (Code 1986, § 5-62; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-34. - Designation of article administrator; duties and responsibilities of the administrator. (a)  The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. (b)  Duties of the building official shall include, but shall not be limited to: (1)  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. (2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. (3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-26, then the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of sections 34-35—34-40. (4)  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level or highest adjacent grade of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 34-33(d). (5)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 34-33(d). (6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the building official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 34-36(2) or 34-38(3). (7)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). (8)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. (9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. (10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the building official and shall be open for public inspection. (Code 1986, § 5-63; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-35. - General standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: (1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; (2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; (3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; (4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction; b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; (5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; (6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; (7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; (8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; (9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and (10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure that is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. (Code 1986, § 5-64; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-36. - Specific standards.     In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: (1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-35(4), elevated buildings. (2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 34-34(b)(6). (3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: a.  All manufactured homes are placed or substantially improved on: 1.  Individual lots or parcels; 2.  In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See subsection 34-35(6).) d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 1.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions. 2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a.—c. of this section. 3.  The recreational vehicle must be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. (4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-26, are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. b.  Only if subsection (4)a. is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 34-35—34-40. (Code 1986, § 5-65; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000; Ord. No. O-09-08-28, 8-20-2009) 
Sec. 34-37. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations, floodway, A-zones.     Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-26, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: (1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-26, then the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 34-35—34-40. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. (2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. (3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-36(4), elevated buildings. (4)  The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (Code 1986, § 5-66; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-38. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding, AO zones.     Areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-26, may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: (1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-35(4), elevated buildings. (2)  The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (3)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this section and as required in subsections 34-33(c)(3) and (d). (4)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. (Code 1986, § 5-67; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-39. - Standards for subdivisions.     Following are the standards for subdivisions: (1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; (2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; (3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and (4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. (Code 1986, § 5-68; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-40. - Variance procedures. (a)  The board, as established by the city, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. (b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. (c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision as provided in other cases for appeal of said board's decisions. (d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. (e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. (f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. (g)  In reviewing such requests, the board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. (h)  Conditions for variances: (1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. (2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. (3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (4)  The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. (i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this article, the board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. (Code 1986, § 5-69; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-41. - Adoption of flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map. (a)  The flood insurance study (FIS) report submitted to the City of Americus by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as of September 11, 2009, is hereby adopted for the city. (b)  The flood insurance rate map (FIRM), prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as of September 11, 2009, is hereby adopted for the city. (c)  The city hereby adopts, and authorizes the city building official to enforce, all of the provisions of Title 44, Part 60, sub-part A, section 60.3(d) of the Code of Federal Regulations; provided, however, that where the city's existing ordinances are more stringent than such regulations, the more stringent provisions of the city ordinance shall control. (Ord. No. O-09-06-19, 6-18-2009; Ord. No. O-09-08-28, 8-20-2009) 
Secs. 34-42—34-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. O-10-02-04, adopted Feb. 19, 2010, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III was entitled "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control", §§ 34-69—34-77, and derived from: Code 1986, §§ 5-70—5-78; Ord. No. O-90-05-14, adopted Feb. 26, 1990; Ord. No. O-95-09-31, adopted Sept. 21, 1995; Ord. No. O-00-12-48, §§ 1—10, adopted Dec. 21, 2000; and Ord. No. O-04-09-19, adopted Sept. 23, 2004. State Law reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 
Sec. 34-69. - Title.     This article will be known as the "City of Americus Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." (Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-70. - Definitions.     The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated:     Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted.     Board: The board of natural resources.     Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat.     Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission.     Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC).     CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc.     Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation.     Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR).     Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: Engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc.     Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative.     District: The Lower Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District.     Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources.     Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes.     Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity.     Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 34-72(c) of this article.     Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation.     Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: Planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction.     Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design.     Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.     Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling.     Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 34-71(5).     Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot.     Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a).     Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et. seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins.     Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling.     Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present.     NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit.     NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit.     Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions.     Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on-site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water.     Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article.     Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity.     Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site.     Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed.     Property designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal.     Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side.     Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion.     Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.     Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Lower Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District.     Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity.     State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or re-issued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f).     State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation.     Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.     Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs.     Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: (1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or (2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or (3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia.     Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater.     Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. (Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-71. - Exemptions.     This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: (1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the "Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; (2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; (3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; (4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; (5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; (6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 34-72(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; (7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; (8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1)—(7), (9) or (10) of this section; (9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; (10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and (11)  Any public water system reservoir. (Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-72. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. (a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. (b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. (1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). (2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm-water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. (3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. (4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. (5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). (c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq., for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: (1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; (2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; (3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; (4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; (5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; (6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; (7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; (8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; (9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq.; (10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut-face of excavations or the sloping of fills; (11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; (12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; (13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; (14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; (15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream; that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and (16)  There is established a 60-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. (d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq., shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. (e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-73. - Application/permit process. (a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. (b)  Application requirements. (1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Americus without first obtaining a permit from the building official or designee to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. (2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the building official and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 34-72(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. (3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. (4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 34-72(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. (5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. (6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. (c)  Plan requirements. (1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 34-72(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. (d)  Permits. (1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. (2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 34-72(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. (4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. (5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. (6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). (Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-74. - Inspection and enforcement. (a)  The building official or designee will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. (b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. (c)  The building official or designee shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. (d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. (e)  The districts or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. (f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. (Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-75. - Penalties and incentives. (a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences and land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. (b)  Stop-work orders. (1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; (2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and (3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. (4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. (c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 34-73(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. (d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. (Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-76. - Education and certification. (a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. (b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on-site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. (c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on-site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. (d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said section. (Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-77. - Administrative appeal judicial review. (a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and city council within ten days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. (b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Sumter County. (Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-78. - Effectivity, validity and liability. (a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 19th day of February 2010. (b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. (c)  Liability. (1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. (2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. (3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. (Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Secs. 34-79—34-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREES 
Sec. 34-98. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city or to which the public has free access as a park.     Shade trees means trees which provide or will eventually provide shaded areas within the city and will help increase the overall canopy to assist in shading and cooling city areas.     Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all street, avenues, or ways within the city. (Code 1986, § 5-210; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-99. - Street tree species; excluded and suggested.     Instead of compiling a list of trees that may be planted as street trees on publicly owned properties in the city, there will be two lists provided by this article. The first list will include trees that may not be planted as street trees or a list of trees that are excluded from being planted as street trees by this article. Any tree that is not on the "excluded" list may be planted. (1)  Trees that may not be planted as street trees. The following trees are excluded as street trees: Birch, Paper Oak, Laurel Chinaberry Pine, Eastern White Cottonwood Poplar, Lombardy Crabapple, Flowering Poplar, Tulip Eucalyptus Poplar, White Hemlock, Eastern Royal Paulownia Maple, Silver Sycamore Mulberry Tree of Heaven  (2)  Trees recommended for planting as street trees. The following lists of trees that are recommended for planting and are known to thrive in the city climate under conditions to which street trees are often subjected. They are intended only as a suggestion of trees and residents are not limited to the trees included on it: a.  Large Trees. Trees reaching a mature height of greater than 30 feet: Ash Green Maple, Florida Beech, American Oak, Sawtooth Birch, River Oak, Scarlet Blackgum Oak, Shumard Catalpa, Southern Oak, Southern Red Cedar, Deodar Oak, Swamp Chestnut Cedar, Red Oak, Water Cryptomeria Oak, White Cypress, Bald Oak, Willow Cypress, Leyland Pear, Bradford Elm, Chinese Pine, Loblolly Elm, Winged Pine, Longleaf Ginkgo Pine, Slash Hickories Pine, Spruce Japanese Zelkova Pine, Virginia Magnolia, Southern Pistache, Chinese Magnolia, Sweetbay Redwood, Dawn Maple, Red Tallowtree, Chinese  b.  Small Trees. Trees reaching a mature height of 30 feet or less: Chaste Tree Maple, Japanese Cherry, Kwanzan Maple, Trident Cherry, Yoshino Possumhaw Crepe Myrtle Red Buckeye Devilwood Redbud Dogwood Sassafras Eastern Hophornbean Serviceberry Fringetree (Greybeard) Silverbell Hawthorne Sourwood Holly, Nellie R. Stevens Viburnum Holly, Yaupon Willow, Contorted Loquat Windmill Palm Magnolia, Japanese Witch Hazel Magnolia, Star  (Code 1986, § 5-211; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-100. - Spacing.     The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the two size classes listed in section 34-99. No trees may be planted closer together than the following: (1)  Small trees may be planted no closer than 30 feet apart. (2)  Large trees may be planted no closer than 50 feet apart. (3)  There will be an exception to the above in special plantings designed or submitted by a landscape architect and approved by the city. (Code 1986, § 5-212; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-101. - Distance—From curb and sidewalk.     The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with tree size classes listed in section 34-99. No tree may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: (1)  Small trees may be planted no closer than two feet; (2)  Large trees may be planted no closer than four feet. (Code 1986, § 5-213; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-102. - Same—From street corner and fire hydrant.     No street tree shall be planted closer than 30 feet to any street corner, measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree may be planted closer than ten feet to any fire hydrant. (Code 1986, § 5-214; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-103. - Utilities.     No street trees other than those defined as small trees in section 34-99 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility. (Code 1986, § 5-215; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-104. - Public tree maintenance; approval to plant. (a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, or shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. (b)  The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree, or part thereof, which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected by any injurious fungus, insects, or other pests. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners on the public right-of-way, providing that the selection of said streets is in accordance with sections 34-99—34-103. (c)  Any person, firm, company, corporation, or other legal entity which desires to plant or have planted any tree or shrub for any purpose within the boundaries of any public park or similar public property shall be required to first obtain permission from the community development department of the city for such planting. A written request to the community development department of the city shall be made prior to any such planting. The community development department shall only be authorized to approve such planting if such planting is determined to be consistent with the present landscaping or any future landscape plan for the particular area involved. Any such written request shall state the purpose for the planting, the species of the tree or shrub proposed to be planted, and the exact desired location for such planting. Any plaque, sign, or monument that is placed or installed in connection with any such approved planting shall be approved by the community development department of the city under the same criteria as is required for the approval of such planting under this section. Nothing herein shall prevent or be construed to prevent the city council from planting, or causing to be planted, such trees, shrubs, or other plants as the city council or its designated agencies may deem appropriate on any publicly owned property within the corporate limits of the city. (Code 1986, § 5-216; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003; Ord. No. O-05-04-11, 4-21-2005) 
Sec. 34-105. - Pruning—Tree topping; severely damaged trees; terms of franchise agreement.     It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. The term "topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this article at the determination of the city. Pruning allowed pursuant to the time of any franchise agreement between the city and a public utility shall continue to be authorized in accord with the terms of such franchise agreement. (Code 1986, § 5-217; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-106. - Same—Obstruction of intersections and sidewalks.     Every owner of any tree overhanging any right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub of private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign. (Code 1986, § 5-218; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-107. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.     The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice. Nothing herein shall be construed to establish any legal obligation or liability on the part of the city for the removal or trimming of dead or diseased trees on either public or private property. (Code 1986, § 5-219; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-108. - Removal of stumps.     All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. (Code 1986, § 5-220; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Secs. 34-109—34-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WETLAND PROTECTION 
Sec. 34-130. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Generalized wetland map means a map showing the general locations of wetlands within the county and the city. The generalized wetland map used at the time this article is adopted is the National Wetlands Inventory as published by the United States Department of Interior.     Hydric soils means soils that form as a result of saturated soils conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly the Soil Conservation Service).     Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent on saturated soil conditions.     Jurisdictional determination means an official statement or map signed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, stating whether a certain specified site is a wetland or is in a wetland.     Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.     Temporary emergency permit means a temporary permit that may be issued in certain circumstances specified in subsection 34-133(c).     Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.     Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the corps.     Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the city and shown on the generalized wetland map. (Code 1986, § 5-279; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 9, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 34-131. - Findings and purpose. (a)  Findings of fact. Wetlands are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control, erosion control; natural resource education, scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state. (b)  Necessity to protect. Nationally, a considerable number of wetland resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. It is, therefore, necessary to discourage development activities that may adversely affect wetlands by ensuring maximum protection for wetlands located in the corporate limits of the city. (c)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of this article is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat. (Code 1986, § 5-271; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 1, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 34-132. - Districts and boundaries. (a)  This article shall apply to all lands within wetlands located in the corporate limits of the city. The generalized wetland map, adopted as part of this article, shows the general location of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands. The generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this article. The generalized wetland map shall be on file in the office of building risk management. (b)  The generalized wetland map is a general reference document, and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners that a subject site may be in a jurisdictional wetland or in proximity to a jurisdictional wetland, requiring the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a section 404 permit will be required prior to initiation of any development activity on the subject site. The generalized wetland map does not represent precise boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county and the city, and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. (Code 1986, § 5-272; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 2, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 34-133. - Local development permits. (a)  Required. No regulated activity will be allowed within the wetland protection district without written permission from the permitting officer in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not identified in subsection (b) of this section or by other local development ordinances, shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. If the area proposed for development appears to be located within 50 feet of the wetland protection district boundary, as determined by the permitting officer from review of the generalized wetland map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, a local development permit will be issued only following receipt by the local permitting officer of a copy of the section 404 permit or letter of permission issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. (b)  Permissible uses; uses as of right. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within a wetland to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided herein: (1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual section 404 permit. (2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, birdwatching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. (3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. (4)  The continued cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall, however, be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. (5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. (6)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. (c)  Temporary emergency permit. A temporary, emergency permit can be issued by the permitting officer for the following reasons: (1)  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged, and written notice prior to the commencement of work has been given to the permitting officer, and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired, and that any adverse affect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. (2)  Temporary water level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations. (3)  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of subsection (b)(4) of this section. (4)  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided such facilities and structures are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. (d)  Site plans. Applications for a local development permit within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. (1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved with cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. (2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. (3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. (4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the subject site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. (5)  Elevation of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. (6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing hazardous or toxic materials released accidently. (7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. (e)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. The site plan may be amended only with approval of the permitting officer. The permitting officer may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purposes of this article. (f)  Subdivision approval in the wetland protection district. Any application for subdivision approval shall include a jurisdictional determination approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If the corps determines that wetlands are present and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, subdivision approval will be issued only following issuance of the section 404 permit or letter of permission. (g)  Subdivision design options in the wetland protection district. Any subdivision that includes jurisdictional wetlands shall be allowed and encouraged to use the following options: (1)  Lot size averaging. Lot size averaging is encouraged in single-family detached subdivisions as a means to work around wetland areas. The planning commission may allow a reduction in lot size provided the same number of lots in the same subdivision are oversized by an equal or greater area. The maximum permissible reduction shall not exceed 25 percent of the minimum required lot area. The number of lots with areas reduced shall not exceed 25 percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision. The permitting officer shall allow no more than a 25 percent adjustment of rear, side and front setbacks for each affected lot. (2)  Cluster development. Clustering of residential development is encouraged. When considering subdivision approval, the planning commission may allow incorporation of wetland or other significant natural areas as open space in the subdivision plan. Such plans should designate at least 25 percent of the gross land area as open space. Density shall be calculated by subtracting from the total acreage of a parcel all land dedicated or in use for private or public roads, including all vehicular rights-of-way. The resultant acreage will then be divided by the minimum allowed lot size of the district to derive the number of lots permissible. (h)  Filing fee. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified by the permitting officer. Filing fees in the amount established by ordinance shall be required to evaluate the application. However, if after review of the initial application it is determined that expert consultants are necessary to provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation and wetland boundary determination, those fees will be in excess of the filing fee. (i)  Enforcement authority. The permitting officer is the department, office or individual assigned the responsibility of administering this article. At the time this article is adopted, the administrative authority is vested in the office of building risk management. (j)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the permitting officer and will be reviewed within seven days. The review period shall begin upon the permitting officer's determination that the application submitted is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings; approval, conditional approval or disapproval, by the permitting officer. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the permitting officer. If outside consultants are required, the process will be completed in a timely fashion, but may exceed the seven day review period established herein. (k)  Appeals. Decisions on permit applications made by the permitting officer may be appealed to the board. The appeal must be submitted in writing with fee attached in the amount established by ordinance to the community development director within ten days of the decision rendered by the permitting officer. A public hearing shall be held by the board. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of the board shall be final and may be issued up to 15 days following the public hearing. (l)  Permit expiration. (1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. (2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six months after the date work ceased. (3)  Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit may be issued by the permitting officer, but no such notification is required. (Code 1986, § 5-273; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 3, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 34-134. - Monitoring and enforcement. (a)  The permitting officer shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing duties required under this article, and may take or cause to be made such examination, survey or sampling as the permitting officer deems necessary. (1)  The permitting officer shall have authority to enter the subject site to monitor development and to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder, and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. (2)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers in the jurisdiction shall have authority to assist the permitting officer with enforcement. (3)  The permitting officer shall have authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified herein. (b)  The permitting officer may require a bond with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of any condition of any such bond, the permitting officer may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. (c)  When the permitting officer determines a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may, at the discretion of the permitting officer, be required to remove the structure. (d)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may, at the discretion of the permitting officer and as far as practicable, be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation. (e)  If the permitting officer discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the permitting officer shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. (f)  Suspension, revocation. The permitting officer may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The permitting officer shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the areas where the wetland is located. (Code 1986, § 5-274; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 4, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 34-135. - Assessment relief.     The county board of tax assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a nonprofit organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains. (Code 1986, § 5-277; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 7, 10-21-1999) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.4. 
Secs. 34-136—34-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 
Sec. 34-154. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Aquifer means any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well.     Groundwater recharge area or aquifer recharge area means an area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer.     Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities.     Pollution susceptibility maps means the maps prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential.     Significant groundwater recharge areas means areas mapped by DNR in the Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of karst topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks) and potentiometric surfaces. (Code 1986, § 5-341; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 11, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 11, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-155. - Findings and objectives. (a)  Findings of fact. In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and to promote a healthy economic climate in the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that public drinking water resources of high quality be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources the city and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. (b)  Necessity to manage. Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers, which are permeable, rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas to ensure that pollution threats to water resources are minimized. (c)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are to: (1)  Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use, or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; (2)  Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and (3)  Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. (Code 1986, § 5-331; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 1, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 1, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-156. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district.     A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands in the corporate limits of the city, that are mapped and designated as significant recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in the Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. (Code 1986, § 5-332; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 2, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 2, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-157. - Determination of pollution susceptibility.     Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium or low based on the groundwater pollution susceptibility map prepared by the state department of natural resources. (Code 1986, § 5-333; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 3, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 3, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-158. - Permit requirements and enforcement.     No building permit, rezoning request or subdivision plan will be approved by the permitting officer unless the permit, request and/or plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed herein. (1)  Enforcement. The permitting officer, his agent, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their assigned duties and responsibilities under this article, and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the permitting officer deems necessary. a.  The permitting officer may require a bond with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of any condition of any such bond, the permitting officer may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. b.  The permitting officer shall have authority to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. c.  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers in the jurisdiction shall have authority to assist the permitting officer in enforcement. d.  The permitting officer shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified herein. e.  When the permitting officer determines that a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may, at the discretion of the permitting officer, be required to remove the structure. f.  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. (2)  Development permit review and site plan requirement. With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in subsection (4) of this section, applications for a development permit within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan providing the following information: a.  A map drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses and drainageways, water lines, wastewater and stormwater facilities, and utility installations. b.  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. c.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. d.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. e.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing hazardous or toxic materials which may be released accidentally. f.  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross sectional drawings. (3)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the permitting officer. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. (4)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: a.  Any subdivision, multifamily, or group housing development where less than ten dwelling units are proposed. b.  Repair to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. c.  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. (5)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the permitting officer and shall be reviewed within seven days. The review period shall begin with the permitting officer's determination that the application is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings; approval, conditional approval or disapproval, by the permitting officer. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the permitting officer. (6)  Permit expiration. a.  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of permit issuance, the permit shall expire. b.  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six months after the date work ceased. (Code 1986, § 5-334; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 4, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 4, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-159. - Groundwater protection standards. (a)  For all pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. (b)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: (1)  A high pollution susceptibility area; (2)  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or (3)  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. (c)  At a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot, and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U. S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service. (d)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. (e)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials, as identified in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, excluding underground storage tanks, and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall take place on an impermeable surface having spill and leak protection approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD), and in conformance with local fire prevention code requirements. (f)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas new, above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 650 gallons must have secondary containment for 110 percent of tank volume, or 110 percent of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt from this requirement, provided they comply with applicable federal regulations. (g)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner approved by EPD. (h)  For high pollution susceptibility areas no new stormwater infiltration basins may be constructed. (i)  For high pollution susceptibility areas the use of wastewater spray irrigation systems and the land application of wastewater sludge shall be practiced in accordance with department of natural resources criteria for slow rate land treatment. An application for a development permit for activities involving wastewater spray irrigation or land application of wastewater sludge must be accompanied by proof that the applicant has received a land application system permit from EPD. (j)  Minimum lot sizes and septic systems. Construction shall not proceed on any building or structure to be served by an on-site sewage management system until the county health department approves the proposed sewage management system as meeting requirements outlined in section M of the department of human resources (DHR) manual for on-site sewage management systems, incorporated herein by reference, and the required building permits have been issued. (See appendix to Ordinance No. O-00-06-24 for section M requirements.) (Code 1986, § 5-336; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 6, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 6, 6-22-2000) Editor's note— The Appendix to Ordinance No. O-00-06-24, adopted June 22, 2000, referred to in subsection (j) of section 5-336 above, has not been included within this Code, but may be found attached to Ordinance No. O-00-06-24, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 34-160. - Appeals.     Decisions on permit applications made by the permitting officer may be appealed to the board. The appeal must be submitted in writing with fee attached in the amount established by ordinance the community development director within ten days of the decision rendered by the permitting officer. A public hearing shall be held by the board. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of the board shall be final and may be issued up to 15 days following the public hearing. (Code 1986, § 5-337; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 7, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 7, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-161. - Assessment relief.     The county board of tax assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. (Code 1986, § 5-339; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 9, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 9, 6-22-2000) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.4. 
Secs. 34-162—34-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 
Sec. 34-200. - Short title and purpose. (a)  This article shall be known as the "wellhead protection ordinance". (b)  The purpose of this article is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the City of Americus by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells and springs which are the supply sources for the City of Americus water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. (Ord. No. O-09-05-17, 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 34-201. - Establishment of a wellhead protection zone.     There is hereby established a use district to be known as a "wellhead protection zone", as identified and described within the State of Georgia, approved wellhead protection plan the official copy of which is maintained on file in the office of the city public services director. (Ord. No. O-09-05-17, 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 34-202. - Prohibited uses.     Land use and activities in the wellhead protection zones, as identified and described as potential pollution sources in the State of Georgia approved wellhead protection plan, will be prohibited as stated in the plan. (Ord. No. O-09-05-17, 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 34-203. - Administration.     The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under the ordinance from which this article derives, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the City of Americus, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. (Ord. No. O-09-05-17, 5-21-2009) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 38-1. - Interference with equipment.     It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to damage, destroy or in any way interfere with any cistern, engine, hose, hose cart, truck, hooks, ladders or other apparatus, implement, fire hydrant or material of any kind connected with or belonging to the fire department for the extinguishment of fires. (Code 1962, § 9-5; Code 1986, § 11-2) State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq. 
Sec. 38-2. - Fire—In public areas.     No person shall kindle or build a fire upon any sidewalk, or in any street or public square of this city without permission of the fire department. (Code 1962, § 9-8; Code 1986, § 11-4) 
Sec. 38-3. - Same—On private lots.     It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash, lumber, leaves, straw or any other combustible material on any private lot within the city without permission of the fire department. (Code 1962, § 9-8; Code 1986, § 11-5) 
Sec. 38-4. - Motor vehicles parking in fire lanes. (a)  The marking of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, shall be approved by the fire chief and the police chief. (b)  Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, so marked and approved, is prohibited at all times. (c)  Any owner or user of a motor vehicle in violation of this section who pleads guilty, is found guilty, or pleads nolo contendere in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to punishment in accord with the provisions of section 1-8 of the City Code. (Code 1962, § 9-10; Code 1986, § 11-6; Ord. No. O-10-07-23, 7-22-2010) 
Sec. 38-5. - Color combinations required for fire hydrants.     All city fire hydrants shall be color coded as follows: (1)  Barrels of all fire hydrants shall be painted yellow. (2)  Bonnets and nozzle caps of all fire hydrants shall be painted as follows: Class Flow Color A 1,000 gpm or greater Green B 500 to 1,000 gpm Yellow C Less than 500 gpm Red  (Code 1962, § 9-11; Code 1986, § 11-7) 
Sec. 38-6. - Fireworks; explosives. (a)  The term "fireworks," as used in this section, shall mean and include any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article, prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers, or other fireworks of like construction, any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or shoot rockets or crackers or any kind of fireworks or to explode dynamite cartridges, or torpedoes within the city, without first having written permission from the city council. (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense, give away or, in any other manner, dispose of any rockets, firecrackers, dynamite caps, torpedoes, or any kind of fireworks within the city, unless the intended purchaser first displays to said seller an authorization of the city council allowing said items to be used or discharged within the city, or said intended purchaser furnishes the seller, before any of the items are delivered, an affidavit duly sworn to before one authorized to administer oaths to the effect that said items will be shipped to persons and places outside the city. (d)  The city council shall give its consent for the sale of the items referred to in this section when the same is authorized under the statutes of the state. (Code 1962, § 15-13; Code 1986, § 11-8) State Law reference— Fireworks control, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Secs. 38-7—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 38-31—38-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CALLS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. O-10-07-23, adopted July 22, 2010, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 38-49—38-55, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1962, §§ 9-13—9-19; Code 1986, §§ 11-20—11-26; Ord. No. O-87-10-18, adopted Oct. 19, 1987; Ord. No. O-90-12-33, adopted Dec. 26, 1990; Ord. No. O-91-11-40, adopted Nov. 25, 1991; Ord. No. O-93-11-37, Nov. 22, 1993; Ord. No. O-95-09-30, adopted Sept. 21, 1995; Ord. No. O-00-05-22, adopted May 18, 2000; and Ord. No. O-04-12-33, adoptd Dec. 16, 2004. 
Sec. 38-49. - Authorized.     The fire department is hereby permitted to answer calls to property lying outside the corporate limits of the city only in the event that there is in existence, at the time of the call, either: (i) an intergovernmental agreement between the governing body of the city and the governing body of the jurisdiction from which such fire call originates providing for the city fire department to answer such calls in such jurisdiction; or (ii) a mutual aid agreement between the governing body of the city and the governing body of the jurisdiction from which such fire call originates. (Ord. No. O-10-07-23, 7-22-2010) 
Sec. 38-50. - Discretion of fire chief preserved.     This article shall not impair the discretion of the chief of the fire department to answer calls on account of fire to the property of citizens adjacent to the corporate limits where such calls are necessary for the protection of property lying within the city. (Ord. No. O-10-07-23, 7-22-2010) 
Sec. 38-51. - Right of refusal.     Except where the city fire department is obligated by contract as provided in section 38-49, the permission given to the fire department to answer calls outside the city shall not be considered as obligatory or mandatory, nor shall any person have any right to compel the fire department to answer such fire call, but whenever, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, the use of equipment and personnel to answer such calls would jeopardize the safety or welfare of property within the corporate limits, the fire department may refuse to make such calls. (Ord. No. O-10-07-23, 7-22-2010) 
Sec. 38-52. - Exception.     None of the provisions of this article shall affect contracts that the city has, or may hereafter have, with industrial and commercial plants whereby such property owners pay certain stipulated amounts to cover sprinkler connections, extensions or water mains, fire protection, etc. (Ord. No. O-10-07-23, 7-22-2010) 
Secs. 38-53—38-75. - Reserved. 