THE CODE OF THE CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA ____________ Published in 2007 by Order of the City Council ____________ OFFICIALS of the CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Barry Blount, Mayor Walton Grant Eloise Paschal Eddie Rhea Walker Lou Chase Steve Jones Lorenzo Johnson City Council ____________ Charlotte D. Cotton City Administrative Officer ____________ Paula Martin City Clerk ____________ James Skipper City Attorney PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Americus, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior Code, and any ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Charlotte Cotton, Chief Administrative Officer, Ms. Paula Martin, City Clerk, and Mr. James Skipper, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. © ;hg;Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. 2007. 
Chapter 82 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 82-1. - Definitions; street classifications.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alleys means minor ways used primarily for vehicular services access to the rear or sides of commercial or industrial properties.     Collector streets means a street used to carry traffic from minor streets to major streets, including the principal entrance streets to a neighborhood or group development and streets for circulation within such neighborhood or development.     Streets are as defined in section 1-2, and for the purposes of these regulations, streets are classified as follows:     Major streets means a street used primarily for fast or heavy traffic.     Minor streets means a street used primarily for access to the abutting properties.     Subdivision. (1)  The term "subdivision" means any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or the future sale, legacy or building development, and includes any division of land involving a new street or a change in one or more existing streets and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. (2)  Provided, however, the following are not included in this definition: a.  The subdivision of land for agricultural purposes provided no lot thereby produced is less than five acres or no new street is involved. b.  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created, and that the lots created are in accordance with other city regulations. c.  The division of land into parcels where no new street is to be established and the resulting lots are equal to or larger than the standard required in the city, and a zoning classification of resulting lots remains the same as the zoning classification of the land before such division; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the rezoning, of such property on proper application and approval granted in accordance with this Code. (Code 1986, § 19-1; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-2. - Zoning; conflict of standards. (a)  No final plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning regulations will be approved unless it conforms with such regulations. (b)  Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or building code, or other official standards, the highest standard shall apply. (Code 1986, § 19-38; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-3. - Variances.     Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these standards would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning on which the departure was justified set forth. (Code 1986, § 19-39; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-4. - Enforcement—Authorities designated; duties.     The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the community development director and the planning commission. The community development director shall: (1)  Receive all subdivision plats; (2)  In cooperation with the planning commission review and approve or disapprove subdivision plats; (3)  Inspect subdivisions for compliance with the requirement of this chapter and other applicable city ordinances. (Code 1986, § 19-2; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-5. - Same—Circumventing requirements; approval of plat required; access street required. (a)  The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the city who transfers or sells or agrees to sell negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat to subdivide such land before such plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county, shall be denied all building permits, public services, and utility connections, and subject to punishment for ordinance violation and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city, through its attorney or other official designated by the city council, may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. (b)  No plat or plan of subdivision within the city shall be filed or recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county until it has been approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the planning commission. (c)  No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the city unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to that time, or unless such street corresponds in its location and line with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by said planning commission or with a street located and accepted by the city. Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building official, city attorney or other official designated by the city council may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. (Code 1986, § 19-3; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-6. - Preliminary plat filing fee.     The developer shall be assessed a filing fee in the amount established by ordinance payable to the finance director at the time of filing the preliminary plat. (Code 1986, § 19-4; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 82-7—82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES FOR PLAT APPROVAL 
Sec. 82-31. - Generally. (a)  The procedure for formal review and approval of a subdivision plat shall consist of the following three separate steps: (1)  The subdivider should consult early and informally with the community development director and/or other city technical staff for advice and assistance before the preparation of the preliminary sketch plat and its formal application for approval. This will enable the subdivider to become thoroughly familiar with these standards, the major street plan and other official plans or public improvements that might affect the area. Such informal review should prevent unnecessary and costly revisions. (2)  Prior to the making of any street improvement, or installations of utilities, the developer shall submit to the planning commission a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. After receiving the planning commission's approval of the preliminary plat and full concurrence and approval by the city, the developer may then proceed to grade the streets and install all improvements required by this chapter and any other applicable city ordinances. In lieu of the completion of all improvements prior to submission of the final plat, the developer may post a bond with the city, or certified check, in an amount and with surety satisfactory to the city and conditions satisfactory to the city, providing for and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a period specified by the planning commission and stated in the bond. (3)  After completion of the physical development of the subdivision or the posting of a bond or certified check to guarantee the same, the developer shall submit to the planning commission a final plat together with any required certificates. The final plat, along with any deed restrictions, becomes the instrument to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county. (b)  No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for record by the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county until the required improvements listed shall be constructed in satisfactory manner and approved by the appropriate approving agent. (Code 1986, § 19-20; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-32. - Preliminary plat. (a)  At least ten days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission the subdivider shall submit to the building official's office three copies of the plat of the proposed subdivision drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, along with a receipt for the filing fee from the finance director. (b)  The preliminary plat shall meet the minimum standards of design and general requirements for the construction of public improvements as set forth in article III of this chapter and shall give the following information insofar as possible: (1)  Description: a.  Proposed name of subdivision. b.  Name and address of subdivider. c.  Graphic scale, north point and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true, or grid north. d.  Location sketch map showing the relationship of the subdivision site to the surrounding area, including directions and distances to readily identifiable landmarks in the surrounding area. e.  Acreage to be subdivided. (2)  Existing conditions: a.  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, or as determined necessary by the city utilities director, when a new street is involved in a subdivision, including outline of wooded areas and classifications of land. b.  Zoning district classification on land to be subdivided and of adjoining land. c.  Names and addresses of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. d.  In case of resubdivision, a copy of existing plat with proposed resubdivision superimposed thereon. e.  Location of streams, lakes and swamps and land subject to flood as determined from past history of flooding (listed on appropriate FEMA map). f.  Location of existing and platted property lines, location, width and names of all platted roads, railroads, utility rights-of-way, public areas, existing buildings or structures. g.  Existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of boundary roads, with sizes, grades and invert elevations from public records, or from field surveys, or other sources. All sizes and data on all utilities shall be provided. h.  Certification by the county health officer when individual sewage disposal or water systems are to be installed. (3)  Proposed conditions: a.  Layout of roads, alleys and public crosswalks, with widths, road names or designations. b.  Layout of all lots and the area of each lot, including building setback lines and lot divisions with scaled dimensions and utility easements with width and use on all lots. c.  Preliminary plan of all utilities to be constructed. d.  Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use. (c)  Within 30 days after submission of the preliminary plat, the planning commission shall review it and indicate its approval, disapproval, or approval subject to listed modifications, as a basis for preparation of the final plat. If a plat is disapproved, reasons for such disapproval will be stated in the records of the planning commission. Failure of the planning commission to act on the preliminary sketch within 30 days will be deemed approval of this plat, unless the developer agrees to an extension of time. (d)  Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall not constitute acceptance of the final plat and shall not be indicated on the preliminary plat. (e)  The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse until a final plat based thereon is submitted within one year from the date of such approval, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning commission. (f)  After the planning commission has reviewed and acted on the preliminary plat, one copy will be returned to the developer, one copy will go to the building official's office and one copy will be retained in the records of the planning commission. (g)  After the planning commission has approved the preliminary plat, construction plans should be submitted to the building official and include the following: (1)  Layout of roads, alleys and public crosswalks, with widths, road names or designations, grades and cross sections. (2)  Preliminary plan of sanitary sewers with grades, service, pipe size and points of discharge, together with certified copy of all load design factors and computations. (3)  Preliminary plan of storm drainage system with glade, pipe size and location of outlet, together with certified copy of all design factors and computations. (4)  Preliminary plan of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves and all appurtenances. (Code 1986, § 19-21; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 82-33. - Final plat. (a)  At least ten days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission the subdivider shall submit to the building official's office an original on reproducible Mylar or vellum, and three copies, of the final plat. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat which such developer proposes to record and develop at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these standards. (b)  The original shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet on reproducible Mylar or vellum and shall correspond to plat book dimensions. It shall be the developer's responsibility to provide the clerk of superior court with a plat that will fit in the plat book/cabinet. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision with sheets lettered in alphabetical order as a key. (c)  When the plat has been approved, the original will be returned to the developer with the approval of the planning commission certified thereon for filing with the clerk of the superior court of this county; one copy will be returned to the developer for such developer's records; one copy will be forwarded to the building official's office and one copy will be returned in the records of the planning commission. (d)  The planning commission shall approve or disapprove this final plat within 30 days after its submission to that body. Failure of the planning commission to act on this final plat within these 30 days shall be deemed approval of it. If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission. (e)  Approval of the final plat by the planning commission shall not constitute acceptance by the public of the dedication of any streets or public ways or ground. (f)  The final plat shall comply with the plat act and shall give the following information: (1)  Certification that the applicant is the landowner, all parties with mortgage or lien interest to be included, and that applicant dedicates street rights-of-way and any sites for public use. (2)  Certification by a licensed surveyor to the accuracy of survey and plat and placement of monuments. (3)  Certification by the proper city officials that the developer has complied with the following: All improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable city ordinances. (4)  Protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, shall be placed directly on the final plat or attached thereto in form for recording. (5)  Certificate on the plat to be signed by the secretary of the planning commission when the plat has been given final approval by the planning commission. (Code 1986, § 19-22; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-99-02-08, 2-18-1999) 
Sec. 82-34. - As-built construction plans. (a)  The as-built construction plans shall give the following information: (1)  Sufficient information to reproduce the plat on the ground, including tract boundary lines and their relation to established land lot lines, right-of-way, property lines of residential lots, and other sites with accurate dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot, bearings, and angles on all lines, radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves with readings to the nearest minute. (2)  Profiles of grades for streets when required by the city. (3)  Blocks designated by letter and lots by number or lots numbered consecutively. (4)  Location and description of monuments. (5)  Final plan of sanitary sewers with grade, pipe sizes, and point of discharge. (6)  Final plan of storm drains with grade, pipe sizes, and point of discharge. (7)  Final plan of water supply system with pipe sites and location of hydrants and valves. (b)  The as-built construction plans shall be furnished to the public works department on a 3½-inch disk or CD and shall be in a .DWG or .DXF format. (Code 1986, § 19-23; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-99-08-34, 8-19-1999) 
Secs. 82-35—82-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS 
Sec. 82-57. - Basic requirements; minimum standards. (a)  Land which the planning commission has found to be unsuitable for subdivision due to flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, or other features likely to be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the future residents shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods approved by the planning commission are formulated by the developer for meeting the problems created by the subdivision of such land. (b)  Land subject to flooding shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for such other uses, as will not comply with chapter 34, article II, the danger to health, life and property unless such land is not to be used as a building site. In applying this provision, land liable to flooding as determined from past history shall be considered subject to flood. Fill shall not be used to raise the land in areas subject to flood unless the fill proposed does not restrict the flow of water and unduly increase flood heights. (Code 1986, § 19-30; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-58. - Streets. (a)  Conformity to the major street plan. The location and width of all streets and roads shall conform to the official major street plan; i.e., provision must be made for the location of thoroughfares as shown on the major street plan. (b)  Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width. It shall connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivisions or where no such streets exist, it shall follow the projection of streets in related subdivided tracts so that other subdivisions may connect therewith. The city reserves the right to require the developer to meet minimum road design standards. (c)  Restriction of access. When a tract fronts on an arterial street or highway, the planning commission may require all residential lots to be provided with frontage on a minor residential street. (d)  Street right-of-way widths. The minimum width of right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be as shown on the major street plan, or if not shown on such plan, shall be not less than as follows: (1)  Arterial streets and highways: 80 to120 feet. (2)  Collector streets: 60 feet. (3)  Commercial and industrial streets: 80 feet. (4)  Minor residential streets: a.  Curb and gutter: 50 feet. b.  Ditches: 60 feet. For both of the above, a 15-foot utility drainage easement shall be provided on each side of the right-of-way. (e)  Exceptions. In cases where topography or other physical conditions made a street of the required minimum width impracticable, the planning commission may modify the above requirements. Through proposed business areas the street widths shall be increased ten feet on each side if needed to provide parking without interference to normal passing traffic. (f)  Additional width on existing street. Subdivisions that join existing streets shall dedicate additional rights-of-way if needed to meet the above minimum street width requirements. (1)  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street. (2)  When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway shall be provided. (g)  Street grades and elevations. Grades on major streets shall not exceed seven percent and grades on other streets shall not exceed 12 percent. (h)  Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than two degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets 60 feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature shall be not less than 300 feet; on other streets it shall not be less than 100 feet. (i)  Vertical curves. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to 15 times the algebraic difference in rates of grade for major streets, and one-half this minimum length for other streets. Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet horizontally and one inch equals 20 feet vertically may be required by the planning commission upon recommendation of the city utilities director. (j)  Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Property line radii at street intersections shall not be less than 20 feet, and where the angle of street intersection is less than 75 degrees the planning commission may require a greater curb radius. To permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be reduced or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. (k)  Tangents. A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on all streets. (l)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be allowed. (m)  Dead-end streets. (1)  Minor terminal streets or courts designed to have one end permanently closed shall be no more than 600 feet long unless necessitated by topography. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 90 feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 110 feet for curb and gutter and 130 feet for ditches. (2)  Where phases may be proposed a temporary turnaround shall be provided. (n)  Private streets and reserve strips. There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every lot of subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the city under conditions approved by the planning commission. (o)  Street names. Proposed streets that are obviously, in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the names for proposed streets duplicate names of existing streets, irrespective of the use of the suffix "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "driveway," "place" or "court." (p)  Alleys. Alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots used for business purposes; alleys shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. (q)  Construction requirements. (1)  Every subdivision developer shall be required to make adequate provision for handling drainage problems, to grade and improve streets and alleys, to install curbs or invert ditches and to install street name signs in accordance with specifications established by the city utilities director. (2)  All street design and construction and related matters shall be in strict accordance with Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, volume 1 "Construction of Roads and Bridges" and volume 2 "Materials for Roads and Bridges" and all revisions thereto. Where circumstances dictate variations from the standard specifications, the city utilities director may vary the requirements providing the design or materials accepted are in all ways commensurate with good practice. (3)  All materials, equipment, labor and other matters related to street construction shall be provided by the developer. The following is a summary of the improvements required: a.  Grading. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the subdivider so that pavements and sidewalks, if installed in the future can be constructed on the same level plane. The preparation of the right-of-way before grading is started and the construction of cuts and fills shall be accomplished according to the specifications of the city. b.  Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary curbs, pipes, culverts, headwalls, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, swale ditches, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. c.  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied all of the underground work (water mains, gas mains, etc. and all service connections) shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. All driveways for houses to be built by the developer shall be cut and drained. d.  Roadway base. After preparation of the subgrade, the roadbed shall be properly based with one of the following: 1.  A six-inch sand clay base (class B); 2.  A six-inch graded aggregate base; or 3.  Six-inch mixed in place soil cement base. e.  Roadway surfacing. The paved surface shall be a two-inch compacted asphalt plant mix. f.  Minimum pavement width. Minimum pavement including paved gutters between curbs shall be as follows: 1.  Minor residential streets: 30 feet. 2.  Access routes: 38 to 44 feet. 3.  Arterial streets or through routes: As may be required. 4.  Ditch sections: 24 feet. g.  Curbs. Where the subdivider elects to provide curbs or it is deemed essential and necessary by the city utilities director, a permanent six-inch Portland cement concrete curb and gutter with a longitudinal storm drain system shall be installed. Backfill shall slope toward the curb to ensure drainage of surface water into the storm drainage system. h.  Rural ditch section. Where the developer does not install curb and gutter, a rural ditch section shall be provided. Said ditch shall be constructed with a minimum of 3:1 slope on both sides of the ditch. And shall have a minimum channel width of at least two feet. All rural ditch sections shall be designed and constructed to accommodate a 25-year flood. No rural ditch section shall be constructed within a right-of-way less than 60 feet wide with a 15-foot utility/storm drainage easement, on both sides. All rural ditch sections shall be seeded or sodded to provide for a permanent stand of grass. i.  Outfall ditches. Outfall ditches shall be piped 130 feet from the right-of-way. (Code 1986, § 19-31; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-59. - Blocks. (a)  In general, blocks shall be not less than 400 feet, nor more than 1,200 feet in length, except where topography or other conditions peculiar to the site make such dimensions impracticable. (b)  Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topography conditions or size of the property, in which case the planning commission will approve a single tier or lots of minimum depth. (Code 1986, § 19-32; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-60. - Lots. (a)  Arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot shall front upon a public street or road that is not less than 50 feet in width. Each lot shall be at least 30 feet in width at the front property line. (b)  Minimum size. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be such, as the planning commission deems appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such sewer and provide a connection to each lot. Where a public sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal may be used when meeting all applicable public health regulations. (1)  Residential lots served by a public sewer system shall be not less than 60 feet wide at the building setback line, nor less than 7,000 square feet in area. Where a rural ditch section is used, each lot shall maintain a 100-foot width at the setback line, not less than 13,000 square feet in size, and maintain a minimum frontage at the right-of-way line of 50 feet. Where a cul-de-sac is constructed using the rural ditch section method, the maximum number of lots on a cul-de-sac shall be five lots, with a minimum right-of-way diameter of 130 feet, and a minimum paving diameter being 90 feet. (2)  For residential lots not served by a public sewer system, the planning commission shall require that data from percolation tests be submitted as a basis for approving subdivisions dependent upon septic tanks as a means of sewage disposal, and no lot shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building line, nor less than 15,000 square feet in area. (3)  For residential lots not served by a public water supply or a public sewer system, no lot shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building line, nor less than one acre in size except upon approval of the county health officer and in no case shall any lot be less than one-half acre in size. (4)  The minimum size of residential lots to be served by a private source of water supply shall be determined by the county health officer after investigations of soil conditions, proposed sewer system and depth of groundwater. (5)  Size of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial properties shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. Platting of individual lots shall be avoided in favor of an overall design of the land to be used for such purposes. (6)  The size and widths of lots shall in no case be less than the minimum requirements of the zoning regulations in effect. (c)  Building setback lines. The minimum depth of building setback lines from any street shall be 30 feet. If, however, suitable provision is made in connection with the plat or restrictions pertaining to the plat, building lines may be varied, provided such variation does not reduce the setback more than five feet. Where rural ditch section construction for a subdivision is used the minimum building setback line from any street right-of-way shall be 50 feet for any zoning district. (d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently wider and larger to permit the additional side yard requirements of the zoning regulations or building setback lines outlined above. (Code 1986, § 19-33; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-61. - Utilities. (a)  Water. Water mains for both domestic use and fire protection shall be properly connected with the city water system. The lines shall conform with accepted standards of good practice for municipal water systems, and shall meet, as a minimum, the requirements of the state environmental protection division and the city. All materials, labor, equipment, and other matters related to the water distribution system shall be provided by the developer. (b)  Sewer. When the subdivision is located within the service area of a public sewer system, sanitary sewers shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots with connection to the public system. Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sewer system, they must contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal fields and must be approved in writing by the county health officer. All materials, equipment, labor, and other matters related to the sanitary sewer system shall be provided by the developer and all sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the department of human resources of the state and standards of the city. (c)  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied to the street, all of the underground work, water mains, gas mains, etc., and all service connections shall be installed completed and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. Where the utility mains are off the pavement, the developer may elect to omit the installation of service connections providing that at such time as these service connections are needed, they may be jacked across the street without breaking or weakening the existing pavement. (d)  Easements for utilities. Except where alleys are permitted for that purpose, the city may require easements for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, and water mains or other utility lines, along rear lot lines or side lot lines, if, in the opinion of the city utilities director such action is desirable. Easements of the same or greater width may be required along the line of or across lots, where necessary for the extension of existing or planned utilities. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way along each side for the purpose of widening, depending, relocating, improving or protecting such drainage easement. (e)  Street lighting. Either underground or overhead electrical service shall be provided by the developer of a subdivision, through a public utility. All subdivisions with underground electrical lines shall have placed appropriate utility poles for street lighting. The installation of streetlights shall adhere to the following requirements: streetlights shall be installed at each street intersection and streetlights that are to be installed along the proposed blocks shall be equally spaced between street intersections. However, the maximum distance between any two streetlights shall not exceed 400 feet in length. After construction has been completed for an accepted phase or for an entire subdivision, and where the streets have been dedicated to the city, the city will be responsible for the costs associated with the operation of the streetlights. Streetlight design, size, and wattage must be approved by the city as part of the preliminary platting process. For example, a block 800 feet in length, it would be necessary to install three streetlights. For a block 1,100 feet in length, four streetlights would be necessary. (Code 1986, § 19-34; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-62. - Monuments.     Concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square, four feet long, with a flat top, shall be set at all street corners at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at angle points and points of curve in each street. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location and shall be set flush with the finished grade. All other lot, corners shall be marked with iron pipe not less than three-fourths inches in diameter and 24 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. (Code 1986, § 19-35; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-63. - Large tracts.     When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision. (Code 1986, § 19-36; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-64. - Group housing developments.     A comprehensive group housing development, including the large scale construction of housing units together with necessary drives and ways of access, may be approved by the planning commission although the design of the project does not include standard street, lot and subdivision arrangements, if departure from the foregoing standards can be made without destroying their intent. The developer shall provide proof that adequate access is provided for emergency vehicles. (Code 1986, § 19-37; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 86-1. - State law—Adoption by reference.     Pursuant to chapter 6 of title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (Code §§ 40-6-372—40-6- 376, Code §§ 40-6-1—40-6-397) of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the City of Americus with like effect as if recited herein. (Code 1962, § 23-152(a); Code 1986, § 20-1; Ord. No. O-2013-4, § 1, 2-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-2. - Same—Penalty.     Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Code 1962, § 23-153; Code 1986, § 20-2; Ord. No. O-2013-4, § 2, 2-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-3. - Riding on outside of vehicle.     It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on the fenders, bumpers or any other portion of any motor vehicle, except on the inside thereof. (Code 1962, § 23-27; Code 1986, § 20-30) 
Secs. 86-4—86-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 86-25. - Authority of police and fire department officials. (a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce this chapter and all other traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. (b)  Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformity with traffic laws, provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. (c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic threat or in the immediate vicinity. (Code 1962, § 23-9; Code 1986, § 20-4) 
Sec. 86-26. - Authority of chief of police to delegate power and duties.     The chief of police shall have the power to delegate to any other officer in the police department the duties and responsibilities conferred on such chief by this chapter. (Code 1962, § 23-10; Code 1986, § 20-5) 
Sec. 86-27. - Authority of utilities director. (a)  Signs on one-way streets. Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the utilities director shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (b)  Speed signs. The police chief shall cause to be erected and the utilities director shall erect throughout the city signs indicating the maximum speed limit and/or such other information as will be informative to drivers of motor vehicles as it pertains to traffic control regulations at said location or in the city. (c)  Turn signs. The police chief is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn. The utilities director shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (d)  Turn markers. The utilities director is authorized to place markers, buttons, and signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersection, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by this chapter or other law or ordinance. (e)  Marking crosswalks, safety zones, traffic lanes. The utilities director is hereby authorized: (1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as such engineer may deem necessary. (2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as may be necessary for the protection of pedestrians. (3)  To make lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as may be advisable, consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city. (f)  Stop signs. Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street it shall be the duty of the utilities director to place and maintain a stop sign or yield right-of-way sign on each intersection of such through street or intersection of that portion described and designated as such by this chapter or any ordinance of this city. (g)  Hazardous locations. The police chief is hereby authorized to determined and designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon streets other than those designated by this chapter or any other ordinance of this city as through streets, and to place at such determined and designated hazardous intersections at one or more entrances to any such intersection either a stop sign or yield right-of-way sign. (Code 1962, §§ 23-12, 23-32, 23-54, 23-55, 23-64, 23-118, 23-119; Code 1986, § 20-6; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Sec. 86-28. - Temporary traffic rules.     Where the traffic upon the streets becomes congested, and upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public places where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules regulating the traffic in such congested districts. (Code 1962, § 23-62; Code 1986, § 20-17) 
Sec. 86-29. - Play streets; authority to establish.     The police chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. (Code 1962, § 23-71; Code 1986, § 20-40; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Secs. 86-30—86-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
Sec. 86-47. - Owner liable for parking violation.     It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in such person's name to stand or park in any street, in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city regulating the parking of vehicles. Such person shall be equally liable with the operator for such violation and in addition thereto may have the vehicle impounded; provided, however, this shall not apply in those instances described in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-207. (Code 1962, § 23-144; Code 1986, § 20-80) 
Sec. 86-48. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. (a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time which, such violation occurred; provided, however, this shall not apply in those instances described in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-207. (b)  The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure in section 86-49 has been followed. (Code 1962, § 23-142; Code 1986, § 20-81) 
Sec. 86-49. - Notice on illegally parked vehicle.     Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter or other ordinance of this city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the city clerk for the driver to answer to the charge at the time and place specified in the notice. (Code 1962, § 23-143; Code 1986, § 20-82) 
Sec. 86-50. - When summons for arrest to be issued.     In the event any person fails to comply with a notice given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons, or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the city clerk shall forthwith secure and issue a summons for such person's arrest. (Code 1962, § 23-146; Code 1986, § 20-83) 
Sec. 86-51. - When warrants for arrest to be issued.     When it shall be made to appear to the municipal court that any person has been lawfully served with a copy of charges to appear in such court for trial and shall fail to appear at the time and place set forth in such copy of charges, it shall be the duty of the municipal judge to forthwith issue a warrant for the arrest of such person and deliver same to the chief of police. (Code 1962, § 23-150; Code 1986, § 20-86) 
Secs. 86-52—86-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE OPERATION 
Sec. 86-76. - Maximum speed limits—Generally.     Motor vehicles shall not be driven at a higher rate of speed than 30 miles per hour in the city, nor a higher rate of speed than ten miles per hour in any park or cemetery owned and maintained by the city. (Code 1962, § 23-28; Code 1986, § 20-31) State Law reference— Speed limits generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181. 
Sec. 86-77. - Same—In school zones.     It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle on streets adjoining school property during school days, in excess of 15 miles per hour. (Code 1962, § 23-31; Code 1986, § 20-32) 
Sec. 86-78. - Speed zones established.     The following speed zones are established for vehicles upon the following streets within the corporate limits of the city, as follows: (1)  On-system. Signs to be erected by the state department of transportation: a.  State Route 3 from the south city limits (Mile Point 10.62) to a point 500 feet south of McGarrah Street (Mile Point 11.82), a distance of 1.20 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour. b.  State Route 3 from a point 500 feet south of McGarrah Street (Mile Point 11.82) to State Route 30 (Mile Point 12.24), a distance of 0.42 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. c.  State Route 3 from State Route 30 (Mile Point 12.24) to north city limits (Mile Point 13.08), a distance of 0.84 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour. d.  State Route 27 (Lamar Street) from State Route 3 (Mile Point 12.53) to Dudley Street (Mile Point 12.90), a distance of 0.37 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. e.  State Route 27 (Lamar Street) from Dudley Street (Mile Point 12.90) to Prince Street (Mile Point 13.32), a distance of 0.42 miles, to be zoned for 25 miles per hour. f.  State Route 27 (Lamar Street) from Prince Street (Mile Point 13.32) to State Route 30 (Presidential Route) (Mile Point 14.63), a distance of 1.31 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. g.  State Route 27 (Lamar Street) from State Route 30 (Presidential Route) (Mile Point 14.63) to east city limits (Mile Point 14.88), a distance of 0.25 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour. h.  State Route 27 Dual (Forsyth Street) from State Route 27 (Lamar Street) (Mile Point 0.00) to State Route 49 (Mile Point 0.65), a distance of 0.65 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour. i.  State Route 27 Dual (Forsyth Street) from State Route 49 (Mile Point 0.65) to Price Street (Mile Point 1.41), a distance of 0.76 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. j.  State Route 27 Dual (Forsyth Street) from Prince Street (Mile Point 1.41) to Dudley Street (Mile Point 1.83), a distance of 0.42 miles, to be zoned for 25 miles per hour. k.  State Route 27 Dual (Forsyth Street) from Dudley Street (Mile Point 1.83) to State Route 3 (Mile Point 2.17), a distance of 0.34 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. l.  State Route 30 from west city limits (Mile Point 12.40) to State Route 3 (Mile Point 12.90), a distance of 0.50 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. m.  State Route 30 runs in common with State Route 3 for 0.89 miles. n.  State Route 30 from State Route 27 (Mile Point 15.87) to east city limits (Mile Point 16.03), a distance of 0.16 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour. o.  State Route 49 from State Route 27 (Lamar Street) (Mile Point 16.54) to east city limits (Mile Point 17.65), a distance of 1.11 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. p.  State Route 377 from south city limits (Mile Point 8.61) to Rose Avenue (Mile Point 9.40), a distance of 0.79 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. q.  State Route 377 from Rose Avenue (Mile Point 9.40) to State Route 27 Dual (Forsyth Street) (Mile Point 11.21), a distance of 1.81 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. (2)  Off-system. Signs to be erected by the city: a.  Armory Drive from State Route 30 to Patton Drive, a distance of 0.80 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. b.  Carter Street from North Lee Street to Southerfield Road, a distance of 0.22 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. c.  Cotton Avenue from Forsyth Street to McGarrah Street, a distance of 0.56 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. d.  East Oglethorpe Avenue from Mayo Street to State Route 49, a distance of 1.36 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. e.  Elm Avenue from State Route 377 to Seaboard Coastline Railroad, a distance of 0.75 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. f.  Elm Avenue from Seaboard Coastline Railroad to Taylor Street, a distance of 0.32 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. g.  Felder Street from the east city limits to Reese Park, a distance of 1.87 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. h.  Glessner Street from Oak Avenue to Wheatley Street, a distance of 0.94 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. i.  Hancock Drive from Daniel Street to College Street, a distance of 0.86 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. j.  Harrold Avenue from Glessner Street to College Street, a distance of 0.63 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. k.  Jackson Street from Forsyth Street to Northside Drive, a distance of 1.17 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. l.  Magnolia Street from State Route 3 to State Route 30, a distance of 0.79 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. m.  Mayo Street from Lamar Street to Johansen Street, a distance of 0.83 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. n.  Mayo Street from Johanson Street to Railroad Street, a distance of 0.32 miles, to be zoned for 40 miles per hour. o.  McGarrah Street from Cotton Avenue to State Route 3, a distance of 0.45 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. p.  North Lee Street from State Route 377 to Rucker Street, a distance of 1.20 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. q.  Oak Avenue from Pecan Drive to College Street, a distance of 0.76 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. r.  Park Row from State Route 3 to Magnolia Street, a distance of 0.33 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. s.  Money Street from Rucker Street to north city limits, a distance of 0.40 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. t.  Rose Avenue from State Route 377 to Glessner Street, a distance of 1.70 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. u.  Rucker Street from State Route 3 to Northside Drive a distance of 0.37 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. v.  Tripp Street from Felder Street to State Route 27 (Lamar Street), a distance of 0.66 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. w.  West Church Street from Spring Street to Reese Street, a distance of 1.90 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. x.  West Patterson Street from North Lee Street to State Route 3, a distance of 0.46 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. y.  Spring Street from its intersection with the city limits to its intersection with South Dudley Street to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. (Code 1986, § 20-33; Ord. No. O-87-04-07, 4-27-1987; Ord. No. O-92-03-16, 3-23-1992; Ord. No. O-95-01-01, 1-26-1995; Ord. No. O-95-06-22, 6-22-1995; Ord. No. O-96-03-13, 3-21-1996; Ord. No. O-98-11-39, 11-19-1998; Ord. No. O-02-07-18, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-03-09-24, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-01-03, 1-22-2004; Ord. No. O-04-10-20, 10-21-2004; Ord. No. O-04-11-24, 11-18-2004) State Law reference— Local alteration of speed limits, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-9, 40-6-183. 
Sec. 86-79. - Driving in a procession generally.     Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the street or roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. (Code 1962, § 23-42; Code 1986, § 20-35) 
Sec. 86-80. - Vehicles comprising funeral procession. (a)  Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided each shall identify itself by burning regular headlights, and by keeping in close formation. (b)  When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection, even though such signal may change to red. (Code 1962, § 23-34; Code 1986, § 20-36) 
Sec. 86-81. - Driving through funeral or other procession.     No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in section 86-80. (Code 1962, § 23-41; Code 1986, § 20-37) 
Sec. 86-82. - Signal to leave parking space.     Whenever vehicles are parked parallel to the curbing, before the operator of a parked vehicle or a vehicle stopped or standing at the edge of the street or roadway as prescribed in this chapter, shall execute a movement into any portion of the street or roadway normally used for moving traffic, such person shall signal the intention to do so by first giving the signal as prescribed in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-123—40-6-125, and shall start such movement only when the operator can do so with reasonable safety and without creating a hazard to other traffic moving lawfully within the street or roadway. (Code 1962, § 23-38; Code 1986, § 20-39) State Law reference— Starting parked vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-122. 
Sec. 86-83. - Designated play streets.     Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the highest degree of care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof, and at no time shall such driver's speed exceed five miles per hour. (Code 1962, § 23-40; Code 1986, § 20-41) 
Sec. 86-84. - Towing.     No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed 16 feet in length. (Code 1962, § 23-45; Code 1986, § 20-43) 
Sec. 86-85. - Vehicle colliding with object.     No driver of any vehicle shall operate same, in such manner so as to collide with any object legally placed upon or adjacent to any street or highway. (Code 1962, § 23-47; Code 1986, § 20-44) 
Sec. 86-86. - Vehicle involved in collision with parked vehicle.     No driver of any vehicle shall operate same, in such a manner so as to collide with any vehicle properly parked. (Code 1962, § 23-49; Code 1986, § 20-45) 
Sec. 86-87. - Vehicle leaving street or roadway.     No driver of any vehicle shall operate same, in such a manner as to enter or leave any street or highway except at an intersection or at an alley or private drive. (Code 1962, § 23-48; Code 1986, § 20-46) 
Sec. 86-88. - One-way streets. (a)  East and west. Traffic upon the streets designated shall move as follows in one direction only: (1)  On Forsyth Street in a westerly direction from the Vienna Road to Highway 19. (2)  On Lamar Street in an easterly direction from Highway 19 to the Vienna Road. (3)  On East Peppermint Way in an easterly direction from its intersection with North Lee Street to its intersection with Montgomery Street. (b)  North. (1)  Between Forsyth Street to the north and Forsyth Street to the south, traffic upon the following street shall be one-way north: Windsor Avenue. (2)  Jones Lane, from its intersection with Patterson Street to its intersection with Peppermint Way, shall be a one-way street in a northerly direction. (3)  Oak Avenue from Glessner Street to Bell Street shall be a one-way street in a northerly direction on Friday nights when Americus High School is hosting home football games. (c)  South. (1)  On Harrold Avenue, traffic shall be one-way south from Bell Street to Glessner Street from 7:00 a.m. until 8:30 a.m. during the time that Americus High School is in session. (2)  On Harrold Avenue, traffic shall be one-way south from Bell Street to Glessner Street from 3:00 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. during the times that Americus High School is in session. (d)  West. (1)  Peppermint Way between North Jackson Street and North Lee Street shall be a one-way street in a westerly direction. (2)  Sheffield Street from Quincy Drive to Jackson Street shall be a one-way street in a westerly direction. (3)  Glessner Street from Harrold Avenue to Oak Avenue shall be a one-way street in a westerly direction on Friday nights when Americus High School is hosting home football games. (e)  Other streets. Traffic on all other streets, unless otherwise indicated, shall be two-way traveling in both directions. (Code 1962, § 23-58; Code 1986, § 20-48; Ord. No. O-96-08-33, 8-22-1996; Ord. No. O-02-02-07, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. O-03-09-26, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-07-13, 7-22-2004; O-2012-13, 5-24-2012) State Law reference— Authority to establish one-way streets, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(4); one-way streets, O.C.G.A. § 49-6-47. 
Sec. 86-89. - Stop when traffic obstructed.     No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (Code 1962, § 23-120; Code 1986, § 20-49) 
Sec. 86-90. - Criminal trespass by a motor vehicle. (a)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass by a motor vehicle when the person, after having been requested not to do so by a law enforcement officer or by the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, parks or stands an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in, or repeatedly drives a motor vehicle through or within, a parking area which is located on privately owned property and is provided by a merchant, a group of merchants, or a shopping center or other similar facility for customers if: (1)  The parking area identified by at least one sign as specified in this section, and if the parking area contains more than 150 parking spaces then by at least one such sign for every 150 parking spaces, each sign containing the following information in easy-to-read printing: a.  Notice of the elements of the crime of criminal trespass by motor vehicle; b.  Identification of the property that is reserved for customers' use only; c.  Identification of the merchant, group of merchants, or shopping center or other similar facility providing the parking area; and d.  Warning that violators will be prosecuted. (2)  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing, or is being operated other than for the purpose of: a.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business of a merchant identified by the sign or signs in the parking area, or to or from the interior of the shopping center or other facility so identified; b.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller machine, or other similar facility located in the parking area; c.  Meeting the requirements of a situation in which it has unexpectedly become impossible or impractical for the motor vehicle to continue to travel on the public roads; or d.  Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area of an authorized representative of the owner. (b)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to a monetary fine as follows: (1)  Not to exceed $50.00 for the first such violation; (2)  Not to exceed $100.00 for the second such violation; (3)  Not to exceed $150.00 for the third or subsequent such violation. (Code 1986, § 20-50; Ord. No. O-87-06-11, 6-22-1987) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252. 
Sec. 86-91. - Four-way stop intersections.     There shall be established and enforced a four-way stop traffic regulation at the following intersections: (1)  Oglethorpe Avenue and Jefferson Street. (2)  Freida Lane and Jefferson Street. (3)  Douglas Circle and Ridge Street. (4)  Hancock Avenue and Bell Street. (5)  Lorraine Avenue and Peggy Ann Drive. (6)  Edgewood Avenue and Anthony Drive. (7)  Hancock Street and Furlow Street. (8)  Harrold Street and Furlow Street. (9)  Hill Street and Jackson Street. (10)  Hill Street and Harrold Avenue. (11)  Hancock Street and Hill Street. (12)  Douglas Drive and Pinecrest Drive. (13)  Jackson Avenue and Furlow Street. (14)  North Jackson Street with J. R. Campbell Drive. (15)  Alice Street and John Street. (Code 1986, § 20-51; Ord. No. O-87-06-13, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. O-89-6-17, 6-26-1989; Ord. No. O-89-7-23, 7-24-1989; Ord. No. O-91-07-23(a), 7-29-1991; Ord. No. O-91-10-36, 10-28-1991; Ord. No. O-96-03-11, 3-21-1996; Ord. No. O-98-11-41, 11-19-1998; Ord. No. O-99-04-16, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. O-99-11-45, 11-18-1999; Ord. No. O-05-07-17, 7-21-2005; Ord. No. O-07-08-23, 8-23-2007; Ord. No. O-07-08-24, 8-23-2007; Ord. No. O-11-12-31, 12-15-2011) State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
Sec. 86-92. - Three-way stop intersections.     There shall be established and enforced a three-way stop traffic regulation at the following intersections: (1)  Church Street and Brown Street. (2)  East Jefferson Street and Oglethorpe Avenue. (3)  GSW State University Drive and Wheatley Street. (4)  Taylor Street and Barlow Street. (Code 1986, § 20-52; Ord. No. O-00-07-31, 7-20-2000; Ord. No. O-04-02-04, 2-19-2004; Ord. No. O-06-04-11, 4-20-2006; Ord. No. O-07-09-31, 9-20-2007) State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
Sec. 86-93. - One-way stop intersections.     There shall be established and enforced a one-way stop at the intersection of East Jefferson Street and Oglethorpe Street in the city. The existing stop signs requiring a stop on Oglethorpe Avenue shall be removed. The city shall be authorized to install signage preceding the new stop sign advising motorists that the traffic on Oglethorpe Avenue traveling both east and west shall not be required to stop at such intersection. (Ord. No. O-10-11-40, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 86-94. - Two-way stop intersections.     There shall be established and enforced a two-way stop traffic regulation at the following intersections: (1)  North Jackson Street and Tom Hall Circle. (Ord. No. O-12-04-08, 4-19-2012) 
Secs. 86-95—86-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 86-113. - Park within markings. (a)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any portion of the streets within the city that have been or are, at the time of such parking, marked in sections indicating by such marking where and how vehicles shall be parked, otherwise than in conformity to such markings, leaving all the wheels of such parked vehicle clearly within the space indicated by such marks for parking of vehicles. (b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to commercial vehicles over 25 feet in length delivering or receiving cargo from buildings not equipped with off-street loading and unloading capabilities, providing said vehicles park in such manner for no more than 15 minutes, block only one lane of traffic, and that such vehicle is moved upon demand of any motorist whose exit from parking may be blocked by the delivery vehicle. (Code 1962, § 23-79; Code 1986, § 20-60; Ord. No. O-92-06-18, 6-22-1992) 
Sec. 86-114. - Parking in alley.     It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of any vehicle to park the same in any public alley within the city except where such motor vehicles are being loaded or unloaded or are awaiting loading or unloading of wares, goods or merchandise from or to the buildings or adjacent property to be served by said alley. (Code 1962, § 23-82; Code 1986, § 20-61) 
Sec. 86-115. - Parking of certain tractor-trailer rigs on residential streets.     No tractor-trailer rig or motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of 21,000 pounds or more shall be parked on a public street within the city, which public street has adjoining property which is zoned R-1 district or R-2 district. (Code 1962, § 23-83; Code 1986, § 20-62) 
Sec. 86-116. - Parking spaces for disabled in downtown. (a)  There is hereby established parking spaces in the downtown area of the city for use by persons with disabilities such parking spaces to be located as follows: (1)  On the west side of Jackson Avenue in the space immediately north of the cross walk; (2)  On the south side of Forsyth Street in the space immediately east of Windsor Avenue. (b)  The police chief, or his designee, shall be authorized to acquire and install appropriate signage at such parking spaces to indicate that they are reserved for the use of disabled citizens in accord with this section. (Code 1986, § 20-63; Ord. No. O-92-08-26, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 86-117. - Report of violation; fine. (a)  In each violation of this article, it shall be the duty of the police officers to report to the chief of police: (1)  The state license of such vehicle. (2)  The time of day or night the officer detected such violation of the provisions of this article. (3)  Any other facts, knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. (b)  Each police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this article and instructing such owner or operator to report at the office of the chief of police, in regard to such violation. Each such owner or operator may, within 24 hours of the time such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to the municipal court, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of $1.00. The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment to the municipal court, within 24 hours, shall render such owner or operator subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. (Code 1962, § 23-98; Code 1986, § 20-64) 
Sec. 86-118. - Successive violations, separate offenses.     When any vehicle shall remain parked for one hour beyond the time of the original notice of violation attached to the vehicle, such person shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Each such violation shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-8. It is the intention of this section that each hour that any vehicle shall be parked without complying with the provisions of this article shall be a separate offense and that time is the gravamen of the offense insofar as the successive violations shall occur. (Code 1962, § 23-97; Code 1986, § 20-65) 
Sec. 86-119. - Parking prohibited at certain times; illegal parking. (a)  No person employed by or operating a business or profession in that part of the city in the downtown area which is hereinafter more particularly designated shall park a privately owned or company-owned motor vehicle on any public right-of-way, whether it be an alley or a street, for the purpose of using such parking space while the owner or operator performs his duties at his regular place of employment in such downtown area. The provisions of this section shall be effective between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday of each week. (b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, and notwithstanding the provisions of section 86-116, a disabled person who has a handicap parking permit, who is employed by or who operates a business or profession in that part of the city in the downtown area which is hereinafter more particularly designated, shall be authorized to park in a designated disabled parking space in said downtown area at any time. The location of such parking space shall be designated by the city police with appropriate signage and markings. (c)  The parking area of the downtown area of the city wherein such parking by employees or operators of businesses or professions during said time periods shall be prohibited shall be as follows: (1)  Along the northerly and southerly sides of West Lamar Street, from its intersection with South Hampton Street and North Hampton Street to its intersection with South Lee Street and North Lee Street. (2)  Along the southerly side of East Lamar Street, from its intersection with South Lee Street to its intersection with South Price Street. (3)  Along the northerly and southerly sides of West Forsyth Street, from its intersection with North Hampton Street to its intersection with North Lee Street. (4)  Along the easterly and westerly sides of South Jackson Street, from its intersection with Church Street to its intersection with West Lamar Street. (5)  Along the easterly and westerly sides of North Jackson Street, from its intersection with West Lamar Street to its intersection with West Jefferson Street. (6)  Along the westerly side of Cotton Avenue, from its intersection with West Lamar Street to its intersection with West Forsyth Street. (7)  Along the easterly and westerly sides of Cotton Avenue, from its intersection with West Forsyth Street to its intersection with West Jefferson Street. (8)  Along the westerly side of Windsor Avenue, from its intersection with West Lamar Street to its intersection with West Forsyth Street. (9)  Along the westerly side of North Lee Street, from its intersection with West Forsyth Street to its intersection with West Jefferson Street. (d)  Upon conviction, a plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere to a violation of the provisions of this section, the violator shall pay a fine of not less than $35.00 in addition to any other punishment or penalty which may be lawfully imposed by the municipal court of the city. (e)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the parking of motor vehicles by persons residing in upper floor residential areas as authorized by chapter 94. (Code 1986, § 20-66; Ord. No. O-87-06-12, §§ A—C, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. O-89-10-29, 10-23-1989; Ord. No. O-89-12-43, 12-18-1989; Ord. No. O-97-08-31A, 8-21-1997) 
Sec. 86-120. - No parking zones. (a)  There are hereby established the following no parking zones: (1)  Harrold Avenue, east side, from its intersection with Dodson Street to its intersection with Virginia Avenue. (2)  Harrold Avenue, west side, from its intersection with the driveway leading to the Americus High School Gymnasium south to its intersection with the northerly property line of the first residential house now located on the west side of Harrold Avenue. (3)  Virginia Avenue, north and south sides, from its intersection with Harrold Avenue to its intersection with Turner Street. (4)  Bell Street, from its intersection with Harrold Avenue to its intersection with South Jackson Street, on both sides of said Bell Street. (5)  Reddick Drive on the south side for the entire length of said street. (6)  Wild Street, south side, between Cotton Avenue and Jackson Street, with Wild Street, north side, to be designated for passenger pickup and dropoff. (7)  Elmo Street, along the south side thereof, from its intersection with Mayo Street to its intersection with Reese Street. (8)  Hampton Street, east and west sides, from its intersection with Church Street to its intersection with Lamar Street. (9)  Habitat Street, east side, from its intersection with Church Street to its intersection with Spring Street. (10)  North Jackson Street, east side, from its intersection with Rucker Street to its intersection with Hope Street. (11)  West Church Street along the north curb of the street beginning at the northwest corner of West Church Street and South Lee Street and continuing west to the northeast corner of Church Street and Habitat Street. (12)  East Church Street along the north curb of the street beginning at the northwest corner of East Church Street at its intersection with Reese Street and continuing to the northeast corner of Church Street and Brown Street. (13)  Taylor Street beginning at the northwest corner of Taylor Street at its intersection with Jones Street and continuing west to a point 50 feet west of Elm Avenue. (14)  Taylor Street on the northwest curb thereof beginning 30 feet east of Barlow Street and continuing west to its intersection with Brown Street, including the traffic island located at "Taylor's Place." (15)  Taylor Street at the northeast corner of Taylor Street and South Lee Street extending 20 feet east on Taylor Street. (16)  East Church Street, north side from its intersection with Prince Street to its intersection with the Harvey's Supermarket driveway that enters and exits from East Church Street. (17)  Spring Street on the North side from the Northwest intersection of the curb on the north side of Spring Street with the west curb of the driveway entering into the west side of the Summer County Courthouse for a distance of 120 feet. (18)  South Jackson Street, East side, on both sides of the southernmost access drive to the Public Safety Building for a distance of 40 feet south and 40 feet north, and on South Jackson Street, east side, on the south side of the northernmost access drive to the Public Safety Building for a distance of 40 feet south. (19)  Felder Street, both sides, from its intersection with Bosworth Drive to its intersection with Hill Street. (20)  Dodson Street, on both the North and South sides thereof, from its intersection with Harrold Avenue to its intersection with Hancock Drive during school hours from 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. Monday through Friday while Americus-Sumter High School is in session. (21)  The north and west sides of Tom Hall Circle from its intersection with North Jackson Street to its intersection with the north right-of-way of Harvey Lane and on the west and south sides of Tom Hall Circle from its intersection with the south right-of-way of Harvey Lane to its intersection with North Jackson Street. (22)  Simmons Street, both sides, from its intersection with Felder Street to its intersection with Anthony Street. (23)  Ashby Street from its intersection with North Lee Street to the intersection with the private driveway located at 112 Ashby Street. (24)  South Lee Street from its intersection with Elm Avenue for a distance of 60 feet north along the east side of South Lee Street. (25)  The eastern side of Elm Avenue where Rees Park abuts Elm Avenue at such locations as may be marked by yellow painted curbing at such locations as are authorized by the chief of police of the city. (26)  The south side of Anthony Drive from Perimeter Road to GSW Drive at such locations as may be marked by yellow painted curbing at such locations as are authorized by the chief of police of the city. (b)  The utilities director shall provide for notice of such no parking zones and the times of operation thereof by appropriate yellow markings and signs. (c)  In the event of the establishment of no parking zones by the city council, the utilities director shall designate the same by appropriate yellow markings and signs, and any person violating such no parking zone shall be punishable and any person violating such no parking zone shall be guilty of an offense. (Code 1986, § 20-67; Ord. No. O-88-03-11, 3-28-1988; Ord. No. O-93-04-15, 4-26-1993; Ord. No. O-94-05-14, 5-19-1994; Ord. No. O-94-07-24, 7-21-1994; Ord. No. O-94-12-40, 12-22-1994; Ord. No. O-95-06-23, 6-22-1995; Ord. No. O-96-03-12, 3-21-1996; Ord. No. O-96-06-20, 6-20-1996; Ord. No. O-01-10-37, 10-18-2001; Ord. No. O-01-04-15, 4-19-2001; Ord. No. O-03-05-10, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. O-03-08-18, 8-21-2003; Ord. No. O-03-11-36, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. O-04-10-21, 10-21-2004; Ord. No. O-05-07-15, 7-21-2005; Ord. No. O-05-08-20, 8-19-2005; Ord. No. O-05-09-29, 9-22-2005; Ord. No. O-08-08-19, 8-21-2008; Ord. No. O-08-10-34, 10-23-2008; Ord. No. O-09-07-23, 7-23-2009) 
Sec. 86-121. - Parking zones on Windsor Avenue.     There is hereby established along Windsor Avenue, from its intersection with Forsyth Street to its intersection with Lamar Street, a restricted parking zone such that there shall be no parking by any person along Windsor Avenue between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. Monday through Friday of each week. Parking along said Windsor Avenue at times other than set out above shall not be restricted except as otherwise provided in this Code. (Code 1986, § 20-68; Ord. No. O-90-06-16, 6-28-1990) 
Sec. 86-122. - Fifteen-minute parking zones.     There is hereby established a 15-minute parking zone for the two parking spaces on the north side of West Lamar Street, immediately in front of the Windsor Hotel property, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park any type of vehicle for a period longer than 15 minutes in either or both of said parking spaces. (Code 1986, § 20-69; Ord. No. O-91-10-35, 10-28-1991) 
Secs. 86-123—86-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOADING ZONES 
Sec. 86-143. - Authority of police chief.     The police chief shall be authorized to designate, establish and maintain, by appropriate markings, loading zones for the purpose of loading and unloading commercial vehicles in the downtown area of the city; provided that there shall be no more than one loading zone per city block, that such loading zones shall be clearly delineated by appropriate markings and signs, and that such loading zones shall be located in such positions as will not interfere with the normal traffic flow. (Code 1986, § 20-91; Ord. No. O-88-03-13, 3-28-1988; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Sec. 86-144. - Parking prohibited; exceptions.     It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a loading zone as designated by authority of the police chief, unless such vehicle is a commercial vehicle from which property or merchandise is being loaded or unloaded, and in no event shall such commercial vehicle park in said loading zone for a period of time longer than 30 minutes. For purposes of this article, the term "commercial vehicle" shall be defined as an automobile, truck, trailer, tractor, wagon or any other motor vehicle designed or used as a vehicle of conveyance in the furtherance of or as a part of any commercial activity or enterprise, whether or not such vehicle is used solely in such commercial activity or enterprise or is used only intermittently in such commercial activity or enterprise. (Code 1986, § 20-92; Ord. No. O-88-03-14, 3-28-1988; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Secs. 86-145—86-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sec. 86-172. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, which has been parked or left standing on the public streets of the city for more than five days in a nonoperating state of repair.     Abandonment means the act of the owner leaving the vehicle on the streets or sidewalks of the city for a period in excess of five days, when the owner of the vehicle does not own the property abutting the street or sidewalk upon which the vehicle is parked and does not reside, room, have a place of business, lease, rent, or otherwise exercise control and dominion over the abutting real estate.     Hazard to normal flow of traffic means a vehicle parked on the public streets of the city in a nonoperational condition and is hereby defined to be a hazard to the normal flow of traffic on the streets of the city.     Nonoperational vehicle means a vehicle that will not start, run and move under its own power in its existing condition.     Vehicle means any automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, wagon, or other artificial contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means of transportation on land. (Code 1962, § 23-106; Code 1986, § 20-70) State Law reference— Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 86-173. - Unlawful to abandon vehicle.     It shall be unlawful to abandon any vehicle upon the streets or sidewalks of the city. (Code 1962, §§ 23-107, 23-108; Code 1986, § 20-71) 
Sec. 86-174. - Maximum parking time.     No vehicle shall be parked upon the streets for a period of more than 24 hours unless such vehicle is owned by or in the custody, care and control of the property owner abutting said street or sidewalk where such vehicle is parked. (Code 1962, § 23-109; Code 1986, § 20-72) 
Sec. 86-175. - Abandoned vehicle to be moved within 24 hours following receipt of notice.     All such abandoned or overparked vehicles shall be moved by the owner or person in charge thereof within 24 hours following receipt of notice from the police chief or designee or any member of the police force of the city requiring such vehicle to be removed. (Code 1962, § 23-109.1; Code 1986, § 20-73) 
Sec. 86-176. - Removal of abandoned vehicle or vehicle constituting a hazard authorized.     Any vehicle which shall be abandoned, or parked so as to constitute a traffic hazard, on the streets of the city may be taken into the custody of the police department and towed or removed to a garage or parking lot either by the police chief or designee. (Code 1962, §§ 23-110, 23-112; Code 1986, § 20-74) State Law reference— When police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-206, 40-11-3. 
Sec. 86-177. - Impounding parked vehicles, removal of, authorized.     Any vehicle parked on the streets of the city in such a manner that it is a traffic hazard may be moved by the police department or towed under the custody and control and the charge for towing made and collected as herein provided. (Code 1962, § 23-112; Code 1986, § 20-75) 
Secs. 86-178—86-207. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WEIGHT AND LOAD LIMITS[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Weight limits, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-20 et seq. 
Sec. 86-208. - Motor trucks or trailers prohibited from traversing certain areas during designated hours.     It shall be unlawful for any motor truck or motor-drawn trailer to traverse any street or part of the area of the city during periods hereafter specifically designated by the city council by resolution or ordinance. Whenever said streets or areas are designated, nothing in this section shall prevent any truck, when not accompanied by a trailer, from traversing any of the streets or areas solely for the purpose of making delivery or for the purpose of picking up or receiving goods, wares or merchandise for transportation; but this shall not include permission for trailers to enter, park or stand in such areas for any purpose whatsoever. (Code 1962, § 23-6; Code 1986, § 20-15) 
Sec. 86-209. - Limitations as to weight of vehicles on city streets. (a)  The governing body of the city shall have the right to proclaim by ordinance or resolution the maximum weight of any vehicle, including tractors and trailers, which may be driven upon certain designated streets of the city. (b)  There are hereby established certain truck routes in the city. Those trucks shall be located upon the following streets: Brady Road Carter Street Cotton Avenue East Furlow Street to Elm Avenue East Lester Street from McGarrah to Davis Elm Avenue Felder Street Forrest Street Glessner Street Industrial Boulevard Industrial Drive Jefferson Street (downtown) Lee Street to Carter Street Mathews Drive Mayo Street McGarrah Street North Dudley Street North Hampton (from Lamar north) North Jackson to Prince Street (but not between Lamar and Forsyth) Oak Avenue (from West Glessner north) Patterson Street from McGarrah to Davis Perimeter Road-Georgia Southwestern State University Prince Street Railroad Street Reese Street Simmons Street Southerfield Road Spring Street Swett Avenue Tripp Street Warren Avenue West Church Street (c)  No truck, including tractor-trailer trucks, or other motor vehicles, which weigh over 36,000 pounds gross weight, shall travel any public street within the city except for those streets listed above, unless it is necessary for such truck, tractor-trailer, or other motor vehicle to pick up or deliver a cargo on streets other than those listed above. (d)  The city shall post appropriate signs along the streets designated as truck routes. Any street not posted as a truck route shall not be considered a truck route for purposes of this section. (Code 1962, § 23-8; Code 1986, § 20-16; Ord. No. O-91-06-18, 6-20-1991; Ord. No. O-91-08-25, 8-26-1991; Ord. No. O-91-10-34, 10-28-1991; Ord. No. O-92-03-12, 3-23-1992; Ord. No. O-06-07-22, 7-20-2006; Ord. No. O-07-07-21, § 20-16, 7-19-2007; Ord. No. O-10-05-16, 5-20-2010; Ord. No. O-10-08-25, 8-19-2010) 
Sec. 86-210. - Use of engine brakes and compression brakes prohibited. (a)  For purposes of this section the terms "engine brake" or "compression brake" shall mean a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheeled brakes, said devices being commonly referred to as "air brakes", "Jacob's brakes" or "jake brakes". (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in actual physical control of a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to; a truck or a tractor-trailer truck, to use an engine brake or compression brake while traveling along the streets of the city unless such engine brake or compression brake is used solely to effect an emergency stop of the motor vehicle. (c)  Upon conviction, the penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-07-07-20, § 20-16.1, 7-19-2007) 
Chapter 90 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 90-1. - Discontinuance of city services when charges remain unpaid.     Any person failing for any reason or refusing to pay timely the monthly water, gas, sewerage or refuse collection charges provided in this Code set by the city after having been duly billed for same by the city shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter, and all water service, gas service, sewerage service and refuse collection service provided by the city to the premises for which the monthly charges are past due shall be terminated by the city; provided, however, should not more than one of the monthly water charges, gas charges, sewerage charges and refuse collection charges remain unpaid, any person may make application to the finance director to have the city services restored that are not in arrears provided such person submits a monthly repayment plan to the finance director to pay for the particular services that are in arrears within a three-month period of time from the date of such application; and provided that the person abides by each proposed monthly payment within said three-month time period. (Code 1962, § 10-22; Code 1986, § 13-1; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-2. - Refunds of utility payments. (a)  In the event that a city utility customer claims that he has overpaid a utility bill or that he has been charged more than was legally due for the use of city utilities, then such customer may file a claim for a refund with the finance director at any time within three years after the date of the payment of the amount for which a refund is claimed. The claim for refund shall be in writing, and shall be in a form and contain the information required by the finance director. Such claim shall include a summary statement of the grounds upon which the customer relies in claiming the refund. The customer may be required to provide such additional information as may be requested by the finance director in order for the clerk to consider the claim. (b)  Upon receipt of the claim, and any additional information required from the customer by the finance director, the finance director shall consider the claim and determine whether or not the customer is entitled to a refund, but in no event shall any refund be provided for any payments made more than three years prior to the date of filing the claim for refund. The finance director shall only grant the claim for refund if the finance director determines that the amount for which the refund is sought was billed to the customer erroneously or illegally. (c)  The finance director shall notify the customer of the finance director's decision regarding the refund claim within 30 days from the date that the finance director receives all information necessary in order for the finance director to make a determination regarding the refund claim. (d)  Any customer whose claim for refund is denied by the finance director may appeal such denial to the city council within 30 days of the date of the finance director's decision. The city council shall authorize such refund only in the event that it finds that the funds for which the refund is sought were billed to the customer either erroneously or illegally. The decision of the city council regarding the claim for refund shall be final. (Code 1986, § 13-2; Ord. No. O-97-11-36, 11-20-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 90-3—90-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BACKFLOW CONTROL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, adopted Nov. 17, 2011, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out, with the exception of § 90-32, which remains unchanged. Former art. II, §§ 90-23—90-32, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1986, §§ 13-40—13-48; Ord. No. O-85-07-16, §§ 1—3, adopted June 27, 1985; and Ord. No. O-95-11-35, adopted Nov. 30, 1995. 
Sec. 90-23. - Definitions.     The definitions found in the city plumbing code for backflow, cross-connections, and backflow prevention devices shall be those used in this article. In addition, the following definitions shall apply:     Air gap means a physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable water system and any other system. Physically defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply side pipe diameter but never less than one inch.     Approved means accepted by the director of public works as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this regulation, or as suitable for the proposed use.     Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural sources such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control.     Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances under positive or reduced pressure in the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than its intended source.     Backflow preventer means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or backsiphonage. Most commonly categorized as air gap, reduced pressure principal assembly, double-check valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bibb vacuum breaker, residential dual check and barometric loop.     Containment means a method of backflow prevention which requires a backflow preventer at the water service entrance.     Contaminant means a substance that will impair the quality of the water to a degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public, leading to poisoning or the spread of disease.     Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.     Cross-connection means a connection or potential connection between any part of a potable water system and any other environment containing other substances in a manner that, under any circumstances, would allow such substances to enter the potable water system. Other substances may be gases, liquids or solids, such as chemicals, waste products, steam, water from other sources (potable or nonpotable), or any other matter that may change the color and/or add odor to the water.     Cross-connection control by containment means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer's water system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection.     Cross-connection, controlled means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.     Customer means a person or entity receiving water or sewer services from the City of Americus Public Works Department.     Department means the City of Americus Public Works Department.     Double-check backflow preventer means an assembly of two independently operating spring-loaded check valves with tightly-closing shut off valves on each side of the check valves and properly located test cocks allowing for the testing of each check valve on each line, specifically a double-check valve assembly (DCVA) or a double-check detector assembly (DCDA).     Hazard assessment means a hazard determination conducted pursuant to Section 608 of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code.     Hazard, degree of, means the term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.     Hazard, health, means any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the building official, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer.     Hazard, plumbing, means a plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air gap or approved backflow prevention device.     Hazard, pollutional, means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.     Hazard, system, means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.     Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but is not limited to: Polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulating cooling water connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes.     Owner means any person who has legal title to, or license to operate or inhabit, a property upon which a cross-connection inspection is to be made or upon which a cross-connection is deemed likely by the City of Americus Public Works.     Permit means a document issued by the department which allows the installation of a backflow preventer.     Person means any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation, political subdivision or agency of the state department, agency or instrumentality or the United States or any other legal entity.     Pollutant means a foreign substance that, if permitted to get into the public water system, will degrade its quality so as to constitute a moderate hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree that does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such water for domestic use.     Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer means an assembly consisting of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two check valves, tightly-closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves and properly located test cocks allowing for the testing of the check valves and the relief valve on each line, specifically a reduced pressure principal assembly (RP) or a reduced pressure principal detector assembly (RPDA).     Residential dual check means an assembly of two spring loaded, independently operating check valves without tightly closing shut-off valves or test cocks. Generally employed immediately downstream of the water meter to act as a containment device.     Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the term "service connection" shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system.     Water used means any water supplied by the city from the public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the city water department. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-24. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to: (1)  Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by containing within the customer's internal distribution systems or the customer's private water systems such contaminates or pollutants which could backflow into the public water system through an undiscovered or uncontrolled cross-connection on said premises; (2)  Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water systems and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and (3)  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically attempt to prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-25. - Protection of system; fees and charges; installation of assemblies. (a)  In accordance with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, and the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water Section 391-3-5-.13, the Water Purveyor, City of Americus Public Works, has the primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources, or any other substances, from entering the public potable water system. (b)  The City of Americus is authorized to charge a nominal fee to water customers for the purpose of funding the cross-connection control program. The City of Americus is also authorized to charge an additional fee to businesses for funding the cross-connection control program and the associated inspections. Should a water customer fail to comply with the requirements set out herein, the City of Americus has the authority to install, test, and repair backflow prevention assemblies and pass on costs to the customer associated with the work, including, but not limited to, labor, parts and administration. The City of Americus Public Works Department has the authority to hire or designate an on-call or consulting engineer to offer support with tasks associated with upkeep of the cross-connection control program. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-25.1. - Obligations and responsibilities.     The following obligations shall be undertaken and performed by the named persons or entities: (1)  Purveyor. The Director of Public Works for the City of Americus, Georgia, or a designee on his or her behalf, as authorized through this article, is primarily responsible for preventing contamination and pollution of the public water supply by instituting the cross-connection control program, as approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. Such responsibility begins at the point of origin for the public potable water supply, includes all of the distribution system, and terminates at the service connection for the customer's water system. In addition, the director shall exercise reasonable vigilance to ensure that the customer adheres to this policy and these procedures as stated and outlined herein. (2)  Customer. The business and residential customers will be responsible for all work and costs related to installing, certifying and maintaining the required backflow assemblies. The required customer-supplied backflow prevention assembly at the service connection shall provide maximum protection for locations deemed "high hazard" (reduced pressure principal backflow preventer — RP, RPDA or air gap), or minimum protection for locations deemed "low hazard" (double-check backflow preventer — DCVA, DCDA) as directed by the department or an authorized representative thereof. (3)  Building code official. The building inspection department is primarily responsible for enforcing the State of Georgia Plumbing Code to prevent contamination and pollution within the customer's water system in accordance with applicable plumbing and building codes requiring that all outlets terminate through an approved air gap or be controlled by an approved mechanical backflow prevention device. Such responsibility begins at the service connection to the premises and extends to the extremities of the customer's potable water supply. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011; Ord. No. O-12-04-09, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 90-26. - Water system components.     The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: The utility system and the customer system. (1)  Utility system. The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the city, up to the point where the customer's system begins. a.  Source facilities. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. b.  Distribution system. The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. (2)  Customer's system. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-27. - Connection policy. (a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city unless the water supply is protected as required by state law and regulations and this article. The City of Americus shall either discontinue service of water to any premises or take appropriate steps by installing, testing or maintaining a backflow prevention assembly if one is required by this article and state law and has not been tested and maintained, or if it is found that a required backflow prevention assembly has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. In the event of disconnection, service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. Compliance with applicable requirements for backflow prevention shall be verified by the department before water service is reinstated. (b)  The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to the department or authorized representatives of the department to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the department shall either immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the conditions in conformance with state statutes and city ordinances relating to plumbing and water supplies, and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or take appropriate steps by installing, testing or maintaining the assembly to correct the conditions in conformance with state statutes and city ordinances relating to plumbing and water supplies, and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. All costs incurred shall be passed directly to the customer. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-28. - Installation of assembly in service line.     An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: (1)  Auxiliary water supply. In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the building official, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by eliminating the connection between the two systems. (2)  Industrial fluid or hazardous substances. In the case of premises on which any industrial fluid or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. (3)  Connection issues. In the case of premises having: a.  Internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled; b.  Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements; or c.  Where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist. The public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line. (4)  Water heating or pressure producing device. In the case of premises having any water heating device or any other pressure-producing device connected to the customer's system, a thermal protection device, either a thermal expansion tank or a calibrated pressure-relief valve set at 80 psi, will be required in order to protect against damage caused by thermal expansion of a system closed with backflow preventer. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-29. - Type of assembly.     The type of protective assembly required under subsections 90-28(1)—(3) shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: (1)  Auxiliary water supply. In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection 90-28(1) and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. (2)  Objectionable substances. In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable, but not hazardous to health, if introducted into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double-check valve assembly. (3)  Hazardous substances. In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or any approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. (4)  Connection issues. In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection. (5)  Other prohibitions or restrictions. In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each service to the premises. (6)  Unknown hazards. In the case of any premises where there is no known pollutional or contaminant hazard, as described or covered in subsections (1) through (5) of this section, the public water system shall be protected by an approved residential dual-check valve at the service connection. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-30. - Approved backflow prevention assembly.     Any backflow prevention assembly device assembly required herein shall be a model and size approved by the building official. The term "approved backflow prevention assembly" shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established in the city and state plumbing codes. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-31. - Tests; repair of assemblies. (a)  Periodic testing. Annual testing shall be performed by a tester certified by one of the approved programs. This testing will be coordinated by the owner and performed at the owner's expense. Assemblies shall also be tested immediately following installation, repair or relocation of an assembly. Test reports must be submitted within seven days from the date that the test is performed. Any backflow preventer that fails during a periodic test will be repaired or replaced. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of the repair, the assembly will be retested at the customer's expense to insure correct operation. In situations where the public water system is not deemed by the department to be immediately threatened by a health or pollutional hazard, a compliance date of not more than 30 days after the test date will be established. If a customer does not comply with installation, testing or repair within 60 days of notifications, the department may perform installation, testing or repair and bill the customer for the cost of the work, parts, and any associated administrative costs. (b)  Backflow assembly testers. In accordance with the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division requirements, backflow testers for the City of Americus must be certified by one of the State of Georgia approved agencies in order to test backflow assemblies. Certification is valid for up to three years or until such time as his or her certification expires, whichever comes first. In order to certify backflow prevention assemblies for the City of Americus, testers must complete an application, including, but not limited to, a copy of his or her current tester certificate from one of the approved agencies, a copy of the current calibration certificate of the approved backflow gauge to be used by the tester, and the business license under which he or she will be practicing. A list of testers will be published and made available to customers who require a backflow assembly test. (c)  Backflow assembly repairs. All backflow assembly repairs shall be performed by a person or persons working under a current plumber's license. (d)  Backflow assembly installation. In accordance with State of Georgia's Cross-Connection Control requirements, all installations of backflow assemblies shall be performed by a person or persons working under a current plumber's license. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-31.1. - Installation of residential dual-checks.     Residential dual-checks shall be installed by the department or a designee thereof. (Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-32. - Nonconforming devices.     All presently installed backflow prevention devices which do not meet the requirements of this section, but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under section 90-31, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the building official is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the building official finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this section. (Code 1986, § 13-49; Ord. No. O-85-07-16, § 3.2.7, 6-27-1985; Ord. No. O-95-11-35, 11-30-1995) 
Secs. 90-33—90-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 90-53—90-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL AREAS 
Sec. 90-78. - Authority to extend; service charges. (a)  The city council shall be authorized to extend or cause to be extended water main lines and sewer main lines into commercial areas, both inside and outside the city limits where the city council deems it appropriate and in the best interest of the city to do so. (b)  In considering the extension of such water mains and sewer mains, the city council shall take into consideration past commercial business growth patterns and anticipated commercial business growth patterns, both inside and outside the city limits. The city council shall also weigh the net cost to the city of such extensions against the potential increased revenues to the city realized or anticipated to result from such extensions due to increased economic development activity. (c)  In the event that the city council determines that it is appropriate to extend water mains and sewer mains into commercial areas, either inside or outside the city limits, the city shall be authorized to charge to new water and sewer customers, in addition to tap charges, service deposits, meter costs and monthly water and sewer rates, an amount determined by the city which will reimburse the city for all reasonable costs of extending such water mains and sewer mains based upon the linear front footage of the property to be served by such water main and sewer main extensions. Such costs need not be paid by a property owner or owners until such time as the property owner or owners desire to purchase city water and city sewer services, and such charges may be paid as part of the initial tap charges otherwise authorized in this Code. In addition to the foregoing, the city shall be authorized to charge interest on such amounts from the date that such water and sewer service becomes available to the date that such charges are paid in an amount to be determined by the city. (d)  The charges authorized hereunder shall be in addition to all other charges authorized to persons or businesses who utilize city water and city sewer services, whether inside or outside the city limits. (e)  The commercial business shall be required to pay the full cost of installing water and sewer lines from the main line to a commercial business building or buildings located on the premises, and the city shall have no responsibility or liability therefor. (f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to residential subdivisions, or to the extension of water mains and sewer mains by the city to serve a single residence or a single commercial business. Under such circumstances, the city shall be authorized to undertake such extensions and shall be authorized to charge the full cost of such extensions to such residential or commercial customer. (Code 1986, § 13-150; Ord. No. O-96-04-15, 4-18-1996) 
Secs. 90-79—90-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL AREAS 
Sec. 90-100. - Authority to extend.     The city council shall be authorized to extend or cause to be extended water main lines and sewer main lines into residential areas, both inside and outside the city limits, where the city council deems it appropriate and in the best interest of the city to do so. For purposes of this division, the term "residential areas" shall include all areas inside and outside the city limits which are zoned for any type of residential development. (Code 1986, § 13-161; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 1, 1-21-1999) 
Sec. 90-101. - Investigation; survey; estimated costs. (a)  In the event that the utilities director shall determine that there is an area within the city or outside the city limits which should have access to city water and city sewerage, the utilities director shall conduct a preliminary investigation of the area to determine the estimated cost, feasibility, and if appropriate, the time frame within which water mains and sewer mains could be installed to serve such area. The utilities director shall then make a written report of his findings to the city manager of the city, who shall review such findings and submit them to the city council for review. (b)  Upon review of the findings, the city council shall be authorized to undertake one of the following three options: (1)  The council can determine that the proposed installation of water and sewer lines in such area is not feasible, not cost effective, or is a project that the city should not undertake at the present time. (2)  In the event that the area studied is an area where residential property has already been developed, then the city council shall be authorized to direct the city manager of the city to undertake a survey of the property owners in the area to determine whether or not they desire the construction of such improvements in the area. An estimated cost of such extension that would have to be paid by such property owners, if any, shall be submitted to said property owners as part of such survey. Unless the city council shall determine that public health and safety concerns exist so as to require such installation, in the discretion of the city council, no such extension shall be undertaken by the city unless at least 60 percent of the property owners in the subject area respond affirmatively to such survey. (3)  In the event that the subject area has not been developed as a residential area, then the city council shall direct the city manager to conduct a survey, as referred to in subsection (b)(2) of this section, of the property owners in the subject area in the same manner. Unless the city council shall determine that public health and safety concerns exist so as to require such installation, in the discretion of the city council, no such extension shall be undertaken by the city unless 100 percent of the property owners in the subject area respond affirmatively to such survey. (Code 1986, § 13-162; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 2, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-102. - Completion of survey; determination of special or general benefits. (a)  The survey shall be completed within 90 days after the city manager is directed to commence such survey. In the event that the required percentage approval from the property owners is met as a result of the survey, or in the event that the city council determines that public health and safety concerns exist so as to require the installation of the water and sewer improvements, the city council shall determine whether or not a special benefit will accrue to those property owners gaining access to the city's water and sewer system. In the event that such a special benefit will accrue as determined by the city council, the city council shall compare such special benefit with the general benefit derived by taxpayers of the city in general as a result of such improvements. If the comparison of the special benefit to the general benefit derived by taxpayers of the city in general results in a conclusion that the special benefit to the taxpayers of the subject area in expanding the water and sewer system to said area will outweigh the general benefit derived by taxpayers of the city in general, then in such event, the city council shall determine what portion of the cost of extending the city's water and sewer line to the subject area will be paid by the city, if any. If the city council determines that the general benefit to be derived by taxpayers of the city in general outweighs the special benefit to the property owners in the subject area, then the city shall pay the total cost of the extension of the water and sewer line. (b)  In the event that the city determines there is a special benefit to the property owners in the subject area, the city shall determine what portion of such cost each property owner shall pay for such water and sewer extension. If finally approved, the portion of the cost of the water and sewer line extension payable by the property owners in the subject area shall be paid to the city in accord with the provisions of this division. (Code 1986, § 13-163; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 3, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-103. - Boundary of subject area; total costs; assessment. (a)  At the next regular meeting of the city council after completion of the survey and the tabulations of the results thereof, or at such other time as the city council may determine. The city council may consider a resolution establishing the boundary of the subject area to be served by the water and sewer extensions and identifying all of the property or properties in the subject area which will benefit from access to such extension. Such resolution shall also provide the following: (1)  The total cost of the proposed project; (2)  The proposed method of assessment as to each property owner; (3)  A good faith estimate of the proposed assessment against each property; and (4)  A date, place, and time for a public hearing to be held on the merits of the project and on any objections thereto. (b)  Such resolution, if approved by the city council, shall be deemed to conditionally approve the project under the terms and conditions as set out in the resolution, but such project shall not proceed until after the public hearing and after the city council has approved a final resolution approving the project in accord with the terms of such final resolution. (c)  Notice of the public hearing, referred to in subsection (b) of this section, shall be given to every property owner identified in the preliminary resolution as potentially benefiting from access to the proposed water and sewer line improvements. Such notice shall be given in writing and mailed to such property owners by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address shown on the city tax digest for the mailing of tax notices. Such notices shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing and shall include a copy of the preliminary resolution as approved by the city council. Such notice shall also specify the date, time, and location of the hearing and advise such property owners of their right to attend said hearing and to testify at said hearing. Such notice shall also be published by the city manager or his designee at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in the legal organ of the city. The time fixed for the public hearing shall be not less than five nor more than ten days after the date of the last publication of such notice. (d)  The city council shall hold the public hearing on the date, time, and place specified for the purpose of hearing supporting comments, complaints, objections that may be made by any interested persons concerning the project, including, but not limited to, the need for such water and sewer extension, the basis of apportioning costs between the city and the property owners, or the amount of the proposed assessment. The city council shall consider such comments and shall also be authorized to accept written comments from interested parties. (e)  At the next regular meeting of the city council, or at such other time as the city council may direct, the city council shall be authorized to consider a final resolution authorizing the project. Such resolution shall not be approved at the meeting at which it is first read without unanimous consent of the members of the city council, but shall be voted upon by the city council at the time of the second reading of such resolution. Such resolution shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following determinations. (1)  The boundary of the subject area to be served by the water and sewer extension; (2)  The projected cost of the improvements; (3)  The proposed method of assessment of such costs against the property owners; (4)  A good faith estimate of the proposed assessment against each property owner; and (5)  The date on which such assessments shall be due and payable to the city. (Code 1986, § 13-164; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 4, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-104. - Notice of assessment. (a)  The city manager of the city, or his designee, shall, not less than 30 days before the date on which the payment of an assessment shall be due, cause written notice of such assessment to be sent to each affected property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall inform the property owner of the amount of the assessment, that the assessment is payable to the finance director of the city, that if paid on or before the due date, such assessment shall be without interest, and that if such assessment is not paid by the due date, the amount of such assessment shall be a lien against the lot or tracts of land subject to the assessment, and such lien shall continue in force until the assessment and all interest is fully paid. The interest to be charged on assessments not paid when due shall be determined by the city council in the final resolution in section 90-103. (b)  In addition to the foregoing notice of the property owner's right to pay such assessment in installments, as provided in this division, shall also be contained in the notice required under this section. (Code 1986, § 13-165; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 5, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-105. - Action to enjoin or contest assessments.     No action shall be authorized to set aside any assessment, to enjoin the collection of any assessment, to enjoin the issuance of any execution therefor, or to contest the validity of an assessment on any legal or equitable grounds, unless such action is commenced within 30 days after the receipt of the notice provided for in section 90-104. (Code 1986, § 13-166; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 6, 1-21-1999) 
Sec. 90-106. - Payment of assessment by installments.     When an assessment is imposed against a property owner for the installation of water and sewer lines as set out in this division, and the property owner desires to pay the assessment in installments, the property owner shall be authorized to pay such assessment in installments if notice of such election shall be given by the property to the chief administrator officer of the city on or before the due date of the assessment, subject to the following terms: (1)  The assessment may be amortized over such length of time as requested by the property owner, but no such assessment may be amortized over more than seven years. (2)  The interest rate to be charged to a property owner shall be based upon the cost of funds to the city in connection with such project, plus administrative expenses and costs incurred by the city in administering the payments. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the water and sewer line extension project is paid for with cash funds from the city's water and sewer fund, the interest rate to be charged to property owners who amortize their assessment shall be the rate that the money expended for such extension would have earned if such money had been invested in one-year certificates of deposit, plus administrative expenses and costs incurred by the city in administering the payments. (3)  Each assessment amortized, as provided in this section, shall be repaid in equal monthly installments of principal and interest according to an amortization schedule provided by the city manager. Such assessments shall be evidenced by a promissory note and such other documents as may be deemed necessary or appropriate to evidence such indebtedness and to secure the repayment thereof. In the event that the property owner is a utility customer of the city, the city shall be authorized to add the monthly installment to the monthly utility bill of the property owner. In the event the property owner is not a utility customer of the city, a monthly installment shall be billed to the property owner by the city. (4)  The amount of the assessment shall be a lien against the property of the property owner subject to such assessment until such time as all principal and interest are fully paid. Such liens shall be levied, enforced, and collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of city taxes. (5)  In the event that any installment is not paid in full when due, the finance director of the city shall be authorized to notify the property owner that the assessment is in default and such officer shall be further authorized to declare the entire unpaid balance, with interest, costs, and expenses, immediately due and payable. (6)  Upon the sale, donation, gift, or other transfer by operation of law of any real property subject to such a lien, such assessment shall be due and payable in full at the time of such transfer; provided, however, that transfers of property solely for the purpose of securing a bona fide indebtedness of the property owner shall not require payment in full of such lien upon such transfer. (7)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section regarding the repayment of such assessments amortized over a period of years, in the event that the subject area has no residential dwellings located on it at the time of the approval of the final resolution approving the project as provided in this division, then, in such event, the property owners shall be authorized to enter into an agreement with the city to provide that such assessment shall be paid, with interest as aforesaid, at the time that each lot in the proposed development is sold, provided that the entire assessment, whether or not all lots subject to such assessment have been sold, shall be paid no later than seven years from the initial due date of the assessment. All other provisions of this division relating to interest rates, liens for assessments, and default shall be applicable to such property owners. (Code 1986, § 13-167; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 7, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-107. - Special fund for assessments.     All assessments levied and collected under this division shall be retained by the finance director of the city in a special fund to be used and applied for the payment of expenses incurred in installing and extending water and sewer lines for the project identified in the final resolution referred to in this division. No money in said special fund shall be used for any other purpose until such time as all costs of such project have been paid in full. In the event that any funds remain in the special fund after the project has been paid for in full, then such remaining funds shall be transferred to the city water and sewer fund. (Code 1986, § 13-168; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 8, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-108. - Property required to connect and pay monthly usage cost.     Upon approval of the final resolution referred to in this division authorizing the commencement of the project in the subject area, the city shall be authorized to require that each property in the subject area which is to benefit from the extension of the water and sewer lines as a result of such project shall be required to connect to such water and sewer lines and pay the monthly usage cost as established under this chapter, in addition to the payment of such assessments as may be levied under the terms of this division. (Code 1986, § 13-169; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 9, 1-21-1999) 
Sec. 90-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ANNEXATION OF RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL AREAS 
Sec. 90-110. - Annexation application; utility extensions.     Upon any property owner submitting an application for annexation of such property owner's property into the city under any applicable method of annexation, if the property to be annexed is not being served by city water service or city sanitary sewer service at the time of the filing of such annexation petition, and if the property to be annexed has already been developed to the extent that it already has constructed on it residential or commercial buildings, then, as a part of the annexation process, the governing body of the city shall be authorized to consider proceeding in accord with the terms of this article with respect to the extension of water mains, sewer mains, water taps, and sewer taps to the property which is the subject of the annexation in accord with the terms of this division. (Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Sec. 90-111. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings:     "Annexation" means the annexation of real property into the incorporated limits of the City of Americus pursuant to any method authorized by Georgia law.     "Project" means the construction of water line extensions, sewer line extensions, installation of water tap fees, or installation of sewer tap fees, or all of the above.     "Property owner" means the person or entity which owns fee simple title to the subject property and is the annexation applicant with respect to the subject property.     "Qualified property" means subject property which is situated such that existing city water services and existing city sewer services can be lawfully extended to such property without excessive costs, without placing an undue burden upon the capacity of the utility system, and without permanently disrupting utility service to existing city utility service customers.     "Sewer line extension costs" means the cost to be incurred by the city is extending existing city sewerage line from the existing city sewerage system to a location from which the subject property could be served. Such cost shall include, but shall not be limited to, the cost of easement or right-or-way acquisition.     "Subject property" means the improved real property located outside the incorporated limits of the city which the property owner is seeking to annex into the city.     "Water line extension costs" means the cost to be incurred by the city in extending existing city water lines from the existing city water system to a location from which the subject property could be served. Such cost shall include, but shall not be limited to, the cost of easement or right-or-way acquisition. (Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Sec. 90-112. - Initial review of application.     If the property to be annexed is "qualified property" as defined in this division, and if the property owner makes appropriate application for the extension of water and sewer services to the property to be annexed under this division, then the community development department, working in conjunction with the city utilities department and the city fire and emergency services department, shall undertake an initial review of the application. If such departments determine, as a result of such initial review, that the property to be annexed is "qualified property" under this division, then the departments shall jointly determine whether it is economically feasible from a financial standpoint for the governing body to provide the property owner, as a condition of annexation, reduced costs and fees for water line extensions, sewer line extensions, water tap fees, and sewer tap fees. No such cost or fee reductions shall be authorized unless the net cost of such project shall result in a financial benefit to the city. (Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Sec. 90-113. - Financial benefit determination.     In determining financial benefit to the city in connection with such project, said departments shall perform a cost analysis to determine the cost of water line extensions, sewer line extensions, water tap fees, and sewer tap fees to the subject property. Such analysis shall include consideration of the following: (1)  Cost to extend water lines; (2)  Cost to extend sewer lines; (3)  Cost for project engineering; (4)  Cost of water tap fees; (5)  Cost of sewer tap fees; (6)  Cost of stormwater fees; (7)  Estimated revenue to city from ad valorem property taxes, water service fees, sewer service fees, garbage fees, and stormwater fees; and (8)  Any other information that either department deems appropriate to include in connection with such analysis. (Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Sec. 90-114. - Recommendation to city council.     The departments shall jointly recommend to the governing body of the city the actual amount of fee reductions, if any, that would be authorized for the proposed project based upon such calculations conditioned upon the subject property being annexed into the city; provided, however, that in no event shall fee reductions exceed a seven-year payback to the city which shall be calculated solely based upon increased ad valorem tax revenue to the city generated by the subject property. (Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Sec. 90-115. - Payment of fees in installments under certain circumstances.     With respect to any water line extension costs, sewer line extensions costs, water tap fees, or sewer tap fees which are to be paid by a property owner annexing property into the city: (i) where the subject property is not qualified property as defined in section 90-111; (ii) where all or a portion of such fees are not subject to a reduction under section 90-114 above; or (iii) where the governing body of the city does not approve a fee reduction with respect to a particular application, the property owner may apply to the city to pay such costs and fees in installments. The property owner's application to pay such costs and fees, or a portion thereof, in installments may be authorized if approved by the governing body of the city, subject to the following terms: (1)  The governing body of the city must determine, based upon the financial benefit determination, that the project would bring economic development to the city in the form of increased private sector employment, increased ad valorem tax revenue to the city, or increased net revenue to the city's utility system. (2)  The costs and fees may be amortized over such length of time as approved by the governing body of the city, but the repayment of such costs and fees may not be amortized over a period of more than seven years. (3)  The interest rate to be charged to a property owner in connection with the payment of such installment payments shall be as determined by the governing body of the city, taking into account the cost of funds to the city in connection with the project, current prevailing interest rates in the private sector, plus administrative costs and expenses incurred and to be incurred by the city in collecting and administering such installment payments. (4)  Such costs and fees to be paid in installments shall be repaid in equal monthly installments of principal and interest according to a written amortization schedule. At the time that the city and the property owner agree to the monthly repayment amounts, the property owner shall execute and deliver to the city the property owner's promissory note and such other documents as may be deemed necessary or appropriate to evidence such indebtedness and to secure the repayment thereof. In the event that the property owner is a utility customer of the city, the city shall be authorized to add the monthly installment payment to the monthly utility bill of the property owner or the property owner's tenant in the case of leased property. (5)  Prior to any installment payment being authorized under this section, the property owner must be determined by the governing body to be sufficiently creditworthy to insure to the governing body, to the extent reasonably possible, that the property owner will have the financial ability to pay such indebtedness within the term established by the city. (6)  The amount of the costs and fees to be paid in installments shall constitute a lien against the property of the property owner benefitted by such utility services until such time as all principal and interest are paid in full. Evidence of such lien shall be executed by the property owner and shall be recorded in the deed records in the Office the Clerk of the Superior Court of Sumter County, Georgia. The city clerk shall be authorized to cancel such lien upon the full payment thereof. Such liens shall be levied, enforced, and collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of city ad valorem taxes. (7)  Upon the sale, donation, gift, foreclosure, or the transfer of or operation of law of all or a portion of the real property subject to such lien, any remaining unpaid amounts of such costs and fees shall be due and payable in full at the time of such transfer unless the governing body of the city approves the assumption of such remaining obligations by the person or entity acquiring all or a portion of the subject property. (Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Secs. 90-116—90-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 90-130. - Access to private property; discovery of violations.     The public works employees, their agents and assistants may enter the premises of any water taker at any reasonable time to examine the pipes and fixtures, the quantity of water used; and the manner of its use and in case of fraudulent representation on the part of any water taker, or unnecessary waste of water, the payment will be forfeited and the supply of water stopped. (Code 1962, § 26-7; Code 1986, § 13-30) 
Secs. 90-131—90-158. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES; BILLING AND COLLECTION 
Sec. 90-159. - Meters—Required; installation and maintenance; cut off of service. (a)  All buildings, structures or premises supplied with water by the city waterworks shall be controlled by a meter. (b)  The meter shall be of the design and type to be approved by the utilities director or his designee, and shall be provided and installed by the city water department at a charge adequate to cover the purchase and installation costs of said meter. After installation, such meter shall be under the control of the water department of the city; and if such meter becomes damaged by the negligence of the property owner or tenant, the expense of any replacement or repair to such meter by the city water department shall be borne by the property owner; otherwise, the city water department shall replace any such meter at the city's expense when, in the judgment of the utilities director, or his designee, such meter is defective or in need of replacement. (c)  If any person shall refuse to comply with the provisions of this section, the supply of water to such service shall be cut off. (Code 1962, 26-11; Code 1986, § 13-20; Ord. No. O-92-08-24, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 90-160. - Same—Separate connections; definitions; service charge formula for multiple use. (a)  Each house, store, building, place of business, or residential premises which desires to have water service shall have a separate meter and be separately connected to said meter, except as hereinafter provided. (b)  The term "residential premises" means: (1)  A single-family apartment unit; (2)  A single-family dwelling house; (3)  A single-family mobile home dwelling unit. (c)  Where a multiple residential premises is served through a master meter, the owner of the multiple residential premises shall be required to pay a base water charge for each single-family residential premises, and, in addition thereto, the owner shall also pay all charges for actual water used at the premises to be calculated based upon the current city water rate schedule as approved by the city council. (d)  Where a multiple residential premises is served through a master meter, the bill for such water charge, shall be to the owner of the property served by such master meter. (e)  The term "business premises" means a premises upon which a business is being conducted. (f)  The term "multiple-business premises" means a premises upon which two or more businesses are located. (g)  Where a multiple-business premises is served through a master meter, the owner of the multiple-business premises shall be required to pay a base water charge for each separate business location constituting said multiple business premises, whether occupied or not, located upon the multiple business premises, and, in addition thereto, said owner shall also pay all charges for actual water used at the premises to be calculated based upon the current city water rate schedule as approved by the city council. (h)  Where a multiple-business premises is served through a master meter, the bill for such water charge shall be to the owner of the property served by such master meter. (i)  A master meter will not be allowed to serve a multiple residential or business premises except in those instances where all of the premises of such multiple premises are under a single ownership. (j)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, where a newly constructed or renovated multiple residential premises is served through a master meter, for each unit actually rented during the first two months after completion of such construction or renovation, the owner shall only be required to pay a base water charge, plus payment for any water used. Such two-month period is to begin on the date the owner makes application for a sanitation receptacle for such premises. The electric utility providing service to the premises shall be contacted each month during such two-month period by the finance director's office to verify the actual number of units having electric power on the meter reading date. Such number of units having electric power on the meter reading date shall be deemed to be units actually rented for the purposes of this section. At the conclusion of said two-month period, the owner shall be required to pay a base water charge, plus any water used above or in excess of such base charge, for all units located at the premises, whether or not such units are rented. For purposes of this section, the term "renovated multiple residential premises" means a multiple residential premises renovated to such an extent that all tenants thereof were required to vacate the premises being renovated during the renovation process. (Code 1962, § 26-6; Code 1986, § 13-21; Ord. No. O-91-03-08, 3-25-1991; Ord. No. O-92-08-24, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 90-161. - Same—Tampering with meter or lock. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter in the city so as to cause said meter to misregister or fail to register the volume of water furnished to the owner or user of water through said meter. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter or water meter lock in the city so as to cause the service to be cut back on when the city has terminated the service for a reason. (Code 1962, § 26-5; Code 1986, § 13-22; Ord. No. O-10-09-31, 9-20-2010) State Law reference— Theft of services, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 90-162. - Tap charges and relocation of water meters. (a)  Water tap charges are as established by ordinance. The cost of installing a meter other than those listed by ordinance will be charged according to actual installation costs. (b)  There shall be a charge in the amount established by ordinance payable by the city's water customer any time that a water meter two inches or smaller in diameter is moved from one location to another location on such customer's property at the request of the customer. Such charge shall be paid by the customer at the time such service is provided, or shall be billed to the customer with the customer's regular monthly water bill, whichever is deemed appropriate by the city. (c)  In the event that a customer seeks to move a water meter from one location to another on such customer's water, and such water meter is two inches in diameter or greater, then such water meter must be moved, upon the approval of such a move by the city, by a private contractor licensed to undertake such activity. Such private contractor shall be either, hired by the customer or, if the customer so requests, the city will hire such private contractor. In the event that the city hires such private contractor, then the city will bill the customer on said customer's water bill for the contractor's charges for such work. In the event that the customer hires the contractor directly, then the customer shall pay the contractor's charges directly to the contractor. (Code 1962, § 26-1; Code 1986, § 13-23; Ord. No. O-89-03-06, 3-27-1989; Ord. No. O-90-12-31, 12-26-1990; Ord. No. O-00-07-32, 6-23-2000; Ord. No. O-03-08-19, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-11-29, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-163. - Service deposit—Nonsingle-family, commercial and industrial customers; nonprofit organizations. (a)  All categories of consumers of water in the city other than single-family residences shall be required to pay a service deposit in the amount established by ordinance before water service is made available, and in the case of all existing commercial, industrial and other residential water customers an average will be taken of the previous customer's six months' water usage and the deposit required will be one month's bill to be computed and rounded off to the nearest dollar amount; and provided further, however, in the case of a previous consumption history not being available for a new commercial, industrial or nonsingle-family residential water customer, a monthly figure will be estimated, based on a similar type commercial, industrial or nonsingle-family water customer, and a followup computation will be done after six months' water usage to ascertain the accuracy of such estimated deposit amount charged, and an adjustment either up or down will be made at that time, based on the average six months' water usage. (b)  Nonprofit organizations shall be required to pay a service deposit calculated in the same manner as set out in subsection (a) of this section; provided, however, that the finance director shall be authorized to waive such service deposit for nonprofit organizations where the nonprofit organization has established its credit worthiness from such documentation or other information presented to the finance director. (c)  No facilities owned or operated by a government entity shall be required to pay any advance water service deposit. The term "facilities owned or operated by a government entity" shall include any such facilities owned or operated by a government and any boards, authorities, or divisions appointed or established by any governmental entity for the provision of public services as authorized by the constitution or laws of the state or federal government. (Code 1962, § 26-2; Code 1986, § 13-24; Ord. No. O-87-12-27, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. O-95-03-10, 3-23-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-07-18, 7-21-2005) 
Sec. 90-164. - Same—Exceptions, refunds. (a)  An advance service deposit is required before water service is made available to consumers of water in the city. (b)  All residents except, those who have presented a letter from another utility company establishing their credit worthiness or has or have had a utility account in good standing with the city. For these customers, the advance service deposit may be waived by the finance director. (c)  The service deposit required of residential customers under subsection (a) of this section shall be refunded after the customer has maintained service at the same address for a minimum of 24 months with no delinquencies. The city utility billing department shall accomplish the refunding at least annually by applying the customer's deposit to his bill and notifying the customer when it has been done. (Code 1986, § 13-25; Ord. No. O-87-12-27, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-165. - Water service rates—Inside city limits. (a)  Residential, small commercial, and large commercial users. Rates in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for users inside the city limits for water service furnished to them by the city. (b)  Industrial users. Rates in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for users inside the city limits for water service furnished to them by the city. (c)  Qualifying senior citizens. There shall be a ten percent discount applied to the rates referenced in subsection (a) of this section for qualifying senior citizens. A qualifying senior citizen is one who meets all of the following qualifications: (1)  They shall be 62 years of age or older. (2)  They shall have a total household income from all sources not exceeding $15,000.00. (3)  They shall complete and sign an application attesting certain required information. (4)  They shall have the utility account in the name of the qualifying senior citizen. (Code 1962, §§ 26-3, 26-22; Code 1986, § 13-26; Ord. of 12-22-1986, § (a); Ord. No. O-88-02-09, 2-22-1988; Ord. No. O-92-01-01, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. O-93-01-02, 1-26-1993; Ord. No. O-93-02-07, 2-22-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-04, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-98-01-01, 1-22-1998; Ord. No. O-99-01-05, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-01-01-03, 1-18-2001; Ord. No. O-01-01-05, 1-18-2001; Ord. No. O-02-01-02, 1-24-2002; Ord. No. O-03-01-01, 1-23-2003; Ord. No. O-06-01-03, 1-19-2006) 
Sec. 90-166. - Same—Outside the city limits. (a)  In accord with the provisions of state law and the City's Charter, the city shall be authorized to provide water service to residential, small commercial, large commercial, and industrial users whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city. (b)  The water rates to be charged by the city for water service provided by the city to residential, small commercial, large commercial, and industrial users whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city shall be two times the rates charged for similar services to city water customers whose premises are located within the corporate limits of the city. (c)  The provision of such water services to premises located outside the corporate limits of the city shall only be authorized upon the occurrence of the following: (1)  The city shall have entered into an intergovernmental contract with the county authorizing the provision of water services in the unincorporated areas of the county as required pursuant to article IV, section II, paragraph III, subsection (b) of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, as such may be now or hereafter amended; and (2)  The owner of the premises to which such water services are proposed to be provided executes and delivers to the city a written contract between the city and such property owner, which contract shall provide, at a minimum, the method by which the property owner shall pay the city for base charges and water usage at the premises, the terms and conditions for the provision of such water services, and such other terms and conditions as the parties may deem appropriate in connection with such contract. In addition thereto, and as further consideration for the city's provision of water services to the property owner's premises outside the corporate limits of the city, said contract shall provide that in the event that the property owner's premises, or any portion thereof, becomes subject to annexation pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 36, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-20 et seq.), annexation pursuant to application by 100 percent of landowners, then the property owner shall, within 90 calendar days after such premises become subject to such annexation, apply to the city for annexation of such premises into the city. Each party to the contract shall be responsible for undertaking all proceedings necessary in order to effect such annexation in accord with state law. Such contract shall also provide that upon the completion of such annexation, the water rates charged for the provision of water services to the premises shall be the same water rates as those rates charged to residential, small commercial, large commercial, or industrial users, as the case may be, which are located within the corporate limits of the city. (d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the rates for any water services provided by the city to facilities owned or operated by a government which are located outside the corporate limits shall be the same as such rates for water service customers located inside the corporate limits of the city. For such purposes, the term "facilities owned or operated by a government" shall include any such facilities owned or operated by a government or any boards, authorities, or divisions appointed or established by such government, for the provision of public services as authorized by the Constitution and the laws of the state or federal government. (e)  This section shall be applicable to any residential, small commercial, large commercial, or industrial users whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city that commence the use of city water services after August 1, 2005. For residential customers whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city who are already city water customers prior to August 1, 2005, the rates for such water service provided by the city to such residential customers shall continue to be two times the rate charged for similar services for customers residing within the corporate limits of the city, but no contract or other agreement with respect to the provision of such services shall be required. (Code 1962, § 26-4; Code 1986, § 13-27; Ord. No. O-85-05-12, 5-27-1985; Ord. No. O-89-03-05a, 3-27-1989; Ord. No. O-92-01-04, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. O-05-07-18, 7-21-2005; Ord. No. O-05-08-22, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 90-167. - Same—Water purchased in bulk. (a)  The rate that shall be charged for users of city water purchased in bulk shall be as established by ordinance. (b)  Purchases of city water in bulk under this section shall only be allowed at fire station # 1. (c)  Any person desiring to purchase water under this section shall obtain permission from the fire chief or utilities director of the city on each occasion such person purchases water under this section. (d)  Any person who shall use or take city water from a fire hydrant without being authorized to do so by the utilities director or the fire chief shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set out in section 1-8. (e)  Any person who shall use or take water from the fire hydrant must first get permission from the fire chief or the utilities director and must also use a meter provided for this purpose by the city public works department. Meter readings shall be taken on the meter before use and again after use. The meter readings, consumption, and all billing information will be forwarded to the finance director's office for billing. With respect to a meter provided by the city public works department under this subsection, the person or entity to whom such meter is provided shall pay, at the time the meter is provided, a refundable deposit. In the event that the meter is returned to the city without any damage thereto, the city shall be authorized to refund the refundable deposit. In the event that the meter is damaged, then the city shall use all or a portion of the refundable deposit to make repairs to such meter. In the event that the meter is totally destroyed, or is not returned to the city within the time period directed by the city at the time the water meter is delivered to the person or entity utilizing it, then the city shall be authorized to retain the refundable deposit. The amount of the refundable deposit shall be as established from time to time in chapter 46, section 46-401 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Americus. (Code 1962, § 26-4.1; Code 1986, § 13-28; Ord. No. O-92-09-29, 9-25-1992; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-10-01-02, 1-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-168. - Same—Sprinkler system.     There shall be a monthly charge in the amount established by ordinance for each separate building in the city that is connected to the city water system for the purpose of a sprinkler system regardless of whether any water is used. (Code 1962, § 26-12; Code 1986, § 13-29) 
Sec. 90-169. - Notice of discontinuance by consumer.     Any person wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from the city must give notice thereof at the utility billing department office, and such person will be charged for use of water until such notice is given. (Code 1962, § 26-8; Code 1986, § 13-31) 
Sec. 90-170. - Discontinuance of service for failure to pay bill; reconnection charge.     All water charges must be paid promptly or water will be shut off and a reconnecting fee in the amount established by ordinance will be charged before turning on again and also the current advance water service payment required shall be paid in full to the city before the city shall turn water on again. (Code 1962, § 26-9; Code 1986, § 13-32; Ord. No. O-98-01-04, 1-22-1998) 
Sec. 90-171. - Reconnection of water services after business hours.     In addition to the provisions of section 90-170 of this article, any person whose water service has been turned off for nonpayment, or for other violation or violations of the City Code, and who requests reconnection services which must be performed after normal business hours, which are Monday—Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., shall be required to sign an "after hours service agreement" with the city before the reconnection services will be performed by the city. Such agreement shall provide that the customer requesting reconnection services must pay the service agreement fee, reconnection fees, and any past due amounts by 10:00 a.m., on the next business day. In the event that the customer does not pay such amounts within such time frame in violation of the agreement, the city shall be authorized to disconnect the water service for such customer again, and the charges incurred for the reconnection shall be added to the customer's water service account. In the event that the customer fails to pay the amounts due under the after hours service agreement prior to the deadline for payment thereof, service shall not be reinstated for the customer until all amounts owed by the customer to the city in connection with the customer's water service are paid in full. In the event that the original disconnection is deemed to be an error on the part of the city, the service agreement fee and the reconnection fees will be waived. The amount of the service agreement fee and reconnection fees shall be established by ordinance. (Ord. No. O-09-03-07, 3-19-2009) 
Secs. 90-172—90-193. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER RESTRICTIONS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. O-10-08-26, adopted Aug. 19, 2010, repealed §§ 90-195—197 of the former div. 3, and enacted a new title for div. 3, as set out herein. The former div. 3 was entitled "Water Shortages" and pertained to similar subject matter. Sections 90-195—90-197 derived from: Code 1986, §§ 13-201—13-203; Ord. No. O-04-06-11, adopted July 22, 2004; and Ord. No. O-08-06-13, adopted June 19, 2008. 
Sec. 90-194. - Outdoor watering restrictions imposed. (a)  There is hereby imposed, as to all water customers of the city, restrictions as to any outdoor watering. (b)  Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining groundcover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. (c)  Subsection (b) of this section shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor watering uses: (1)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; (2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; (3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; (4)  Use or reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the department to provide reclaimed wastewater; (5)  Irrigation of personal food gardens; (6)  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; (7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; (8)  Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; (9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; (10)  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; (11)  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; (12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or (13)  Hydroseeding. (d)  Violations of the provisions of this section shall subject the violator to punishment in accord with the provisions of section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. (Ord. No. O-10-08-26, 8-19-2010) 
Secs. 90-195—90-197. - Reserved. 
Sec. 90-198. - Exemptions. (a)  This division shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: (1)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances. (2)  Refuse of gray water in compliance with applicable state law and local ordinances. (b)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this division: (1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. (2)  Irrigation of personal food gardens. (c)  Newly installed landscapes, in place less than 30 days, are subject to the following: (1)  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No such watering is allowed during drought response level four. (2)  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions established in subsection (e) of this section apply. (d)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this division: (1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. (2)  Irrigation of fairways during times of nondrought and declared drought response level one. (3)  Irrigation of tee box areas during times of nondrought and declared drought response levels one, two, and three. (4)  Irrigation of greens. (e)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this division: (1)  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers, during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. (2)  Irrigation contractors, during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. (3)  Sod producers. (4)  Ornamental growers. (5)  Fruit and vegetable growers. (6)  Retail garden centers. (7)  Hydroseeding. (8)  Powerwashing. (9)  Construction sites. (10)  Producers of food and fiber. (11)  Carwashes. (12)  Other activities essential to daily business. (13)  Watering in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. (Code 1986, § 13-204; Ord. No. O-04-06-11, 7-22-2004) 
Sec. 90-199. - Penalties. (a)  The first violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor, and the offender shall be issued a warning advising of such offense by the appropriate city official. The second and any subsequent violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor. (b)  In addition to the foregoing penalties which may be imposed by the municipal court of the city, in the event that any water customer of the city is cited for violation of this division three or more times, the city water department shall be required to discontinue water service to such water customer's premises where such violations occurred for not less than five consecutive calendar days. (Code 1986, § 13-25; Ord. No. O-04-06-11, 7-22-2004) 
Secs. 90-200—90-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 90-222—90-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 90-251. - Purpose and objectives of division; administration. (a)  The purpose of this division is to regulate the use of public and private sewers and drains, private wastewater disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers, and the discharge of waters and waste into the public sewer system and to provide penalties for violations thereof in the city. All connections of lateral or other sewer lines to the sewerage system of the city service area, whether within or without the city limits, shall be made subject to such terms and conditions as the city may prescribe. This division enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 403. (b)  The objectives of this division are: (1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with operations of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; (2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system, which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; (3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludges from the system; (4)  To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject; (5)  To provide for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users; and (6)  To authorize monitoring and enforcement activities, user reporting, and provide for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. (c)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the utilities director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers or duties granted to or upon the utilities director may be delegated to a duly authorized representative. (Code 1986, § 13-80; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-252. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.     Authorized representative of the user means: (1)  If the user is a corporation: a.  The president, secretary treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having a gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00, in second quarter 1980 dollars, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. (2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. (3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. (4)  The individuals described in subsections (1)—(3) of this section may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for the environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.     Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under EPA approved laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).     Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.     Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. (Also called house connection or service connection.)     Categorical standards means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, 33 USC 1317 which applies to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405-471.     Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.     Composite means the makeup of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of sewage or industrial wastes.     Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.     Effluent means the discharge flow of a pretreatment facility.     Equalizing unit means those devices or structures constructed to regulate evenly, either or both, the strength and volumes of wastes.     Flammable shall be defined by existing fire regulations.     Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility.     Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement.     Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods.     Health officer means the director of the board of health or other person designated and their duly appointed assistants.     Hours of operation mean the normal number of hours per day that an industry or commercial establishment operates.     Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) and (c) of the Act into the POTW, otherwise known as publicly owned treatment works (including holding tank waste).     Industrial or commercial user means all users not embraced within the definition of a residential or domestic user as herein defined are declared to be industrial or commercial users.     Infiltration or inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes, or other openings.     Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.     National prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.     Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.     New source means: (1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity, as the existing source should be considered. (2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather then a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)b. or c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. (3)  Construction of a new source means or has commenced if the owner or operator has: a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; 2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts, which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies that do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.     Pass through means a discharge, which exits the POTW into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit.     PH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions.     Pit privy means a shored vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid.     Polluted water means that wastewater leaving the user's premises to which contaminants have been added so as to render the water nonpotable.     POTW or publicly owned treatment works means any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. This includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant.     POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW, which is designed to provide treatment, including recycling and reclamation of municipal or industrial waste.     Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharge or otherwise introduction of such pollutants into a POTW.     Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.     Public sewer means a sewer, which is owned and controlled, or controlled by the city.     Receiving waters means those waters into which wastes are discharged.     Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater, and surface water that are not intentionally admitted.     Septic tank means a surface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: (1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and (2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified liquid from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered.     Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater.     SIC means and is an acronym for standard industrial classification.     Significant industrial user means : (1)  Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who is: a.  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or b.  A user that discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater; contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. (2)  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (1)b of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user.     Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater, which in concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, which adversely affects the collection system or performance of the wastewater facilities.     Storm sewer means a sewer, which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage, but excludes sanitary or polluted industrial wastewater.     Superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.     Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, wastewater or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.     Total suspended solids (TSS) means and is an acronym for all solids contained in sewage except colloidal and dissolved solids.     Utilities director means the current utilities director of the city or his duly authorized representative.     Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of the source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water borne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. The equivalent term is sewage.     Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. (Code 1986, § 13-81; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-253. - Use of public sewers required. (a)  All premises shall be provided by the owner thereof with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. (b)  No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. (c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of the division. (d)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. (e)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city's jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at the owners' expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. (f)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer. (Code 1986, § 13-82; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-254. - Private wastewater disposal. (a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 90-253, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the city and the state department of human resources. (b)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged, and maintained in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the health officer. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. (c)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless he shall hold a valid permit for such work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending the inspection and approval by the health officer of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. (d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than that allowed by the health officer. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (e)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible within 100 feet to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of same to be a menace to human health or well-being. (f)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days after notice. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. (g)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (h)  Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. (i)  No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: (1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; (2)  In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; (3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or (4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. (j)  Any premises that has a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system, located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written notification from the health officer. (k)  Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. (l)  No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. (Code 1986, § 13-83; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-255. - Building sewers and connections. (a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. (b)  The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the utilities director. A permit and inspection fee as specified in the fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application is filed. (c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage to the public sewer system that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every property except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. The front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. (e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the utilities director, to meet all requirements of this division. (f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of building sewer, and the method to be used in construction shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. (g)  Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city: (1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. (2)  Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe, with bolted mechanical joints. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if it is laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the utilities director. (3)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the utilities director, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. (4)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. (5)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the utilities director. Pipe-laying and backfilling shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved by the utilities director. (6)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Requirements are as follows: a.  Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C-564. b.  Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. c.  PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber O-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes, including oils and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of the gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. d.  Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the utilities director. (h)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth of a foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the utilities director. (i)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. (j)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or a building drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. (k)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the utilities director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the utilities director or his representative. (l)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (m)  The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. (n)  The connection of the property sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedure set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing, any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials, must be approved by the utilities director before installation. (o)  If any private sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow to the public sewer, the city may: (1)  Require the owner to repair the private sewer; (2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property; or (3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. (Code 1986, § 13-84; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-256. - Restricted use of public sewers; prohibitions. (a)  A user may not introduce into any public sewer any pollutants that cause passthrough or interference of the POTW. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in subsection (d) of this section apply to each user introducing pollutants into the POTW whether or not the user is subject to other national pretreatment standards or any national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. (b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (c)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged, upon approval of the state environmental protection division, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. (d)  Specific prohibitions. Except as herein provided, no person shall discharge any of the following described waters or wastes into any public sewer: (1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; (2)  Pollutants, which cause corrosive or structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than five; (3)  Solids or viscous pollutants in amounts which cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; (4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants such as BOD, etc., released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration, which cause interference with the POTW; (5)  Heat in amounts which inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW plant influent exceeds 40 degrees Celsius or 104 degrees Fahrenheit; (6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil that will cause interference or passthrough at the POTW; (7)  Pollutants which will result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, capable of creating a public nuisance or preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance, inspection, and repair; (8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW; (9)  Any water or waste, which contains more than 100 mg/l of fat, oil, or grease, of animal or vegetable origin; (10)  Any water or waste containing in excess of one mg/l of any of the following hazardous or dangerous gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, or nitrous oxide; (11)  Any nondomestic waters, wastes or materials containing toxic organic and inorganic priority pollutants, unless issued a written permit by the utilities director that provides numerical limits on the quantity of such pollutants. Such limits will be calculated based on national pretreatment standards, local conditions of the POTW; and the presence of any pollutants causing passthrough or interference with the POTW; (12)  Any waters containing quantities of radium, naturally occurring or artificially produced radioisotopes in excess of presently existing or subsequently accepted limits for drinking water as established by the National Committee on Radiation Protection and Measuring; (13)  Any concentrated dye wastes, or other wastes which are highly colored, and adversely affect the treated effluent of the POTW. (e)  Local discharge limits. Using EPA approved methodology the city has established local discharge limits for the pollutants of concern to the POTW. These limits are designed to protect the receiving stream, prevent interference with POTW operations and protect the quality of the sludge produced by the POTW. These limits apply to all users of the system. For industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, the local limit will be compared to the categorical limit and the lower value will be used. The city reserves the right to set higher discharge limits for individual industrial users provided that the following conditions apply: (1)  There are no other industrial users discharging the pollutant of concern or if there are other significant industrial users discharging the pollutant of concern they are discharging below the established limit; (2)  If any other significant industrial users are discharging the pollutant of concern they agree to accept a lower limit; and (3)  The total combined loading on the POTW will not exceed the established maximum head works loading. Any user that desires to have a higher local discharge limit should petition the utilities director in writing. (f)  Any discharge to the POTW that contains concentrations of conventional pollutants above the local discharge limit will be subject to surcharges as provided in this division. For purposes of this division conventional pollutants are considered biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, chemical oxygen demand, ammonia nitrogen, and oil and grease. (g)  All other regulated pollutants are considered nonconventional pollutants and any discharge to the POTW that contains concentrations of these pollutants above the local discharge limit will be subject to enforcement action as provided in this division. City Local Limits Pollutant Concentration (mg/l) Surcharge Limit (mg/l) Biochemical oxygen demand 1,000 250 Total suspended solids 1,000 250 Chemical oxygen demand 3,000 750 Ammonia nitrogen 30 Oil and grease 100 Arsenic 0.015 Cadmium 0.005 Chromium 13.46 Copper 0.108 Lead 0.0125 Mercury 0.00025 Molybdenum 0.03 Nickel 1.23 Selenium 0.02 Silver 4.21 Zinc 0.738  (Code 1986, § 13-85; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-257. - National categorical pretreatment standards.     The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated by reference. (1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the utilities director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). (2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the utilities director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). (3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. (4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. (5)  Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The city may impose mass limitations on industrial users that are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. (Code 1986, § 13-86; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-258. - Industrial pretreatment requirements. (a)  Pretreatment of wastewater. (1)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 90-256 within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the utilities director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the utilities director for review, and shall be acceptable to the utilities director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. (2)  Additional pretreatment measures. a.  Whenever deemed necessary, the utilities director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate certain wastewaters to be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this division. b.  The utilities director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain on their own property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. c.  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the utilities director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the utilities director and shall be located as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. d.  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. (3)  Accidental discharge or slug control plans. At least once every two years, the utilities director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge or slug control plan. The utilities director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the utilities director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge or slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: a.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; b.  Description of stored chemicals; c.  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by subsection (d)(6)a of this section; d.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (4)  Hauled waste. a.  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the utilities director, and at such times as are established by the utilities director. Such wastes shall not violate section 90-256 or any other requirements established by the city. The utilities director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the director, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. b.  A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks, as provided in separate rules. A record shall be kept of such dumps and statements rendered at the first of each month, the amount of such statements shall be payable within ten days after rendition. Failure to pay the amounts due within such ten-day period shall be cause for revoking the permit. c.  The utilities director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The utilities director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The utilities director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this division. d.  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the POTW superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the POTW superintendent. The POTW superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. (b)  Wastewater discharge permit application process. (1)  Analysis. When requested by the utilities director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 90 days of the request. The utilities director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. (2)  Required. a.  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the utilities director, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to subsection (c) of this section may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. b.  The utilities director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. c.  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 90-259—90-261. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. (3)  Existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this division and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 180 days after said date, apply to the utilities director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the utilities director. (4)  New connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date which any discharge will begin or recommence. (5)  Reissuance. Any user who is issued a wastewater discharge permit under this division must submit an application to have their permit reissued at least 90 days prior to the expiration date on the permit. (6)  Application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The utilities director may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: a.  All information required by subsection (d)(1)b of this section; b.  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; c.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; d.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; e.  Type and amount of raw materials processed, the average and the maximum per day; f.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; g.  Time and duration of discharges; h.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the utilities director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application; and i.  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. (7)  Signatories and certifications. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." (8)  Evaluation and decision on issuance. The utilities director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application the utilities director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The utilities director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. (c)  Issuance process. (1)  Duration of permit. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the utilities director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. (2)  Conditions. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the utilities director to prevent passthrough or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. a.  Permits must contain: 1.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 2.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with subsection (c)(5) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 3.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 4.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 5.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. b.  Permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 1.  Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 2.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 3.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 4.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plan to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 5.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 6.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 7.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 8.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the utilities director to ensure compliance with this division, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. (3)  Appeals. The utilities director shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the utilities director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. a.  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. b.  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. c.  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. d.  If the utilities director fails to act within 90 days, a request for reconsideration, shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. (4)  Modifications. The utilities director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: a.  Incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; b.  Address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; c.  Change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; d.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; e.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; f.  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; g.  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; h.  Correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or i.  Reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. (5)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 90 days' advance notice to the utilities director and the utilities director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the utilities director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: a.  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; b.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; c.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit; and d.  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of the facility's transfer. (6)  Revocation. The utilities director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: a.  Failure to notify the utilities director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the utilities director of changed conditions pursuant to subsection (d)(5) of this section; c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; f.  Refusing to allow city representatives timely access to the facility's premises and records; g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; h.  Failure to pay fines; i.  Failure to pay sewer charges; j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of permitted facility; m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this division; or n.  Cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. (d)  Reporting requirements. (1)  Baseline monitoring reports. a.  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a national categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the utilities director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (d)(1)b of this section. At least 90 days prior to the commencement of their discharge, new sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit to the utilities director a report that contains the information listed in subsection (d)(1)b.1—5 of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. b.  Users described in subsection (d)(1)a shall submit the following information set forth: 1.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 2.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 3.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated process. 4.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 5.  Measurement of pollutants. i.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. ii.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentrations, or mass, where required by the standard or by the utilities director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (d)(10) of this section. iii.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (d)(11) of this section. 6.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 7.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment or O and M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this subsection (d)(1)b.7 must meet the requirements set out in subsection (d)(2)a of this section. 8.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (b)(7) of this section. (2)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (d)(1)b.7 of this section: a.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation; b.  No increment referred to in subsection (d)(2)a of this section shall exceed nine months; c.  The user shall submit a progress report to the utilities director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and d.  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the utilities director. (3)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 calendar days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in subsection (d)(1)b of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's longterm production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, or other measure of operation, this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (b)(7) of this section. (4)  Periodic compliance reports. a.  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the city but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (b)(7) of this section. b.  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. c.  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (d)(11) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. (5)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the city of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system, which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. a.  The city may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under subsection (b) of this section. b.  The city may issue a wastewater discharge permit under subsection (c) of this section or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under subsection (c)(4) of this section in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. c.  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. (6)  Reports of potential problems. a.  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to accidental discharges, discharges of nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the plant superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. b.  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the city, submit a detailed written report describing the causes of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this division. c.  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph a. above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advise of the emergency notification procedure. (7)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the city may require. (8)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by the user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. (9)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. a.  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge, continuous, batch, or other. If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: 1.  Identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 2.  Estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and 3.  Estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection (d)(9) need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection (d)(5) of this section. The notification requirement in this subsection (d)(9) does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (c)(2)a.4 and (e)(1)c of this section. b.  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (d)(9)a of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. c.  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the city, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. d.  In the case of any notification made under this subsection (d)(9), the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. e.  This provision does not create the right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this division, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. (10)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. (11)  Sample collection. a.  Except as indicated in subsection (d)(11)b of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. b.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. (12)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed, to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. (13)  Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, name of the person taking the samples; the dates analysis were performed; who performed the analysis; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analysis. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city. (e)  Compliance monitoring. (1)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this division and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. a.  Where a user has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city personnel will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. b.  The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and metering of the user's operations. c.  The city may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated on at least an annual basis to ensure their accuracy. d.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. e.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this division. (2)  Search warrants. If the city has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is need to inspect and sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from the municipal court of the city. (f)  Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public, EPD, EPA or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, EPD, and EPA, that release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Users wishing to keep such information confidential must assert a claim of confidentiality at the time the information is submitted to the city, such confidential information may be withheld from the public but it will always be made available to the EPD and EPA. Effluent data will be available to the public without restriction. (g)  Publication of significant noncompliance. The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the city, a list of the users that, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" means: (1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; (2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria; 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH; (3)  Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or passthrough, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; (4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; (5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; (6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; (7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or (8)  Any other violation, which the city determines, will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (h)  Service charges. The city may adopt charges and fees, which may include: (1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program; (2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; (3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; (4)  Fees for permit applications; (5)  Fees for filing appeals; (6)  Fees for consistent removal, by the city, of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; (7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. The applicable charges shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees. (Code 1986, § 13-87; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-259. - Administrative enforcement remedies. (a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this division, or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, the utilities director or his agent may serve upon said user written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the utilities director or his agent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. (b)  Consent orders. The utilities director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as compliance orders issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. (c)  Show cause hearing. The utilities director may order any user which causes or contributes to a violation of this division or wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any user. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued. (d)  Compliance order. When the utilities director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this division or a permit or order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices. (e)  Cease and desist orders. When the utilities director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, the utilities director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: (1)  Comply forthwith; (2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. (f)  Administrative fines. Notwithstanding any other section of this division, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this division, or permits or orders issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the city shall have such other collection remedies as it needs to collect other individual user's property. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a request for the city to reconsider the fine within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where the utilities director believes a request has merit, he shall convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receiving the request from the industrial user. (g)  Emergency suspensions. (1)  The utilities director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and wastewater permit of a user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment. (2)  Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the utilities director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The utilities director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed, unless termination proceedings set forth in subsection (h) of this section are initiated against the user. A user who is the subject of a suspension order under this subsection shall have the right to appeal to the utilities director from such suspension, but such suspension shall remain in full force and effect pending such hearing and the decision of the director thereto. (3)  A user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the utilities director prior to the date of the hearing described in subsection (g)(2) of this section. (h)  Termination of permit. Significant industrial users proposing to discharge into the POTW, must first obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the public works department. Any user who violates the following conditions of this division or a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any applicable state and federal law, is subject to permit termination: (1)  Violation of permit conditions; (2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; (3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or (4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling. Any noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (c) of this section, why the proposed action should not be taken. (i)  Termination of services. The city may order any user who causes or continues to allow an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the city council as to why termination of services should not happen. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the termination of services, the reasons why the action is to be taken, and directing the user to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the public works to: (1)  Issue in the name of the city council notices of the hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; (2)  Take the evidence; (3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon. At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony must be taken under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. (j)  Order from city council to discontinue service. After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service is to be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. (Code 1986, § 13-88; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-260. - Judicial remedies.     If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this division or any order or permit issued hereunder, the utilities director, through the city attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. (1)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate this division or any order or permit issued hereunder, the city, through counsel may petition the court for its issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both, as may be appropriate, which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the user. The city may also initiate nuisance abatement proceedings in the municipal court of the city, as an alternate remedy. (2)  Civil penalties. a.  Any user who has violated or continues to violate this division or any order or permit issued hereunder, shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty of up to at least $1,000.00 plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation per day for as long as the violation continues. In addition to the above described penalty and damages, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses. b.  The city shall petition the municipal court of the city or any state court having jurisdiction to impose, assess, and recover such sums. In determining the amount of liability, the municipal court of the city or any state court having jurisdiction shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factors as justice requires. (3)  Criminal prosecution. a.  Any user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be guilty of a misdemeanor. b.  Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1986, § 13-89; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-261. - Supplemental enforcement remedies. (a)  Performance bonds. The utilities director may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this division or any order or previous permit issued hereunder unless such user files with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the utilities director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (b)  Liability insurance. The utilities director may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this division or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless the industrial user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by its discharge. (c)  Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user has been found after a hearing, to be in violation of the provisions of this division or an order issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Code 1986, § 13-90; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-262. - Affirmative defenses. (a)  Treatment upsets. (1)  For the purposes of this division, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. (2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section are met. (3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and c.  The user has submitted the following information to the utilities director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 3.  Steps being taken and the plan to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. (4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. (5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. (6)  Users shall control production of all discharges, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (b)  Treatment bypasses. (1)  For the purposes of this division: a.  The term "bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. b.  The term "severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. (2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsection (b)(3) and (4) of this section. (3)  Need for bypass known in advance. a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the utilities director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. b.  A user shall submit oral notice to the utilities director of an anticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The utilities director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. (4)  A bypass is prohibited, and the utilities director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (b)(3) of this section; and d.  The utilities director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the utilities director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in this subsection (b)(4). (c)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 90-256 or the specific prohibitions in subsections 90-256(d)(1)—(13), if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause passthrough or interference and that either: (1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the passthrough or interference; or (2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. (Code 1986, § 13-91; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Secs. 90-263—90-287. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES; BILLING AND COLLECTIONS 
Sec. 90-288. - No free service; connections to be effectuated; meters required. (a)  No free service shall at any time be furnished from the system and the city shall undertake within its health powers, or such applicable powers now or hereafter provided by law, to have each separate improved real property within the corporate limits of the city, as now existent and as the same may hereafter be extended, connected to the sewerage facilities. (b)  The city shall endeavor to prohibit the disposal of sewage by any other means. (c)  No customer shall be connected to the system or served by the city without a proper meter having been first installed. (d)  All services shall be furnished in accordance with rates now or hereafter established, including services furnished to any county, municipal corporation or any other public board or body. (Code 1962, § 26-23; Code 1986, § 13-60) 
Sec. 90-289. - Sewer tap and connection charges established. (a)  Sewer tap charges are as established by ordinance. The cost of installing a meter other than those listed by ordinance will be charged according to actual installation costs. (b)  The cost of connection to sewer shall be as established by ordinance. (Code 1962, § 26-21; Code 1986, § 13-61; Ord. No. O-99-12-46, 12-16-1999; Ord. No. O-04-11-29, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-290. - Service charge rates; inside city limits. (a)  Residential, small commercial, and large commercial users. Rates in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for users inside the city limits for sewer service furnished to them by the city. (b)  Residential sewer rate computation. Residential sewer rates shall be based upon the actual water usage each monthly billing cycle and shall be computed at the current rates for the applicable monthly sewer billing cycle. (c)  Industrial users. Rates in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for users inside the city limits for sewer service furnished to them by the city. (d)  Industrial sewer rate computation . Any industry that has received approval from the utilities director and has installed a flow meter for the purposes of metering wastewater shall be billed in the amount established by ordinance. (Code 1962, § 26-22; Code 1986, § 13-62; Ord. of 12-22-1986, § (b); Ord. No. O-88-04-16, 4-25-1988; Ord. No. O-89-01-01, 1-23-1989; Ord. No. O-89-12-41, 12-18-1989; Ord. No. O-90-12-35, 12-26-1990; Ord. No. O-92-01-02, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. O-93-01-03, 1-28-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-05, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-96-01-04, 1-25-1996; Ord. No. O-98-01-02, 1-22-1998; Ord. No. O-99-01-06, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-01-01-04, 1-18-2001; Ord. No. O-02-01-03, 1-24-2002; Ord. No. O-03-01-02, 1-23-2003; Ord. No. O-06-01-04, 1-19-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-18, 11-19-2015) 
Sec. 90-291. - Sewer rates and contract for sewer usage; outside the city limits. (a)  In accord with the provisions of state law and the city's Charter, the city shall be authorized to provide sewer service to residential, small commercial, large commercial, and industrial users whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city. (b)  The sewer rates to be charged by the city for sewer service provided by the city to residential, small commercial, large commercial, and industrial users located outside the corporate limits of the city shall be two times the rates charged for similar services to city sewer customers whose premises are located within the corporate limits of the city. (c)  The provision of such sewer services outside the corporate limits of the city shall only be authorized upon the occurrence of the following: (1)  The city shall have entered into an intergovernmental contract with the county authorizing the provision of sewer services in the unincorporated areas of the county as required pursuant to article IX, section II, paragraph III, subsection (b) of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, as such may be now or hereafter amended; and (2)  The owner of the premises, to which such sewer services are proposed to be provided, executes and delivers to the city a written contract between the city and such property owner, which contract shall provide, at a minimum, the method by which the property owner shall pay the city for base charges and sewer usage at the premises, the terms and conditions for the provision of such sewer services, and such other terms and conditions as the parties may deem appropriate with such contract. In addition thereto, and as further consideration for the city's provision of sewer services to the property owner's premises, said contract shall provide that in the event that the property owner's premises, or any portion thereof, becomes subject to annexation pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 36, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-20 et seq.), annexation pursuant to application by 100 percent of landowners, then the property owner shall, within 90 calendar days after such premises become subject to such annexation, apply to the city for annexation of such premises into the city. Each party shall be responsible to undertake all proceedings necessary in order to effect such annexation in accord with state law. Such contract shall also provide that upon the completion of such annexation, the sewer rates charged for the provision of sewer services to the premises shall be the same sewer rates as those rates charged to residential, small commercial, large commercial, or industrial users, as the case may be, which are located within the corporate limits of the city. (d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the rates for any sewer services provided by the city to facilities owned or operated by a government which are located outside the corporate limits shall be the same as such rates for sewer service customers located inside the corporate limits of the city. For such purposes, the term "facilities owned or operated by a government" shall include any such facilities owned or operated by a government or any boards, authorities, or divisions appointed or established by such government, for the provision of public services as authorized by the Constitution and the laws of the state or federal government. (e)  This section shall be applicable to any residential, small commercial, large commercial, or industrial users whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city who commence the use of city sewer services after August 1, 2005. For residential customers whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city who are already city sewer customers prior to August 1, 2005, the rates for such sewer service provided by the city to such residential customers shall continue to be two times the rate charged for similar services for customers residing within the corporate limits of the city, but no contract or other agreement with respect to such residence shall be required. (Code 1962, § 26-4; Code 1986, § 13-63; Ord. No. O-85-05-12, 5-27-1985; Ord. No. O-84-03-05b, 3-27-1989; Ord. No. O-92-01-04, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. O-05-08-21, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 90-292. - Nonusers of public water supply—Advance payment of service charges.     An advance sewer service payment in the amount established by ordinance is required before sanitary sewer service is furnished to any user of the city's sanitary sewer system whose premises is in the city and whose premises is not served by the public water supply system of the city. The deposit for users outside the city shall be as established by ordinance. (Code 1962, § 26-18.1; Code 1986, § 13-64; Ord. No. O-85-05-12, 5-27-1985) 
Sec. 90-293. - Same—Monthly charges. (a)  All occupants of premises located in the city served by the sanitary sewer system of the city, where such premises are not served by the public water system of the city, shall pay a monthly sanitary service charge. Such charge shall be determined with reference to a water meter installed at the expense of the owner at such location, which water meter shall be read at least monthly by the city. The charges shall include the base customer fee plus the operating fee specified in section 90-290, based upon water usage per month. In the event that said premises are located outside the city, the rates shall be specified in section 90-291. (b)  The owner of such premises shall be required to install a water meter at such location and in such proximity to the premises' water well as may be determined proper by the city. The water meter shall be installed in such a manner and in such location so as to require that all water usage at said premises is recorded by said meter. (Code 1962, § 26-16; Code 1986, § 13-65; Ord. No. O-90-04-10, 4-24-1990) 
Sec. 90-294. - Same—Charge imposed upon each family unit.     For the purpose of sections 90-292 and 90-293, the term "premises" is defined to be a single-family unit. Each additional family unit shall be charged a monthly service charge in the same amount. (Code 1962, § 26-17; Code 1986, § 13-66) 
Sec. 90-295. - Same—Charge imposed upon commercial unit.     A commercial unit which is now tied to the sanitary sewer system and which is not receiving water from the municipal system shall be charged a monthly sanitary sewer service charge in the amount as set out in section 90-293 and any industrial waste charges imposed. (Code 1962, § 26-18; Code 1986, § 13-67) 
Sec. 90-296. - Effect of nonpayment; disconnection of service.     Upon any occupant failing or refusing to pay the monthly sanitary sewer service charge after having been duly billed for same by the city, and following the lapse of 30 days after such billing, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this division and the sanitary sewer service to such premises shall be terminated by the city severing the sanitary sewer connection at the property line. (Code 1962, § 26-19; Code 1986, § 13-68) 
Sec. 90-297. - Reinstatement of service; reconnection fee.     The sanitary sewer service will be reinstated by the city at such premises upon the occupant of the premises paying all past due sanitary sewer service charges billed to the occupant of said premises, together with a reconnection fee in the amount established by ordinance. (Code 1962, § 26-20; Code 1986, § 13-69) 
Sec. 90-298. - Billing.     The charges for such sewer services as aforesaid shall be included in the bill for charges for water services and facilities and shall be billed to the customers at the same time and in the same manner as now provided for the payment of water bills and same shall be collected in the manner and subject to the provisions applicable to the water bills. (Code 1962, § 26-24; Code 1986, § 13-70) 
Sec. 90-299. - Amending rates.     Nothing herein contained shall be construed as relieving the city of the requirement, as often as it may be necessary, to revise and adjust its schedule of rates, fees and charges for either water or sewer services and facilities, or both, as provided and covenanted in the ordinances of its city council heretofore or hereafter adopted authorizing the issuance of the city's water and sewerage revenue obligations. (Code 1962, § 26-25; Code 1986, § 13-71) 
Sec. 90-300. - Disposing of sewage by delivery to city facility.     All persons disposing of sewage by delivering same to the city sewage treatment facility shall be charged an amount established by ordinance. Said persons shall be billed on a monthly basis. (Code 1962, § 26-26; Code 1986, § 13-72) 
Secs. 90-301—90-318. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NATURAL GAS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 90-319—90-339. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES; BILLING AND COLLECTION 
Sec. 90-340. - Meters—Required; installation and maintenance; cut off of service. (a)  All buildings, structures or premises supplied with gas by the city gas system shall be controlled by a meter. (b)  The meter shall be of the design, type and size to be approved by the natural gas services director of the city and shall be provided and installed by the city gas department at a charge adequate to cover the purchase and installation costs of said meter. After installation, such meter shall be under the control of the gas department of the city; and if such meter becomes damaged by negligence of the property owner or tenant, the expense of any replacement or repair to such meter by the city gas department shall be borne by the property owner; otherwise, the city gas department will replace any such meter at the city's expense when, in the judgment of the city gas department, such meter is defective or in need of replacement. (c)  If any person shall refuse to comply with the provisions of this section, the supply of gas to such service shall be cut off. (Code 1986, § 13-100) 
Sec. 90-341. - Same—Separate connections.     Each house, store, building, place of business, or residential premises which desires to have gas service shall have a separate meter and be separately connected to said meter, except as hereinafter provided. (Code 1986, § 13-101) 
Sec. 90-342. - Same—Tampering with meter or lock. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any gas meter in the city so as to cause said meter to misregister or fail to register the volume of gas furnished to the owner or user of gas through said meter. (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any gas meter lock in the city so as to cause the service to be cut back on when the city has terminated the service for a reason. (Code 1986, § 13-102) State Law reference— Theft of service, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 90-343. - Service deposit—Nonsingle-family, commercial and industrial customers; nonprofit organizations. (a)  All categories of consumers of gas in the city other than single-family residences shall be required to pay a minimum amount established by ordinance as a service deposit before gas service is made available, and in the case of all existing commercial, industrial and other residential gas customers an average will be taken of the previous customer's six months of gas usage and the deposit required will be one month's bill to be computed and rounded off to the nearest dollar amount; and provided further, however, in the case of a previous consumption history not being available for a new commercial, industrial or nonsingle-family residential gas customer, a monthly figure will be estimated, based on a similar type commercial, industrial or nonsingle-family gas customer, and a followup computation will be calculated after six months of gas usage to ascertain the accuracy of such estimated deposit amount charged, and an adjustment either up or down will be made at that time, based on the average six months of gas usage. (b)  Nonprofit organizations shall be required to pay a service deposit calculated in the same manner as set out in subsection (a) of this section; provided, however, that the finance director shall be authorized to waive such service deposit for nonprofit organizations where the nonprofit organization has established its credit worthiness from such documentation or other information presented to the finance director. (Code 1986, § 13-103; Ord. No. O-87-12-27, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. O-95-03-10, 3-23-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-344. - Same—Exceptions, refunds. (a)  An advance service deposit in the amount established by ordinance is required before gas service is made available to the consumers of gas in the city, except those who have presented a letter from another utility company establishing their credit worthiness or have had a utility account in good standing with the city. For these customers, the advance service deposit may be waived by the finance director. (b)  The service deposit required of residential customers under subsection (a) of this section shall be refunded after the customer has maintained service at the same address for a minimum of 24 months with no delinquencies. The city utility billing department shall accomplish the refunding at least annually by applying the customer's deposit to his bill and notifying the customer when it has been done. (Code 1986, § 13-104; Ord. No. O-87-12-27, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-345. - Senior citizens' discount on residential gas bill. (a)  A qualifying senior citizen is one who meets the following criteria: (1)  Shall be 62 years of age or older. (2)  Total household income from all sources shall not exceed $15,000.00. (3)  Shall complete and sign an application attesting certain required information. (4)  Shall have the residential utility account in the name of the qualifying senior citizen. (b)  The qualifying senior citizen shall be billed gas rates which are ten percent less than the current residential gas rates in effect. (Code 1986, § 13-105; Ord. No. O-93-02-08, 3-26-1993; Ord. No. O-01-01-05, 1-18-2001) 
Sec. 90-346. - Purchase gas adjustment. (a)  The customer rates for all classifications of firm natural gas customers are based upon the city's paying a commodity charge to the natural gas supplier. Under applicable federal statutes and regulations; namely the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's Regulation section 154.38(d)(4), regulations under the Natural Gas Act and section 282.601 of the regulations under the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, the commodity charges imposed upon the city by the supplier have been rapidly increasing and otherwise fluctuating. Such rapid product cost fluctuations make it practically impossible for the city to establish firm natural gas customer rates at realistic levels to ensure normal revenues that will cover the purchase cost of gas, distribution and transportation costs, natural gas department operating expenses, and an established margin. (b)  To provide for fluctuations in the city's cost of natural gas purchased and other costs to the city that may be incurred in the delivery of natural gas to the city gate, the rates for firm natural gas imposed upon the various classifications of natural gas customers shall be subject to a purchase gas adjustment (hereinafter called "PGA") that will be calculated in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. (c)  The PGA shall not be reflected separately on the utility customer's monthly billing. (d)  The PGA shall be supplied on a monthly basis by the Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia (MGAG) to the city. The natural gas variable rates for all classifications of firm delivery customers shall be calculated monthly and shall be equal to the cost of gas plus the PGA plus the operating expenses and the appropriate rate of return on the city's investments in the natural gas system as determined by the city council from time to time. The Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia will provide the cost of natural gas each month prior to the city's billing cycle. In establishing the PGA, all fractions of cents shall be rounded up to the nearest whole cent. (e)  The city shall have available in the office of the finance director the applicable PGA and corresponding rates for the current calendar month and for the previous 24 calendar months so that interested parties may determine fluctuations in the city's natural gas rates to all classifications of firm load customers. (f)  Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the city shall not consider any price fluctuations in its cost for propane in determining the purchase gas adjustment under this section unless the price fluctuations negatively impact the city's overall gross margin. (Code 1986, § 13-106; Ord. No. O-97-01-01, 1-23-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-347. - Discontinuance of service for failure to pay natural gas bill; reconnection charges.     All natural gas charges must be promptly paid or natural gas service will be discontinued and a reconnection fee in an amount established by ordinance shall be charged for turning the natural gas service on again. In addition, the current advance natural gas service payment required shall be paid in full to the city before the city shall turn the natural gas service on again in the event of a disconnection. (Ord. No. O-09-03-07, 3-19-2009) 
Sec. 90-348. - Reconnection of natural gas services after business hours.     In addition to the provisions of section 90-170 of this article, any person whose natural gas service has been turned off for nonpayment, or for other violation or violations of the City Code, and who requests reconnection services which must be performed after normal business hours, which are Monday—Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., shall be required to sign an "after hours service agreement" with the city before the reconnection services will be performed by the city. Such agreement shall provide that the customer requesting reconnection services must pay the service agreement fee, reconnection fees, and any past due amounts by 10:00 a.m., on the next business day. In the event that the customer does not pay such amounts within such time frame in violation of the agreement, the city shall be authorized to disconnect the natural gas for such customer again, and the charges incurred for the reconnection shall be added to the customer's natural gas service account. In the event that the customer fails to pay the amounts due under the after hours service agreement prior to the deadline for payment thereof, service shall not be reinstated for the customer all amounts owed by the customer to the city in connection with the customer's natural gas service are paid in full. In the event that the original disconnection is deemed to be an error on the part of the city, the service agreement fee and the reconnection fees will be waived. The amount of the service agreement fee and reconnection fees shall be established by ordinance. (Ord. No. O-09-03-07, 3-19-2009) 
Secs. 90-349—90-364. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SOLID WASTE[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-4. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 90-365. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Ashes means and includes the waste product from coal, wood or other fuels used for cooking and heating.     Brown goods includes such items as chairs, mattresses, sofas, tables and other furniture items.     Building refuse means solid waste generated from construction or demolition activities undertaken on property located within the corporate limits of the city. The term "building refuse" includes, but is not limited to, lumber, brick, block, stone, carpet, plumbing materials, plaster, concrete, roofing, floor tile, gutters, and other substances accumulated as a result of construction of or repairs or additions to structures or accessory structures or the demolition thereof.     Bulk waste means appliances, furniture, bedding material, automobile parts, mechanical equipment, mechanical parts and carpet.     Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes.     Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus.     Disposable trash containers means plastic bags and cardboard, wooden and corrugated boxes which shall be nonreturnable and shall be collected and packed into the garbage truck collecting such items.     Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities.     Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn or dispose of a substance.     Front-loading container means a heavy-duty steel container designed for use in commercial, industrial, and apartment units for storage of garbage, miscellaneous rubbish, trash and other waste.     Garbage means all vegetable and animal matter, food and other refuse from a kitchen, market, store, or elsewhere, including all matter that decays, attracts flies, and creates disagreeable odors.     Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of chemicals, pesticides and drugs, other than normal household use, pathological waste, highly flammable, explosive waste, toxic waste, sewer sludge, insecticides, poisons, corrosives, caustics, acids, infectious materials, compressed gases, biological materials, radioactive materials, petroleum products and other waste material that is determined to be a hazard to public health, safety or environment.     Industrial waste means solid waste from generated by factories, processing plants, wholesale establishments, assembling plants, food processing wastes, cinders and ashes, lumber scraps, sawdust, shavings, including solids, semisolids, sludges, and liquids floor sweepings, metal scrap and shavings, and any other waste products from industrial and manufacturing processes.     Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate, which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill.     Litter means all discarded manmade materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, lottery tickets, household trash, industrial waste, building materials, appliances, or portions thereof, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brick bats, rubbish, tin cans, cigarette and cigar butts, other tobacco products, rags, cloths, newspapers, aluminum cans, trash, debris, dead animals, or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article.     Multiple residential unit means any duplex, dwelling place or apartment, or group of apartments under a single roof, or in a single apartment complex, used for a dwelling place for more than a one-family unit and which is served by a single water meter.     Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste for single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations.     Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills.     Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon.     Owner means any person, firm, corporation owning, leasing, renting, occupying or managing any premises.     Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation Standard of 1.1 mills and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist tie. An untied plastic bag shall not be an approved container.     Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new and used replacement tires.     Rubbish means a variety of nonrecyclable household waste derived from places of residence and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, broken glass bottles and jars, crockery, rubber, discarded clothing, and similar materials.     Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect.     Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user or disposal facility.     Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. The term "scrap tire generator" may include, but is not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county and state governments.     Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing.     Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires.     Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one-family unit and which is served by a single water meter.     Solid waste means any garage or refuse; sludge from wastewater treatment plants; solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from operations; mineral matter; metal and wooden furniture; appliances; large metal scraps and wires; wooden crates, boxes or pallets; dead animals; and other waste in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this section.     Waste means discarded material including, but not limited to, ashes, building refuse, garbage, hazardous waste, industrial refuse, recyclable waste, rubbish, solid waste, yard debris, tires, sand, gravel, slag, brick bats, trash, debris, dead animals, bottles, cans, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles or parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge from wastewater treatment plants or air pollution control facilities, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, governmental, or other operations.     Wheeled container means a covered plastic or rubber container on wheels designed primarily for use by residential units for storage of garbage, miscellaneous refuse, trash and other waste.     White goods means appliances such as stoves, refrigerators and other bulky household items primarily constructed of metal, parts of appliances, metal parts and miscellaneous metal.     Yard debris means tree limbs, branches, stumps and logs, twigs, grass and shrub trimmings and clippings, bushes, weeds, leaves, and general yard and garden waste materials, and includes stone and dirt rakings and similar waste materials resulting from landscaping activities.     Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-110, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-366. - Penalties for violation of article.     Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, any violation of this article shall be subject to punishment in the municipal court of the city, upon conviction of such violation, as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1986, § 13-130) 
Sec. 90-367. - Litter. (a)  Scattering refuse and litter prohibited. No person shall throw or deposit any rubbish on any public or private street or scatter such refuse or litter on any public or private property, or throw or deposit in any stream or drainage area. (b)  Use of streets and roads. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials to transport the same without a suitable cover securely fastened to the vehicle in such a manner as to prevent said loose material from being deposited on the streets and adjoining areas. (c)  Unlawful dumping. It shall be unlawful for a person to deposit, throw, drop, dump or otherwise leave any litter on the premises of another without the consent of such other person and without complying with the applicable laws including, but not limited to this section. (d)  Prima facie case. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this section, the trier of fact may in its discretion and in consideration of the totality of the circumstances infer that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. (e)  Presumption. Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this section is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of the person thereon in such manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be an rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this section. (f)  Emergencies. Nothing contained in this section shall require the intermediate measures where the violation is of such nature or degree as to constitute an immediate, clear, and present danger to the health and safety of the public. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-125, 11-16-2006) State Law reference— Litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40. 
Sec. 90-368. - Administration and enforcement of article. (a)  The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. He may call upon the police department for assistance in its enforcement. All regulatory actions of the city manager or his designee shall be subject to review and approval of city council or a committee of city council designated for such purpose by the mayor. (b)  Upon determining that a violation of this article exists, the city manager or his designee shall cause written notice of such violation to be issued to the owner or occupier of the subject premises, setting forth the violation of the chapter and granting such owner or resident a reasonable time, not to exceed ten days, for the owner to correct said condition. (c)  Upon determining that the owner has failed or refused to correct the condition within the time prescribed in the notice, the city manager or his designee shall cause a notice to be issued directing the owner or occupier of said premises to appear in the municipal court to answer the charge of violation of this article. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-128, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-369. - Offal defined; removal to designated area; time limitation. (a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Offal means the inedible parts of a butchered animal and waste parts of the animal. (b)  All offal and byproducts which result from the slaughter of an animal within the city shall be removed to the area designated by the county commissioners by the person responsible for slaughtering said animal within 12 hours after the slaughter of the animal. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-127, 11-16-2006) 
Secs. 90-370—90-396. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION 
Sec. 90-397. - Waste collection responsibility of city. (a)  The city shall be responsible for the collection and disposal of all garbage, solid waste, yard debris and rubbish within the city, and no person, unless otherwise authorized by a contract with the city, shall collect and dispose of or transport over the streets of the city any of such waste without first obtaining a written permit from the city to do so. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall be authorized to enter into a contract with a private corporation or a public authority to provide for the collection and disposal of all garbage, solid waste, yard debris, and rubbish within the city. Such contract shall contain such terms and conditions as authorized by the city council and shall be for such length of time as may be determined by the city council and its citizens, but in no event shall such contract extend a length of time not otherwise authorized by the Constitution and laws of the state. (b)  The city shall not be responsible for the collection of hazardous waste and industrial refuse except as otherwise provided herein. The city shall not be responsible for the collection of building refuse generated by a contractor or other person who does not own or occupy the premises where such building refuse is generated. The city shall not be responsible for the collection of more than one cubic yard of residential building refuse generated in any one-week collection period by a person who owns or occupies the premises where such building refuse is generated. The disposal of all such waste, which is not subject to collection by the city, shall be the responsibility of the person generating such waste. Such waste shall be disposed of in accord with local, state and federal statutes, ordinances and regulations. One cubic yard shall be the equivalent of the size of two-wheeled garbage containers used for residential garbage collections. (c)  No person who owns or occupies any premises in the city shall permit trash, garbage, or other waste or rubbish to collect or remain on such premises, except during such periods between waste pickup; and no person who owns or occupies any premises in the city shall permit garbage, trash or other waste to be scattered from such premises into the public streets of the city. (d)  Any owner of property who permits garbage, solid waste, building refuse, yard debris, recyclable waste and rubbish, hazardous waste or industrial refuse to become in a condition which is hazardous or dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare shall be notified in writing by the city manager or his designee to abate such condition within ten days of the date of such notice. In the event that such condition is not abated within the time provided in such notice, then the city shall be authorized, either directly or through a private contractor, to abate such condition, and the cost of such abatement shall be charged against the property and shall be collected in the same manner as a lien for taxes is collected. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-111, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-09-08-27, 8-20-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-398. - Refuse collection by city. (a)  The city, or any entity with which the city has contracted for such purposes, shall make collections of waste from residential premises which have wheeled containers at least once weekly. The particular day or days of each week during which such collection shall occur shall be determined by the city manager or his designee or agent. (b)  The city, or any entity with which the city has contracted for such purposes, shall make collections of waste from commercial and industrial premises which have wheeled containers at least weekly. The particular day or days of each week during which such collection shall occur shall be determined by the city manager or his designee or agent. (c)  The city, or any entity with which the city has contracted for such purposes, shall make collections of residential building refuse not exceeding one cubic yard in size on a schedule and at such times as may be determined by the city manager or his designee. One cubic yard shall be the equivalent of the size of two, wheeled garbage containers used for residential garbage collection. (d)  Yard debris and yard rubbish shall be collected by the city, or by any entity with which the city has contracted for such purposes, at least once a week on a schedule at such times as may be determined by the city manager or his designee or agent of the city. Such waste shall only be collected by the city when placed curbside. Wheeled containers shall not be utilized for disposal of such waste. (e)  Industrial refuse shall be collected from business and commercial premises a minimum of twice weekly and a maximum of five times weekly, based upon the need of the customer, according to such schedule as may be determined by the city manager or his designee or agent of the city. Such collection shall be made from a front-loading container. (f)  For purposes of this section, any resident of any multiple residential or commercial unit authorized to dispose of its waste by use of a front-loading container shall not be required to comply with the recyclable waste disposal provisions of this division. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-112, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-09-08-27, 8-20-2009; Ord. No. O-10-05-17, 5-20-2010; Ord. No. O-10-08-27, 8-19-2010; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-399. - Garbage containers. (a)  It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of any single or multiple residential or commercial unit to place the wheeled container provided for such purpose on the assigned collection day at a front curbside location in such a manner as not to obstruct pedestrian passage, except that the city manager or his designee or agent may require the wheeled container to be placed on any side of a parcel of property for the reasons of topography or efficiency. (b)  It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of a single or multiple residential or commercial unit to place the wheeled container at an appropriate curbside location at or before 7:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the sanitation truck. (c)  It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any single or multiple residential or commercial unit to remove the wheeled container from the curbside location to a storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the unit located on the premises than to any street abutting such premises; provided, however, that said removal shall be accomplished not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day the contents thereof are collected. (d)  Garbage containers must be placed at least three feet away from vehicles, poles, fire hydrants, fences, overhead wires, low-hanging trees, branches, limbs, or other types of cover. (e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any container provided by the municipality or its agent for the dumping of garbage. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-113, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-400. - Precollection practices. (a)  Front-loading containers. The city manager or his designee or agent shall determine the type, size, specifications, number and location of the garbage containers and shall determine the condition. (b)  Secure containers. All containers shall be maintained at all times with tight-fitting lids or covers, and secured in such a manner as to prevent the overturning by the elements or by dogs or other animals. (c)  Garbage. Garbage placed in containers for collection shall be enclosed in disposable watertight plastic bags with the top secured and placed in the container. (d)  Liquid. Garbage shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in the container. (e)  Injurious garbage or trash items. Garbage placed for pickup with the potential for injury, such as broken glass, lightbulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes, etc., shall be securely packaged or wrapped in such a manner to prevent injury to collection crews or other persons. (f)  Pet litter. Pet litter must be placed in securely tied plastic bags not to exceed ten pounds in weight and placed in the container. (g)  Clean container. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee of the property to keep the container clean and free of odor. (h)  Scrap tires. No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any garbage container or on any public or private property. (i)  Dead animals. No dead animals shall be deposited in any garbage container. (j)  Burying or burning litter or waste; written consent. No owner or occupant of any such property within the corporate limits shall bury or burn litter or waste without prior authorization and written consent from the applicable regulatory agency, including, but not limited to, the United States Environmental Protection Division and/or the state forestry commission. Nothing in this provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state and/or federal law. (k)  Accumulation. No owner or occupant of any property shall cause, suffer, or allow the accumulation on his premises, of garbage, litter or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. (l)  Violations. The conduct described in subsections (h), (j) and (k) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of this article for each day the garbage, litter or waste material remains or continues to unlawfully pollute, contaminate or burn on such premises. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-114, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-401. - Garbage collection for disabled persons.     Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit and who is disabled to the extent that such person is incapable of moving the wheeled container and who shall obtain a physician's certificate as to such disability, shall not be required to place the wheeled container at curbside as required in section 90-399. This section shall not apply unless all of the persons residing in a residential unit are disabled and obtain such physician's certificate. Provision for the collection of garbage from disabled residents shall be included in any contract approved by the city council under section 90-397. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-115, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-402. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. (a)  Yard trimmings, and other small debris generated from the maintenance of a yard shall be collected and placed at the curb of the residence for collection. Said items are to be bagged or placed inside a container with a lid before being placed at the curb for pickup. (b)  The on-site composting of yard trimmings and other yard debris is encouraged. Further, the development of low-maintenance landscaping is encouraged for all commercial and industrial developments. (c)  Storing of yard trimmings and other debris generated on-site for a use other than in a composting or landscaping effort is hereby prohibited. (d)  Limbs and yard trimmings which cannot be bagged as required under subsection (a) hereof, shall be placed at the curb for pickup and shall be subject to the following limitations: (1)  Limbs and yard trimmings no more than five inches in diameter must be cut to no more than five feet long; (2)  Limbs and yard trimmings measuring from five inches to 12 inches in diameter must be cut to no more than one foot long. (3)  No limbs or yard trimmings larger than 12 inches in diameter shall be picked up by the city or by any entity with which the city has contracted. (e)  Yard trimmings and limbs shall be picked up on vacant lots, but only when such debris is generated from the vacant lot. (f)  Yard waste bags or containers must be placed at least six feet away from vehicles, trees, poles, fences, mailboxes, fire hydrants, low-hanging trees, limbs, branches, power lines, guy wires, or other types of obstructions. (g)  Lawn services and contractors are responsible for bagging the yard waste and other waste that they generate and disposing of it in a suitable location as identified by this division. (h)  Grass clippings, weeds, leaves, and other small yard waste materials must be bagged or placed in a container with a lid prior to being placed at the curb for pickup. (i)  Yard waste bags may be placed in the right-of-way, the street pavement or in roadside ditches as long as the flow of water or the flow of traffic is not inhibited or changed. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-116, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-09-08-27, 8-20-2009; Ord. No. O-10-05-17, 5-20-2010; Ord. No. O-10-08-27, 8-19-2010) 
Sec. 90-403. - Prohibitions. (a)  Yard trimmings. It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. (b)  Yard trimmings disposal . Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city or the county. (c)  Stormwater collection system. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any solid waste on any property, in any waters or in any stormwater collection system, except as authorized by applicable permits it shall be the burden of the alleged violator to show proof of any applicable permits. (d)  Storm drains. No person shall place any litter, refuse, trash, trees, grass, or other rubbish over or within five feet of a storm drain, drop inlet, culvert, or manhole. (e)  Appliances. No person shall leave outside in any building or in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, freezer, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing therefrom the door. This section shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator, or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped, or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. (f)  Dumping. It shall be unlawful to dump, open dump, or permit the dumping of litter, waste, scrap tires, municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place within the corporate city limits including and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way, any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless such litter or waste originates within the corporate limits of the city and the property is designated by the city council or its duly designated agent for the disposal of the above, and the material is placed into a receptacle or container designed for such property; and the property has a valid solid waste handling permit issued by the state environmental protection division (EPD) when required. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-117, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-404. - Damaging, etc., containers; enforcement of regulations. (a)  No person shall overhaul, damage, or interfere with the contents of any wheeled container or adjacent containerized trash set out for collection for emptying or removal by the city, unless by permission of the city manager or his designee or agent. (b)  The city manager or his designee or agent is assigned the responsibility for enforcement of waste collection procedures enumerated herein. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-120, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-405. - Scrap tires. (a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. (b)  It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property or any waters unless the property is designated by the city council and the state environmental protection division for the collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property. The scrap tires must be placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property and the property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, and approvals and/or permits issued by the state environmental protection division (EPD) when required. (c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, as amended, and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, chapter 391-3-4 et seq., as amended, applicable to solid waste, except where provisions of this division are more stringent, in which case the provisions of this division shall be applicable unless preempted by state law. (d)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential zone to accumulate any amount of scrap tires on or around property, which they own or occupy. (e)  A retail tire dealer may hold up to 100 scrap tires per garage bay in storage, up to a maximum of 1,000 scrap tires. (f)  Tires must be stored in covered or enclosed areas to prevent the accumulation of water. (g)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any portion of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: (1)  The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this division; (2)  The court may order the person convicted hereunder to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation; (3)  In case of a tire dump, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall, upon conviction, cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this division. The city council shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; (4)  The expenses incurred by the city council for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the person convicted hereunder, such expenses including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this division; (5)  In addition to actions filed by the city council for violations of this division, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction; (6)  Enforcement of this division shall be the responsibility of the city manager or his designee; and (7)  Any person authorized to enforce this division shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this division, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this division must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this division, or by a judge's order upon said person having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-124, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-406. - Waste not subject to pickup by the city. (a)  Manufacturers. All processors of raw material or manufactured items, manufactured and/or assembly plants, are hereby exempted from payment of the fees provided for in this division; and no pickup service is to be furnished to such establishments except upon request, oral or written, which pick up shall be made by the city upon an estimated cost basis to be determined by the city manager or his designee or agent and to be billed by the finance director to such business making the request. (b)  Automotive parts. Automotive parts will not be collected by the city or it's agent. (c)  Dangerous materials. Dangerous materials or substances such as poisons, acids, caustics, infectious materials, explosives, paints, solvents, petroleum products, and other dangerous materials will not be collected by the city or its agent. (d)  Dead animals. The collection of heavy dead animals such as cows, horses, deer, and mules will not be included in the services provided by the city or its agent. (e)  Land clearing. Waste from land clearing operations such as rocks, dirt, sand, brick, and concrete will not be collected by the city or its agent. (f)  Tires. No automobile or other motor vehicle tires will be collected by the city or it's agent. (g)  Separation required. No comingled rubbish will be collected by the city or it's agent. All white goods, brown goods, yard trimmings, and garbage shall be separated into separate piles prior to collection. (h)  Building materials . The contractor and/or builder shall be required to haul and transfer the debris to an authorized and permitted transfer station or landfill. (i)  Batteries. Automotive, boat, and any other type of battery will not be collected by the city or it's agent. (j)  Eviction or rental property debris. Trash, rubbish, white goods, brown goods, will not be collected by the city or its agent if occurs as a result of an eviction or as a result of the property owner cleaning up after a tenant has moved out. It will be the responsibility of the property owner to call the city or its agent to arrange for a special pickup at an additional fee. The fee will be determined by the size of the load, manpower requirements, and time of service required as determined by the city's solid waste hauling contractor. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-126, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-407. - Enforcement of this division. (a)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this division, the city council or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, liens on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation. In addition, the city may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other city issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. (b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer, in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court. (c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this division, the court may cause written notice to be incorporated into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this division for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. (d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within ten days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the city council is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of scrap tires, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this division on behalf of the city. The expenses incurred by the city shall be chargeable to the violator and the city council and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. (e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the city council shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the city, the dates of the action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recording of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-129, 11-16-2006) 
Secs. 90-408—90-427. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 
Sec. 90-428. - Charge—Authorized. (a)  A monthly refuse disposal charge is hereby fixed and assessed against the owner or occupant of every improved premises within the city for which the occupant shall be liable for payment, but if for any reason an occupant of improved premises shall fail to pay said monthly charge to the city, then the owner thereof shall be liable for the payment thereof. (b)  The owner or occupant of every improved premises within the city which is furnished a wheeled container by the city, or by any entity with which the city has contracted for garbage collection, shall be liable for any damage to such container and shall be liable for the expense of repairs to such container which shall be required, except for normal wear and tear, which repairs shall be made by the owner of the container. Such repair for which an owner or occupant shall be liable shall be billed to the occupant. If for any reason an occupant shall fail to pay said charges, then the owner of said improved premises shall be liable for the payment thereof. The charges shall be the actual cost of the necessary repairs. (c)  The owner or occupant of any improved premises within the city who intends to vacate such premises must notify the city in order that the wheeled container may be removed from the premises if the owner of the wheeled container deems it appropriate to do so. (d)  Where multiple residential or commercial premises are served through a master water meter, the owner of the premises shall be required to pay the appropriate charges as established in section 90-429 at the same time and in the same manner as the billing for water and other related services. (Ord. No. O-97-05-16, 5-22-1997; Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-118, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-429. - Same—Schedule.     The monthly charge, provided for in section 90-428, within the city shall be established by separate ordinance. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-119, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-430. - Billing. (a)  The charges provided for in section 90-429 within the city shall be billed monthly by the city. (b)  In all instances where a residential premises is occupied by more than one single-family unit and is served by a single water meter, the refuse collection charges that are applicable to the residential premises at such location shall all be billed to the person in whose name the water meter is registered at the finance director's office, the charge to be included thereon for each family unit on the premises; provided, however, that with respect to any such multi-family premises where dumpster service is provided at such location, the owner of the premises shall be billed and shall pay the applicable monthly dumpster charges as provided in the then-current dumpster fee schedule approved by the local governing body from time to time. In the event of failure to pay the bill in accordance with ordinances applicable thereto, the city, by and through its proper officials, may proceed to enforce collection of same as provided by ordinance, and in addition to such remedies, failure to pay the bill within 30 days from the date of issue will constitute adequate cause to have such water service disconnected and discontinued at those premises. (c)  Charges for repairs to wheeled containers shall be billed and collected with the following billing of refuse collection charges. Subsections (a) and (b) of this section and sections 90-431 and 90-432 are applicable to wheeled container repair charges. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-121, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2017-12, 10-19-2017) 
Sec. 90-431. - Execution, levy, and sale authorized.     Should any person liable for payment of the fees and charges hereby fixed and imposed fail to pay the same within 30 days after having been billed therefor, the finance director is authorized to issue an execution therefor against such person in the same manner provided in cases of default in payment of utility bills. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-122, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-432. - Discontinuance of services to premises when charges remain unpaid.     Any person failing for any reason or refusing to pay monthly the charge provided for in this division shall be subject to the discontinuance of city services as provided in section 90-1. (Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-123, 11-16-2006) 
Secs. 90-433—90-455. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER STATE FRANCHISE FEES 
Sec. 90-456. - [State franchise fees.]     Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-76-6, there is hereby established within the corporate limits of the City of Americus an annual five percent franchise fee payable to the City of Americus by the holders of state cable service franchises and state video service franchises who operate or provide services within the incorporated area of the city. Such annual five percent franchise fee shall be paid by the holder of each state cable service franchise and the holder of each state video service franchise upon the gross annual revenues received by such state franchise holder from customers residing within the incorporated areas of the city. Such franchise fees shall be paid directly to the city within 30 days after the last day of each calendar quarter. In the event that such franchise fees are not paid in a timely manner, then the city shall have the authority to take such steps that are authorized under O.C.G.A. § 36-76-6(b) in order to collect such franchise fees. (Ord. No. O-08-03-06, 3-20-2008) 
Secs. 90-457—90-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER UTILITY ENTERPRISE FUND 
Sec. 90-501. - Purpose.     This article shall establish the stormwater utility enterprise fund. All monies deposited into this fund shall be held in trust and expended solely for the purposes and uses set forth in this article. (Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-502. - Findings of fact.     The mayor and city council make the following findings of fact: (1)  The City of Americus is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I and III thereof and O.C.G.A. § 36-82-62 to provide stormwater management services systems and facilities throughout the corporate boundaries of the City of Americus (hereinafter "the city" or "Americus") and to collect fees for provision of those services. (2)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this section, Americus is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and its City Charter to provide for stormwater collection and disposal. A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the city limits. (3)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater runoff: a.  May cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses and residences, and other facilities with water damage and may environmentally impair the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within, and downstream of, the city. b.  Failure to effectively manage stormwater can adversely affect the operations of the sanitary sewer system operated by the city thereby increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. c.  Failure to effectively manage stormwater contributes to the potential degradation of the quality of both surface water and groundwater resources. (4)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities, which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness and operational function of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and the additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities within the city in concert with the management of other water resources within the city. In order to do so, the city must have both a comprehensive stormwater management program as well as an adequate and stable funding source for its comprehensive program operation and drainage-related capital improvement needs. (5)  The city desires to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality and quantity to mitigate the impacts of pollution and flooding which may impact the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), private property and downstream receiving waters of the State of Georgia and/or United States. Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to establish a stormwater utility and impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4 and stormwater conveyance system, whether the property is private or public in nature. (6)  Compliance with applicable regulatory obligations, including but not limited to, the city's NPDES wastewater discharge permit, the comprehensive plan and the city's watershed protection plan as well as other identified stormwater management program needs will affect the cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities above what is currently being spent for stormwater quality management, drainage system maintenance, floodplain management, capital drainage projects and other program activities. (7)  The cost of operating and maintaining the city's stormwater management system and the funding of necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the city's stormwater management program and the demand imposed by improved property on the city's drainage system and stormwater management program. (8)  The professional engineering and financing analysis and related documents prepared by the city's consulting stormwater engineer properly assesses and defines the city's stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities as well as the stormwater management program funding strategy. (9)  Given the stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and funding strategy identified in the aforementioned professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management services, systems and facilities within the city in concert with other water resource management programs. (10)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the incorporated areas of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management system and service area encompassing all lands and waterbodies within the incorporated areas of the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the city. (11)  The stormwater management services rendered may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners and/or tenants of improved properties in proportion to the demands the properties impose on the city's stormwater management systems and facilities which result in services to such properties and the owners and/or tenants thereof. The fair and equitable apportionment of costs via the stormwater user fee charge should correlate to the stormwater management services provided to that property and the runoff demand that the property imposes on the public drainage system and the city stormwater management program. (12)  The stormwater management needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the community. Provision of stormwater management services renders and/or results in both a service to customers and at least some benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city in a variety of ways although the benefits may be indirect or immeasurable. (13)  A stormwater management program provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services throughout the city, and the most equitable means to implement an enhanced level of service for stormwater management within the city through stormwater user fees, development permits and inspection fees, and other mechanisms. (14)  The presence and amount of impervious surfaces on each improved property is the most important factor influencing the cost of the stormwater management services provided by the city, or to be provided by the city in the future, to that property such that the amount of impervious surface on each property is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater user fee charge. Therefore, the city deems it appropriate to impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public drainage system whether the property is private or public in nature. (15)  A schedule of stormwater utility user fee charges based primarily on the amount of impervious surface located on each improved property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the city. Stormwater utility user fee charges may be designed with specific modifiers to further enhance customer equity, as well as customer understanding of the user fee charge rate structure, while at the same time minimizing the city's customer account management and maintenance efforts. (16)  Stormwater utility user fee charges may be supplemented by other funding which addresses specific needs, including, but not limited to, special district service fees, special assessments, revenue bonds, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes (SPLOST) and other forms of revenue, as, from time to time, deemed appropriate by the mayor and city council. (17)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site stormwater control facilities, activities or assets which reduce, or otherwise mitigate, the impact of a particular property on the city's stormwater management program, and the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities, should be taken into account to reduce the user fee charge on that property either in the form of a credit, and such credit should be conditioned upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the stormwater utility. Credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the reduction and mitigation of the stormwater runoff impacts from the property. (18)  It is imperative that the proceeds from all user fee charges for stormwater management services, systems or facilities, together with any other supplemental revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, systems or facilities, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and such proceeds of user fee charges and supplemental revenues shall therefore be deposited into the City of Americus Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund and shall remain in that fund. In trust, to be dispersed only for stormwater management capital improvements, facilities, and equipment, operating and nonoperating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes. (19)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the governing authority of Americus hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility enterprise fund, as the best available means of addressing the foregoing needs and legal requirements. By means of a separate stormwater utility rate ordinance, the city will enact a stormwater user fee rate structure in the future to establish stormwater utility user fee charge rates for the provision of stormwater management services. (Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-503. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Act means and refers to the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto.     Customers of the stormwater utility shall include all persons, properties, and entities serviced by and/or benefiting from the services provided by the city's stormwater management program and the stormwater utility. These services include, but are not necessarily limited to, the stormwater utility's administration, management, maintenance, expansion, and improvement of the stormwater management systems for the handling and disposal of stormwater runoff from private and public properties, and the regulation of the public and private stormwater management systems, controls, facilities and activities.     Hydrologic response defines the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. Hydrologic response is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious surface, the parcel's size, the parcel's shape, the parcel's topography, the parcel's vegetative canopy, the parcel's groundwater characteristics, the parcel's on-site operations, the parcel's stormwater controls, the parcel's antecedent moisture as well as the parcel's geologic and hydro-geologic characteristics.     Impervious area shall mean and have the same definition as impervious surface.     Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil in the manner in which it entered the soil, in natural conditions, prior to development and causes stormwater runoff to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural condition. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings or structures, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces such as compacted soil and gravel, which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development.     Improved property (or developed property) means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 500 square feet of impervious surfaces.     Service area means the entire land area within the corporate limits of the city.     Single-family residential property (or SFR) means developed property containing one residential structure with no more than two dwelling units in or attached thereto, situated upon a single lot of record. Improved property may be classified as SFR even if supplemental accessory structures are present such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guesthouses, servants or caretakers quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in significant additional amounts of impervious surfaces. SFR properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes; manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes; residential condominium developments with more than two units; or vacant/undeveloped property.     Stormwater management services mean all services provided by the city which relate to the: (1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the incorporated portions of the city; (2)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater management systems and facilities; (3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; (4)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems and facilities; and (5)  Compliance with applicable state and federal stormwater management regulations and permit requirements. Stormwater management services may address the quality of stormwater runoff as well as the quantity thereof.     Stormwater management systems and facilities mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey, detain, retain, treat or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff.     Stormwater user fee charge means the periodic user fee charge for the provision of stormwater management services imposed pursuant to this article of the Americus Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund Ordinance and applicable sections of the Americus Stormwater Utility Rate Ordinance. This term shall exclude special charges to the owners and/or tenants of particular properties for services, systems or facilities related to stormwater management, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects, post-construction maintenance and inspection of existing facilities, on-site stormwater control systems and other stormwater management related services provided by Americus for which a corresponding fee is collected for the service rendered.     Stormwater utility manager means the person appointed by the mayor and city council to administer the provisions of this article.     Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural condition or which is modified to such a minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural condition shall be deemed undeveloped. For purposes of this article, undeveloped land includes property altered from its natural condition by the creation or installation of 500 square feet or less of impervious surface.     User is defined as any person who uses property, which maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the city for stormwater management. (Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-504. - Stormwater utility and enterprise fund established. (a)  There is hereby established within the City of Americus a stormwater utility department, to be known as the "Americus Stormwater Utility", which shall be responsible for stormwater management services throughout the incorporated area of the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the city's stormwater management systems and facilities and stormwater management services. (b)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the Americus Stormwater Management Program and Stormwater Utility, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, and fees as may be established by the city council from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the Americus Stormwater Utility. (c)  All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater utility enterprise fund in trust, to be expended solely for stormwater management purposes. All expenses and capital investments of the stormwater utility shall be paid from the stormwater utility enterprise fund; provided, however, that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management services as deemed appropriate by the city. (d)  The city shall place responsibility with the stormwater utility manager for operation, maintenance and regulation of the stormwater utility and stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated, or maintained by the city, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. (Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-505. - Stormwater utility service area.     There shall be one stormwater utility service area in the city which shall encompass the municipal boundaries of Americus. The city has established that all developed parcels within the municipal boundaries receive stormwater management program services from the city. Improved/developed properties within the defined service area will receive a stormwater user fee charge bill because they contribute stormwater runoff to the public drainage system, are directly or indirectly connected to the city's drainage system, and/or receive stormwater management services from the city to varying degrees. (Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-506. - Scope of responsibility for stormwater management systems and facilities. (a)  The city owns in fee simple or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: (1)  Within public road rights-of-way; (2)  On private property but within legally dedicated easements granted to, and accepted by, the city; (3)  On private property where the city has been granted, by written agreements, for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system facilities located thereon; (4)  On land dedicated to, and accepted by, the city solely for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon; or (5)  On public land which is owned by the city and/or land of another governmental entity upon which the city has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon. (b)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by the city, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner and/or tenant, except as otherwise provided for by state and federal laws and regulations. (c)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the municipal boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. (d)  If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit, negligent issuance of a permit, negligent plan approval, negligent construction of permitted system or facility, or negligent maintenance of any permitted stormwater management system or facility not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city for further maintenance in an action seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the city, its mayor and council members, officers, employees or agents. (Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-507. - Stormwater user fee charges. (a)  It shall be the policy of the city that user fee charges for stormwater management services to be provided by the stormwater utility in the designated service area shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by, or resulting from, the provision of stormwater management services by the city. Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be adopted via a separate stormwater utility rate ordinance and be structured so as to be uniform within the customer class, and the resultant user fee charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services. User fee charge rates shall be in addition to other rates, charges, or fees employed for stormwater management within the incorporated areas of the city as defined herein. (b)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater user fee charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by public and private property owners and/or tenants which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities, or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities. (Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-508. - Enforcement methods and inspections. (a)  It shall be the duty of all property owners and/or tenants of improved real property within the incorporated area of the city to provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and/or discharge stormwater runoff in a safe manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, regulations, city development regulations, and other pertinent ordinances. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to citation and prosecution in the Americus Municipal Court. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. (b)  Alternately, in the event a public nuisance is deemed to exist by the mayor and city council, the city may elect to sue in municipal court to abate such nuisance. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the property owner and/or tenant fails to abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the Americus Municipal Court, the court, by judgment, may allow the city to enter upon the real property and cause work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the property by filing a lien. From date of filing of such abatement action, the city shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lis pendens on the general execution docket of the Sumter County Superior Court. (c)  The city shall have the right for its employees or designated agents to enter upon public and private property during reasonable hours, and after reasonable notice to the owner and/or tenant thereof, in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this article, and state and federal law. Such inspections shall generally be limited to the following purposes: (1)  Inspecting or conducting engineering analyses on existing stormwater management systems and facilities located on-site; (2)  Verification and review of information contained within a stormwater utility credit manual application; and (3)  Determining that stormwater management systems and facilities need to be constructed. (Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-509. - Severability.     If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-510. - Repealer.     All ordinances or parts thereof which are in conflict with any provision or any section, subsection, paragraph, provision or clause of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. (Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Secs. 90-511—90-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - STORMWATER UTILITY RATE 
Sec. 90-601. - Purpose.     This article shall serve the purpose of establishment and set up of the stormwater utility rate structure and billing rate. (Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-602. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Credit means a reduction in the amount of a customer's stormwater user fee charge in recognition of a customer's efforts to mitigate the stormwater runoff impact that developed property has on the city stormwater management services and systems, and/or the efforts of a customer to offset the city's cost for implementation of stormwater management program (SWMP) activities such as public education, watershed stewardship, etc.     Dwelling unit shall mean a structure, regardless of the type or method of construction, which contains one or more bedrooms, a bathroom, and cooking facilities, designed for occupancy by one or more person(s) regardless of relationship, living as a single-family unit.     Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the stormwater user fee charge billing unit increment related to the median horizontal impervious surface area footprint of 3,000 square feet for a typical single-family dwelling unit within the city.     Manufactured home park means a common development (with a single property owner or entity) of more than one factory-built or prefabricated housing structures that have been partially or entirely assembled at another location and moved into the development.     Nonsingle family residential (NSFR) customer shall mean a utility customer whose property meets the definition of NSFR whether such customer is the owner of the parcel or a tenant of the owner.     Nonsingle family residential (NSFR) property shall mean a developed parcel of land that consists of various nonresidential land uses including, but not limited to: (1) multifamily, commercial (including mixed commercial and residential), office/institutional, public, transportation, industrial, manufacturing and storage buildings and facilities; (2) parking lots, parks, public and private schools, universities and hospitals; (3) streets, roads, water and wastewater treatment plants; and (4) any other form of use not specifically defined as a single-family residential property (SFR).     Single-family residential (SFR) customer means a utility customer of the city residing in a dwelling unit whether such customer is the owner of the dwelling unit, a tenant of the owner of the dwelling unit, or a resident of the dwelling unit.     Single-family residential (SFR) property means developed property containing one residential structure with no more than two dwelling units in or attached thereto, situated upon a single lot of record. Improved property may be classified as SFR even if supplemental accessory structures are present such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guesthouses, servants or caretakers quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in significant additional amounts of impervious surfaces, as determined by the governing body or its designee. SFR properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes and as defined herein; manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes; residential condominium developments with more than two units; or vacant/undeveloped property.     Unless otherwise defined within this article, the definitions included in the stormwater utility enterprise fund ordinance (Code section 90-501 et seq.) are adopted herein by reference.     The professional engineering and financing analysis documents entitled: The Americus SWMP Assessment Funding Feasibility Study (Technical Memorandum, dated June 8, 2009); The Americus SWMP Assessment Funding Feasibility Study Addendum (Technical Memorandum, dated May 20, 2010, or the most recent version); and applicable supporting, project-related documents are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-603. - Stormwater utility customer classes. (a)  The stormwater utility shall establish specified customer classes within the service area to reflect differences in impervious surface and stormwater runoff characteristics; stormwater management program services provided by the city to the stormwater utility customers; and the respective demand that those customers' properties place on the city SWMP and drainage system components. All state, federal, and county developed properties are subject to the user fee charges on the same basis as private properties. The stormwater utility classes will encompass all developed and undeveloped properties within the city and are defined as follows: (1)  The single-family residential (SFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as SFR customers per the applicable definition. (2)  The nonsingle-family residential (NSFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as NSFR customers per the applicable definition. (3)  The undeveloped class shall consist of properties classified as undeveloped per the applicable definition. (b)  Documentation pertaining to the stormwater utility customer classes shall be kept on file in the office of the stormwater utility manager for public inspection. (Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-604. - Stormwater user fee charge rates. (a)  The stormwater utility shall impose a stormwater user fee on all developed properties within the service area in a fair and equitable manner. The stormwater utility shall apportion the cost of delivering stormwater services to all developed properties based on the demand the property places on the city's stormwater management program and the stormwater services provided by the city. (b)  Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be set and may be modified from time to time by the governing body of the city. A schedule of said rates shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk of Americus. In setting or modifying such rates, it shall be the goal of the city to establish rates that are fair, equitable and reasonable, and together with other funding sources available to the Americus Stormwater Utility for services, systems, and/or facilities related to stormwater management (e.g., credit application fees, plan review fees, development inspection fees, regulatory compliance inspection fees and other fees related to provision of stormwater management services), are sufficient to support the cost of the stormwater management program, including but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, non-operating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the city. (c)  The basis for calculation of the stormwater user fee charge to all developed property within the city is established in this article. The city shall assign or determine the customer class, amount of impervious area and other pertinent factors as may be needed for the fair, reasonable and equitable allocation of the costs to deliver stormwater management services and to calculate the stormwater user fee charges for all developed properties in the city. (d)  Stormwater user fee charges shall be based upon the total number of equivalent residential units (ERUs) associated with developed properties within the city. Each ERU shall correspond to 3,000 square feet of impervious surface. Gravel and compacted soil driveways, parking areas, and roads on private property will be considered impervious surface and included in the customer's ERU calculation because of the hydrologic response characteristics of these materials. However, the total surface area associated with these materials will be calculated at 85 percent of the total ERUs to reflect the hydrologic response characteristics of these materials. Application of the 85 percent factor to these materials is based on applicable literature sources and reference documents outlined herein. (e)  Calculation of charges. The periodic stormwater user fee charges imposed on all developed properties shall be $4.00 multiplied by the number of ERUs for each customer account. (1)  The number of ERUs that will be utilized to calculate the user fee charge shall be in general accordance with the following: a.  SFR customer class: Each SFR customer account shall be charged 1.0 ERU per month unless one of the conditions outlined below applies. 1.  If two customer accounts are assigned to a SFR property (i.e., a duplex) then each customer account on that parcel will be charged 0.5 ERU per month for billing purposes. 2.  The minimum stormwater user fee charge amount to any eligible customer will be $2.00/ERU/month. 3.  If the SFR property has an impervious surface amount that exceeds 9,000 square feet (or three ERUs) then a customer stormwater user fee bill will be calculated for the customer account using the NSFR user fee charge calculation approach outlined herein. b.  NSFR customer class: Each NSFR customer shall be charged one ERU for each 3,000 square feet, or increment thereof, of impervious surface located on the property to establish the total number of ERUs for billing. Fractional ERUs will be rounded to one decimal place to establish the number of ERUs for billing each month. c.  Undeveloped land customer class: Undeveloped land shall be assigned zero ERUs and will not receive a stormwater user fee bill. (f)  Stormwater user fee charges shall be billed on the customer's monthly public utility bill (except as stipulated below) starting with the first billing cycle in June 2010 as provided in this article and the stormwater utility enterprise fund ordinance. (1)  Customers that do not receive a monthly public utility bill from the city shall be billed for stormwater services via another method and frequency established by the city. (2)  The property owner will be charged for the total impervious surface for residential customer accounts that are part of a larger common development such as multifamily complexes. (3)  The city shall bill the property owner's tenant for the stormwater user fee charge in situations where the tenant has opened an account with the city for public utility services (i.e., water, sewer, and/or sanitation); provided, however, the property owner shall remain ultimately liable for payment of the stormwater user fee charge imposed on the property. The city shall be authorized to bill the landlord or property owner for stormwater services where accurate and equitable apportionment of the user fee charges to multiple accounts on a site is not practical as determined by the city, and/or to facilitate efficient billing and collection of customer user fee charges. (Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-605. - Stormwater user fee charge exemptions. (a)  Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no developed public or private property located in the incorporated area of the city shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. The stormwater utility user fee charge is not a tax and no exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion, disability, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management program services and facilities. (b)  Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: (1)  Parcels which contain 500 square feet, or less, of impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. (2)  Linear railroad rights-of-way (i.e., tracks, rails, roadbed) outside of the defined yard limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by the railroad company associated with rights-of-way and drainage conveyance systems. However, railroad stations, rail yards, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad operations shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. (3)  Sumter County roads and rights-of-way located within the city limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges in situations where Sumter County has legal responsibility to perform all drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities with respect to such roads and rights-of-way. This exemption is in recognition of the drainage system maintenance and capital construction responsibilities undertaken by Sumter County as required in the service delivery strategy dated September 23, 1999. The list of county roads that are exempt from the user fee charges are listed in the service delivery strategy dated September 23, 1999. All other developed property owned by Sumter County shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater user fee charges in accordance with this article. (4)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) roads and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way road and drainage conveyance systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other developed property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. (Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-606. - Stormwater user fee charge credits. (a)  The stormwater utility manager shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the stormwater utility credit manual (credit manual), which is incorporated into this article by reference and made a part hereof. Copies of the credit manual will be maintained by and made available from the stormwater utility manager. (1)  Customers may apply for credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the credit manual. (2)  A stormwater user fee charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the credit manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater user fee charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the credit manual. (3)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater user fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the credit manual and upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the customer. The stormwater utility manager may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the credit manual or this article. (4)  In order to obtain a credit, the customer must make application to the city on forms provided by the stormwater utility manager for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the credit manual. (5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format described in the credit manual. The customer's public utility account must be paid and current prior to review and approval of a stormwater utility credit application by the city. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. (b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the stormwater utility manager, he shall have 30 days from the date the complete application is received to approve the credit in whole, approve the credit in part, or deny the credit. The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. Credits applied for by the customer and approved in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater user fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the credit manual. (Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-607. - Stormwater user fee charge billing, delinquencies, collections, adjustments.     The property owner or utility customer account holder, as identified from city public utility billing database information, tax digest and other public records of Sumter County, shall be obligated to pay the applicable stormwater user fee charge. (1)  Billing. a.  Stormwater user fee charges shall begin to accrue June 1, 2010, and shall be billed prospectively. A bill for stormwater user fee charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the stormwater utility customer of the following items (as a minimum): The stormwater user fee charge amount (less any approved credits); the date the payment is due; and the date when payment is past due. b.  Unless otherwise billed directly to the property owner, the stormwater user fee charge will be billed and collected on a common statement and collected along with other city utility services from the person in whose name such services have been placed on account with the city. If and when the account is closed or becomes delinquent, the bills for unpaid previous service as well as for current and future service shall be sent to the property owner. c.  Frequency of the billing of stormwater user fee charges shall be specified by the city. d.  Failure to receive a bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each developed property subject to stormwater user fee charges shall be ultimately obligated to pay stormwater user fee charges and any interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum on delinquent stormwater user fee charge payments. e.  If a property is unbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of developed property, the stormwater utility may back bill for a period of up to three years, but shall not be entitled to any interest or any delinquency charges during the back billed period. (2)  Delinquencies and collections. a.  Unpaid stormwater service fees shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a writ of fieri facias issued, the unpaid user fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the owner or the property. b.  A late charge shall be assessed against the customer for the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility user fee charge that becomes delinquent in accordance with applicable state law and city ordinance provisions. In addition, the city shall assess all costs of collection, including attorney's fees and court costs, against the property owner. (3)  Adjustments. The stormwater utility manager shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge. a.  If a customer believes his stormwater user fee is incorrect, the customer may seek an adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the stormwater utility manager and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. The customer's public utility account must be paid and current prior to consideration of an adjustment request by the city. b.  Customers requesting the adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide accurate impervious area and other supplemental information to the stormwater utility manager, including, but not limited to, a survey certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer. Submittal of this information will be required if the city staff cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing city aerial photography. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the stormwater utility manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the customer's adjustment request. c.  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information are received by the stormwater utility manager, the stormwater utility manager shall within 30 calendar days render a written decision. d.  In considering an adjustment request, the stormwater utility manager shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater user fee charge for the property is correct. e.  The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. f.  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next stormwater user fee charge bill. (Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-608. - Appeals and hearings. (a)  Appeals. An appeal to the city manager may be taken by any property owner or customer aggrieved by any decision of the stormwater utility manager. The appeal shall be taken within 30 calendar days of the decision of the stormwater utility manager by filing with the city manager a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the stormwater utility manager shall forthwith transmit to the city manager all documentation constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken. (b)  Hearings. The city manager shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give written notice to the appellant at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearing. The city manager shall affirm, reverse, affirm in part, or reverse in part the decision of the stormwater utility manager after hearing the evidence. If the decision of the stormwater utility manager is reversed in whole or in part, resulting in a refund or credit due to the property owner or customer, then such refund or credit shall be calcualted retroactive to the date of the initial appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final, and there shall be no further administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may petition the Superior Court of Sumter County for writ of certiorari. (Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-609. - Severability.     If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. (Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-610. - Repealer.     All ordinances or parts thereof which are in conflict with any provision or any section, subsection, paragraph, provision or clause of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. (Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Secs. 90-611—90-640. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - COMMERCIAL PRETREATMENT 
Sec. 90-641. - Purpose.     The City of Americus enacts this article to set forth uniform requirements for certain users of the sanitary sewer system; to enable the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403); to prevent the introduction of certain pollutants into the sanitary sewer system that will interfere with its operation. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-642. - General provisions; nonapplicability to residential users. (a)  This article pertains to fat, oil and grease (FOG), grit, and any other wastes of commercial origin which may be discharged to the City of Americus sanitary sewer system. The requirements of this article apply to commercial waste from city generators only and not residential users. (b)  For the purposes of this article, wastes of commercial origin are those generated by restaurants, institution kitchens, and other food service establishments, as well as car maintenance, automobile dealerships and car/truck wash facilities. All commercial waste generators involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide an approved fat, oil, grease (FOG) pretreatment system such as a grease trap; provided that the excess FOG is floatable and can be effectively removed. All commercial facilities with vehicle servicing or car washing will be required to provide a pretreatment system such as an oil separator and/or sand trap to remove oil waste prior to discharging to the sanitary sewer. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-643. - Definitions.     Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:     Alternative system. Any approved pretreatment system used in lieu of, including modifications to a standard subsurface system outside the building or an interior type system that is installed other than the Americus Standard System (copy available from the public works department).     Automatic grease recovery unit. Electronic grease removal system used on the interior to collect liquid wastewater from kitchen equipment.     Commercial waste. Nontoxic, nonhazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities. Fats, oil, grease, food scraps and other grease trap contents generated by a food operation or institutional food preparation facility. Any oil waste residue produced from vehicle maintenance or washing that discharges to an oil water separator and/or sand trap.     Commercial waste FOG permit. A permit issued to a transporter for the collection of commercial waste by pumping out, cleaning, or otherwise servicing a grease trap, oil water separator and sand trap.     Disposer. A licensed person or company that receives commercial waste from a transporter for disposal.     Generator. A person or company that produces commercial waste.     Grease trap. A structure or device found in commercial food facilities that separates and retains fats, oil, grease waste prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer system.     Installer. A person or company responsible for a contracted project who, for compensation, undertakes to submit a bid to, or does himself or by others construct, install, alter, repair, or modify a pretreatment system. An installer must be a licensed contractor or master plumber in the State of Georgia possessing the experience, knowledge, skill and ability to provide services pertaining to the installation, construction, alteration, repair and design of a pretreatment system.     Oil water separator. A structure or device installed in commercial facilities to retain and separate oil waste prior to discharge to sanitary sewer.     PDI certification. Plumbing certification given to plumbing equipment, by the plumbing and drainage institute that has passed the institute's testing standards.     Permit. Written authorization granted to a person or company to perform services or discharge commercial waste to the sanitary sewer in the county.     Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.     Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).     Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the sanitary sewer. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.     Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.     Pretreatment system. A grease trap, oil water separator, and sand trap installed to the exterior of the building subsurface or interior at a sink, dishwasher, floor drain, and utility sink to collect and treat commercial wastewater prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer.     Sewage. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present but unintentionally admitted.     Sewer surcharge fee. A fee charged to commercial waste generators for the cost of additional sewer preventative maintenance and program efforts deemed necessary to prevent blockage due to grease in the sewer collection system.     Subsurface. Placement of a pretreatment system below ground or recessed in building floor.     Test manhole. The last discharge point of the pretreatment system and the sampling point for the pretreatment system waste stream.     User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge.     Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-644. - Pretreatment equipment installation, maintenance and grease disposal requirements. (a)  All users of the City of Americus sanitary sewer system involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide approved fat, oil, grease (FOG) removal equipment such as separators or traps, if: (1)  The user generates a wastewater which contains greater than the quantity of FOG permitted in this article division; and/or (2)  The excess FOG is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease separator or trap, then said user shall be required to install an oil/grease separator. (b)  Oil/grease traps shall be required for commercial and industrial establishments where it has been determined by the public works department that they are necessary to prevent discharge to the sewer system in quantities that may adversely affect the operation of the sanitary sewer system. (c)  Alternative pretreatment systems include automatic waste removal equipment and shall be used only after evaluation and authorization by the public works department. (d)  Commercial car and truck washing facilities which discharge to the city sewer shall provide for grit and oil removal as required in these regulations. (e)  All oil/grease separators shall be designed and installed in accordance with city standards. The user shall submit plans to the city for review and comment. The installation shall be subject to the city's inspection prior to placing in service. (f)  Grit and oil/grease separators shall be installed in accordance with the city's plumbing code. (g)  When required by the city, the user shall install a suitable manhole on the discharge to the sewer to allow for observation, sampling and measurement of wastewaters. This manhole shall be installed at the user's expense and shall be maintained to be safe and accessible to the city at all times. (h)  It shall be a violation of these regulations when a person: (1)  Allows commercial waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health or property to spill, overflow or be discharged onto public or private property. (2)  Allows commercial waste to be removed from a facility under his/her control except by a transporter holding a valid and current license/permit for pumping in the State of Georgia. (3)  Allows commercial waste generated at a facility under his/her control to be disposed of at a site not properly permitted to accept such waste. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-645. - Operation and maintenance of pretreatment system. (a)  All oil/grease and grit separators shall be maintained by the user, at the user's expense, in continually efficient operation at all times. The user shall service each separator frequently and repair as necessary, to prohibit the introduction into the system of FOG of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l. The user shall maintain records of said service and make these records available to the public works department upon request. (b)  It shall constitute a violation of this article to introduce chemicals, acidic or caustic substances which emulsify or otherwise temporarily dissolve fats, oils and grease to the extent that it later solidifies in the city sewer system. Use of any other substances, including enzymes and special bacteria is solely at the discretion of the user. Prior to the use of any biological products, the user shall inform the city in writing their intent to add such products to their pretreatment system and provide a material safety data sheet certified by the manufacturer. (c)  The city shall have the authority to prohibit the addition of any substance, including enzymes and bacteria used for maintenance of a grease trap if it is discovered that said substance causes damage to or interferes with the operation or maintenance of the sewer system, creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential hazard to personnel. The utilities director shall maintain a list of substances determined to cause damage to or interferes with the operation or maintenance of the sewer system, creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential hazard to personnel. (d)  If upon inspection, it is determined that a grease trap is in need of cleaning, the only acceptable means shall be to pump out the grease for disposal, as provided elsewhere in this article. Applying heavy doses of chemicals, enzymes or bacteria to the grease trap will not be allowed as a substitute for pumping and removing the material from the trap. (e)  Installation of a mechanical system to continuously or intermittently apply solutions of enzymes, special bacteria or other agents to the sewer shall not be allowed in lieu of an acceptable grease trap. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-646. - Permits. (a)  Construction permit. No portion of a pretreatment system shall be installed, repaired, altered, modified or replaced until a pretreatment construction permit has been issued by the city. A fee will be required for review of plans. Permits issued for new construction shall become void 12 months after the date of issuance if the system has not been installed. However, if building construction has commenced, the system construction permit shall be valid for an additional 90 days beyond the 18-month expiration date. Permits for system repairs shall become void after 90 days from the date of issuance. A construction or repair permit for a pretreatment system shall be transferred to another person if the transferee files an amended application providing all corrected information and proof of ownership of the property or tenant occupancy within 60 days after the transfer of ownership, and all information pertaining to the sitting, location, and installation conditions or repair of a pretreatment system remains the same. There is no fee associated with the processing of the transfer. The date of the construction or repair permit shall not be amended, but shall run from the date of original issuance prior to the transfer. (b)  Construction revision permit. The applicant shall be the permit holder and shall be held responsible for all information supplied to the city. The signed application, site evaluation, and system design plans when required, serve as the basis by which the city determines the issuance of a construction permit. In the event of a change in any information given in the application which served as basis for issuing a construction permit, the permit holder will immediately file an amended application detailing such changed conditions. If the new conditions are determined to be in compliance with city engineering standards, the construction permit shall be amended. If the new conditions are determined to be in noncompliance with the city engineering standards, the permit shall no longer be valid. (c)  Commercial waste permit. A commercial waste permit shall be required by any commercial waste generator discharging to the city sanitary sewer. The permit will be valid for one year from the date of issuance and is not transferable. (d)  The permit must be placed in a location visible to inspections. If the owner of a pretreatment system remains the same but the ownership of the building changes, a site tenant is still operating within the permit guidelines. No new building tenant shall open for business until the city has approved the change of tenancy, and inspected the pretreatment system to see if it is still within the guidelines of the original operating permit (see subsection (c) of this section, commercial waste permits issuance). (e)  Voiding a permit. If the system is improperly modified or damaged, the city shall undertake administrative action to revoke the permit. The city shall prohibit the further or continued use of a system when the permit has become void. The contractor, engineer or licensed plumber will be responsible to do a permit revision and present corrected plans for review. If a larger system is required based on project modifications, another final inspection will be required once the system installation has been completed. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-647. - Pretreatment inspections. (a)  New construction. Before covering with earth and before placing a pretreatment system into service, a person/company installing or constructing any portion of a pretreatment system shall notify the city 48 hours prior to completion of the construction activities and shall have the system inspected by the city for compliance with the requirements of this article. A final inspection fee will be required. The city shall make every reasonable effort to make a complete inspection of system construction, modification, replacement or alteration within two working days after notification to the city that the system is ready for inspection. A repair shall be inspected by the city to determine compliance with construction permit standards prior to final covering of the system. If the system constructed is approved by the city, an "inspection approval" notice will be given to the installer. If the system installation does not pass the construction inspection, then the installer shall make all required corrections and notify the city within seven days for a re-inspection of the system. A re-inspection fee shall be charged to the installer for additional inspection(s) if the contractor has failed to correct the items an inspector has required at the preliminary inspection. Final installation approval shall not be granted until the city has confirmed that the installation is in compliance with plans and specifications submitted with the permit application. If no final construction inspection can be documented of the commercial waste generators pretreatment system, then the certificate of occupancy on the project will not be released by the building inspector. (b)  Existing pretreatment systems. The city will perform an annual inspection of all pretreatment systems permitted to operate in the city. The inspections will be conducted to make sure the commercial waste generator is following the maintenance criteria set forth in this article and the waste generator is operating under the conditions of the permit. Those facilities found in noncompliance will be required to correct all violations within seven days of notification. However, if the violation requires a repair, replacement or installation of a pretreatment system, then the commercial waste generator will have 15 days to comply. All repairs, replacement and installations will require approval by the city. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-648. - Right of entry; inspection and sampling.     The public works department shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the utilities director or designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. (1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the public works department will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. (2)  The public works department shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. (3)  The public works department may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least monthly to ensure their accuracy and records of calibrations shall be kept and made available to the public works department upon request. (4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the public works department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. (5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the public works department for access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-649. - Location and installation. (a)  Pretreatment systems will be located and installed as close as reasonably possible to the discharge source of the commercial waste. (b)  A subsurface pretreatment system must be located or installed no more than 50 feet from the discharge source. A subsurface pretreatment system installed beyond 50 feet must have approval by the city. (c)  Pretreatment systems will be located and installed so that proper maintenance of the system does not create sanitary nuisances or health hazards and does not impact the environment. (d)  Pretreatment systems must be located and installed so that they are accessible for maintenance. No heavy kitchen equipment, canisters, dumpster or trash compactor can block access to the pretreatment system. (e)  Interior grease traps will be installed at the point source such as a three- to four-compartment sink, dishwasher, or any kitchen equipment where grease must be collected prior to discharge to building waste line. Interior grease traps will be located above the floor. Recessed grease traps must have prior approval for installation. All interior grease traps must have a flow control valve and a vent. The flow control valve shall be placed on the inlet side of the grease trap. The vent line will take all odors out of the building. (f)  Pretreatment systems installed and located that experience a rusting of parts (e.g., pretreatment system located under a kitchen sink) which may impair the opening of the system for inspection, will require the commercial waste generator to provide access to the system. If the commercial waste generator cannot provide access, then they will be in violation. Inspector can require the unit replaced if it has deteriorated from corrosion. (g)  Pretreatment systems installed and located to the outside of a building will discharge to the sanitary sewer line. The test manhole is the last discharge point of the pretreatment system before the sanitary sewer. The sanitary sewer connection from the pretreatment system will not be allowed to connect to the site sanitary sewer line by going under or through the building. The connection to the sanitary sewer line must be kept to the exterior of the building structure. The connection from the building to the pretreatment system will be a direct straight line. One, 90- or 45-degree angle will be allowed with a clean out if a straight line is not obtainable. The test manhole will be located a maximum of four feet from the last tank in the pretreatment system and must have an invert in the test manhole. Prefab concrete or brick construction is allowed. (h)  All pretreatment systems installed subsurface in multi-level parking decks must be located on the ground level of the structure and must be located so they are accessible for maintenance and inspection. (i)  Installation of interior pretreatment system will be allowed for commercial waste generators where the following criterion is met: Food Service Establishment Interior Grease Trap Size: Minimum 40 lb. Maximum 200 lb. Coffee/Sandwich Shop (no foods prepared) Waste from by products, cream and milk Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Daycare/Preschool Centers (no hot food prepared; all food reheated in microwave, no commercial kitchen) Waste from clean-up Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Delicatessen (no hot food served, no meat cooked Waste from clean-up cold foods, salads Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Doughnut Shop (retail only) Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Waste from clean-up and handling area, none, if written declaration required that no hot food will be prepared or served Fish Shop (retail) no cooking on-site scales, fish guts Grease Trap 70 lb. minimum capacity Gas Stations with food service (sandwich shop, no hot food preparation) Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Waste from clean-up and handling area Hotel (reheating food in microwave; continental breakfast; kitchen equipment limited) Waste from clean-up Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Hotel (no cooking on-site; no hot foods served) Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Waste from clean-up and handling area, none, if written declaration required that no hot food will be prepared or served Movie Theater (with food service, reheat in microwave) Waste from clean-up Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Pizza Cooking (reheating) no preparation or washing up on-site; pizza heated in retail container and sold for consumption Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Waste from clean-up and handling area, none, if written declaration required that no hot food will be prepared or served. Shopping Centers (retail strip mall) Grease, solids grease trap determined by tenant, type of food service. Take-Out Food Service (cold food preparation) Waste from clean-up Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity  (j)  Installation of alternative interior pretreatment system will be allowed for commercial waste generators where an upgrade, repair or installation of a pretreatment system is required and a subsurface system is not possible. However, the commercial waste generator must meet the following criteria for an alternative pretreatment system to be installed: (1)  The facility must be located in an existing building structure 15 years or older, where written documentation is submitted by a licensed engineer, contractor or master plumber to verify a subsurface pretreatment system is impossible to install due to existing underground utilities; (2)  The facility is not located in new commercial development; (3)  The facility provides written documentation by a licensed engineer, contractor or master plumber that the sanitary sewer tie in of a subsurface pretreatment cannot be reached by the installer. (k)  Installation of alternative interior pretreatment system will be allowed for commercial waste generators where an upgrade, repair or installation of a pretreatment system is required and a subsurface system is not possible. However, the commercial waste generator must meet the following criteria for an alternative pretreatment system to be installed: (1)  The facility must be located in an existing building structure 15 years or older, where written documentation is submitted by a licensed engineer, contractor or master plumber to verify a subsurface pretreatment system is impossible to install due to existing underground utilities; (2)  The facility is not located in new commercial development; (3)  The facility provides written documentation by a licensed engineer, contractor or master plumber that the sanitary sewer tie in of a subsurface pretreatment cannot be reached by the installer; (4)  The facility's pretreatment system is found to be inadequate and an alternative system will upgrade the current pretreatment system to bring the facility into compliance. (l)  Any subsurface pretreatment system requiring installation of more than one single tank will lace the tanks in tandem; one single line. The multiple tanks must be installed so the commercial waste from the building will flow from tank to tank. The distance from tank to tank will not be greater than 12 inches. (m)  The city reserves the right to assess a sewer surcharge fee on a commercial waste generators for the cost of additional sewer collection system frequency and magnitude of cleaning that may be required as determined by the utilities director to prevent stoppages or backups due to commercial waste generators where a required upgrade, repair or installation of a pretreatment system is not completed and/or a subsurface system is not possible pursuant to the requirements of this article. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-650. - Design of pretreatment system.     Oil water separators, grease traps, and sand traps will be required for commercial and industrial establishments as a pretreatment system where it is determined by the city that they are necessary to prevent oil and grease waste discharge to the sanitary sewer system in quantities that may adversely affect the operation of the sewer system. The user shall submit plans to the city for review and comment. The installation shall be subject to the city's inspection prior to placing in service. (1)  All subsurface pretreatment systems must comply with the engineering standards indicated on the standard detail, as well as the current plumbing code used by the city. (2)  For the sizing of pretreatment systems by specific generators source the following calculations are required to be submitted by a licensed engineer or master plumber: a.  Restaurant facilities: (S) × (GS) × HR / 12 × (LF) = Grease Interceptor capacity in gallons S = Number of seats in dining area GS = Gallons of wastewater per seat (use 15 gallons per seat)* HR = Number of hours open LR = Loading factor — 1.25 Interstate freeways 1.0 Other freeways 1.0 Recreational areas Example: Restaurant with 100 seats open 12 hours a day next to a recreational facility.  (100) × (15) × 12 / 12 × (1.0) = 1,500 gal. capacity b.  Hospitals, nursing homes, schools and other commercial kitchens with varied seating capacity: (M) × (GM) × (LF) × (SC) } = Grease interceptor capacity in gallons / 1500 M = Meals per day GM = Gallons of wastewater per seat (use 5 gallons per meal) LF = Loading factor:  1.0 with dishwashing  0.5 without dishwashing SC = storage capacity factor:  1.0 for Public sewer  2.5 for on-site septic disposal Example: School facility w/252 cafeteria seat capacity (3) meals served per/day 3(252) = 756 (756) × (5) × (1.0) = 3780 / 1,500 = 2.52 (Number of Interceptors) (3) 1,500 grease interceptors needed Nursing home w/120 beds, meals served per/day varies (120) × (5) × (1.0) = 1,500 / 1,500 = 1 (1) 1500 grease interceptor needed c.  Commercial car/truck wash facility, gas stations w/carwashes: (without reclaim system) (HR) × (C/HR) × (GAL USED/C) = GAL/DAY Minus (-) (HR) × (C/HR) × (GAL LOST/C) = GAL/DAY } = Oil Interceptor capacity / 1,500= Oil interceptor capacity (gallons) HR = Hours of Operation C/HR = Cars per Hour GAL/USED = Gallons of Wastewater Used per Car (Based on system design specifications) GAL/LOST = Gallons of Wastewater Lost per Car (Based on system design specifications) Example: Carwash is open 12 hours. System can wash 10 cars per hour. System uses 35 gallons of wastewater per car, but loses 8 gallons of wastewater per car. (12) × (10) × (35) = 4200 Used gal. wastewater/day (12) × (10) × (8) = -960 Lost gal. wastewater/day 3240 Gallons Capacity   3,240 / 1,500 = (2) oil interceptors needed for carwash area Example: Carwash Calculation reclaimed water: Average hours of operation = 12.5 13 hours Mon—Sat = 15 Hrs Sun = 10 Hrs  25 Hrs>  Number of cars washed daily 250 Cars Number of Cars washed hourly (250) / 13  = 19 Cars Gallons of wastewater used per car 35 gallons Gallons of wastewater reclaimed per car 30 gallons (13) × (19) × (35) = 8,645 used gal wastewater/day (13) × (19) × (30) - (minus) = 7,410 reclaimed wastewater/day  1,235 gallons of wastewater backwashed to sewer> 1/1500 gallon oil separator required for collection of backwash to sewer (2) 3,000 gallon tanks used for reclaim system ( 7410/3000 = 2.47).  d.  Determine seating capacity to calculate grease interceptor size: AREA / 15 = Approximate seating capacity (S) = AREA / 15 - Square footage of designated food space - Factor to be used to calculate seating capacity (S) × (GM) × (2.5) × (LF) = Grease Interceptor capacity in gallons. Example: A grocery store is 69,000 sq.ft. An area of 4,000 sq. ft., is designated for their food court area. 4,000 / 15 = 266.6 (267) Seating Capacity (267) × (5) × (2.5) × (1.0) = 3,338 / 1,500 = 2.2 (2) 1,500 grease interceptors needed Grocery stores will have a minimum (1) 1,500 grease trap. If additional eating facilities will be located in store similar to a food court area, store will be sized based on square footage of food area and seating capacity. Individual restaurants may be required to install pretreatment for their space. (3)  Systems currently installed will not change unless the pretreatment system is found to be: a.  Inadequate for the facility's current operation. b.  In violation due to a commercial waste generator failing to provide documentation for maintenance of the current system and an inspection reveals an upgrade or repair is required. c.  Located in a spill area and the commercial waste generator has failed to maintain the pretreatment system, which results in a fine from the city or clean-up is required and an inspection reveals the current system is inadequate or in need of repair. d.  Installed incorrectly and not per plumbing code used by the city or engineering standards. The existing system shall be corrected where possible. If unable to correct, then the system must be replaced. (4)  Subsurface pretreatment systems will have manhole covers over the inlet and outlet of the system. The concrete lid of tank will have circular openings for the placement of manhole covers. The manhole covers must be at least two feet in diameter. All openings on the pretreatment system will be core drilled. (5)  Any 3,000-gallon pretreatment system can be installed in two sections provided the center section has been sealed properly where no leakage can occur. The maximum size for any single tank installation will be 3,000 gallons on commercial sites where a greater system is not required for spill containment. All 3,000-gallon tanks shall have a minimum of two manhole openings for access to the tanks for cleaning and inspection. The subsurface pretreatment system will be made of prefab concrete tanks or its equivalent and will be a solid continuous structure where no sealing or binding of the middle section of the tank is allowed. The tank cannot be fabricated in two sections on tanks less than 1,500 gallons. A baffle wall is required in the tanks and the baffle wall must be fabricated as a permanent fixture. A slide structure will not be allowed as a baffle wall. A three-inch to five-inch diameter hole in the baffle wall must have a PVC elbow pipe turned down a maximum two feet from the bottom of the tank. (6)  A subsurface pretreatment system will have a standard manhole suitable for observation, sampling and measurement of wastewater. This manhole shall be installed at the user's expense and shall be maintained to be safe and accessible to the city at all times. This manhole is called the test manhole and is considered part of the overall pretreatment system. (7)  Subsurface pretreatment systems installed must be certified as a grease trap or an oil water separator. A septic system will not be allowed in lieu of the required pretreatment system. Interior pretreatment systems must have PDI certification (or certification approved by the public works department) and the gallon (GMP) capacity must be labeled on the unit. To verify type and size of tank purchased, an inspector can request a copy of the invoice for the pretreatment system installed. (8)  All pretreatment systems that are subsurface will be brought to finished grade using pre-cast concrete cones. Brick work will also be allowed if the depth is no more than four feet to reach grade. The depth of the pretreatment system will determine how the brick work should be built. The standard core hole in the top of a pre-cast pretreatment system lid is two feet. The brick work will be three feet in diameter around the core opening. The three-foot base will allow entry to the pretreatment system for maintenance. When using bricks, once 80 percent of the height has been achieved to the two-foot manhole opening, you must corbel in the brickwork in small increments. (9)  An alternative interior pretreatment system shall be used only after evaluation and authorization by the city. Any alternative pretreatment system unit authorized by the city for use must have product support for maintenance and operation of the system. The equipment must be available for sale and the supply must be readily available for installation. The use of an alternative system will require established procedures for routine maintenance, operational surveillance, and environmental monitoring to assure the system continues to function properly. Any fees incurred for quality assurance of this unit will be the total responsibility of the commercial waste generator. The sizing of the grease trap will be based on the manufacturer's recommendations, but it must be equivalent to a subsurface pretreatment system gallon capacity where required. (10)  A grease trap is used for the collection of kitchen waste discharge only. No can wash areas, no dumpster, no mop sinks, no food grinders and no floor drains in mechanical rooms, bathrooms, or discharge from food coolers. Commercial waste generators that have micro-brewery facilities may be subject to additional discharge requirements. (11)  Installation of a mechanical system to continuously or intermittently apply solutions of enzymes, special bacteria or other agents to the sewer shall not be allowed in lieu of an acceptable pretreatment system. (12)  It shall constitute a violation of this article to introduce chemicals, acidic or caustic substances which emulsify or otherwise temporarily dissolve fats, oils and grease to the extent that it later solidifies in the city sewer lines. If a commercial waste generator uses enzymes and bacteria for pretreatment maintenance and it is discovered that said substances causes damage to or interferes with the operation or maintenance of the sewer system, creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential health hazard, then these additives will be prohibited. Use of any other substances, including special enzymes and bacteria is solely at the discretion of the commercial waste generator. (13)  Grit, sand traps and oil water separators shall be installed in accordance with the current official plumbing code used by the city engineering standards. (14)  Any strip retail shopping center or office building showing subsurface pretreatment systems at designated buildings or structures will only be allowed discharge by a single tenant or food service to that system. No multiple users will be allowed. The only exception to this condition is a shopping mall with a food court where pretreatment systems are installed and maintained by the mall corporation or management leasing. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-651. - Maintenance of pretreatment systems. (a)  Pretreatment systems shall be maintained by the commercial waste generator at their expense, to assure continually efficient operation at all times. The commercial waste generator shall maintain records of said service and make available all records to the city upon request. The commercial waste generator must service their pretreatment system frequently or repair their system to maintain the following: (1)  A 25-percent tank retention capacity rule (the 25 percent rule requires that the depth of oil and grease (floating and settled) in a trap shall not be equal to or greater than 25 percent of the total operating depth of the trap. The operating depth of the trap is determined by measuring the internal depth of the tank. If the tank is measured with more than two feet of floating top solids or more than two feet of settled solids, the tank is in violation). (2)  A top sludge cap less than two feet in tank. (3)  A suspended solids content of less than two feet on the bottom of tank. (4)  A pretreatment system able to maintain a daily discharge limit of 250 mg/l to sanitary sewer. (5)  A pretreatment system where no sludge deposits of grease or oil waste accumulate in a test manhole or create a grease/oil waste stream to the sanitary sewer. (6)  A pretreatment system that does not create any obnoxious odors and poses no threat to public health and welfare. (7)  A pretreatment system that does not cause back-ups to kitchen sinks or any interior kitchen or building plumbing. (8)  A pretreatment system that causes no manhole overflows no accumulation of oil/grease in the city sanitary sewer system. (b)  The following maintenance schedule shall be required for pretreatment systems operating in the city; however, commercial pretreatment inspectors shall have the authority to adjust any facility's maintenance schedule if upon inspection it is determined the maintenance schedule of the pretreatment system is not controlling the discharge of grease/oil waste to the sanitary sewer: (1)  Subsurface systems (grease trap, oil water separator, sand trap): Gallon Capacity Maintenance Required Time Period Type/Size Number Frequency Exterior 1,000—1,500 Gal. 1 Every 3 months Exterior 1,500 Gal. 2-4 Every 6 months Exterior 3,000 Gal. 1 Every 6 months  (2)  Interior systems (grease trap, oil separator, sand trap): 40 lb.—50 lb. Total Pump out—Monthly. 70 lb.—200 lb. Total Pump out—Every 3 months. (3)  Automatic grease recovery systems (grease trap): -35 GPM daily maintenance of solids container—Total pump out of unit to remove solids. Check system weekly—Every three months to make sure system is operating correctly. (c)  New commercial waste generators that are permitted for new pretreatment installation shall be required to provide the city with a notarized statement for the maintenance of their pretreatment system based on the maintenance schedule stated in this article. (d)  Commercial waste generators located in an area that have experienced a spill where a city sanitary sewer system has been impacted or a manhole has overflowed due to grease/oil accumulation must provide the city with a maintenance schedule to prevent this from occurring again. If the maintenance schedule is found to be inadequate or does not adhere to the maintenance schedule required by the city for that specific pretreatment system, the city shall have the right to amend that commercial waste generators' maintenance schedule to control any further commercial waste discharge that could impact the sanitary sewer system, manhole or pretreatment system. (e)  Any commercial waste generator(s) found to be in violation for failure to maintain their pretreatment system in a spill area shall be assessed one-half the cost for clean-up and/or fined by the city due to commercial waste impacting the environment or sanitary sewer system. Additional fines may be imposed by the state. (f)  Any commercial waste generator found not adhering to any maintenance standards as established by this article will be in violation. (g)  Any commercial waste generator requesting a deviation from a pretreatment system maintenance schedule as stated in this article shall submit their request in writing. The written request must include documentation that verifies that the pretreatment system has been operating in accordance with this article for a year and the modification of the maintenance schedule will not change the compliance status of the pretreatment system. (h)  A commercial waste generator who operates a food service in their establishment, but the food service is not considered their main business income may be required to cease their food operation if they violate any parts of this article and may be assessed a sewer surcharge fee for the cost of additional sewer collection system frequency and magnitude of cleaning that may be required as determined by the utilities director to prevent stoppages or backups due to commercial waste generators where a required upgrade, repair, or installation of a pretreatment system is not completed and/or a subsurface system is not possible pursuant to the requirements of this article. Once the generator has come into compliance the food service operation can resume. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-652. - Manifests for commercial waste disposal. (a)  A commercial waste generator shall not allow a transporter to remove waste from their facility without a current commercial waste hauler permit issued by the state or local governing authority. In addition they: (1)  Shall not permit a transporter to remove commercial waste from their premises until the transporter has presented a nonhazardous manifest to the generator to document pumping activity. This manifest will require signatures from the generator, transporter and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. The manifest should be a multi-copy form. (2)  Shall ensure the manifest form used to document the transportation and disposal of commercial waste generated in the city contains the following information as a minimum: a.  Generator information: 1.  Name and physical address of facility. 2.  Volume of waste pumped. 3.  Date and time of pumping activity. 4.  Signature of authorized representative. 5.  Print name. b.  Transporter information: 1.  Name and physical address of company. 2.  City or issued commercial waste FOG permit. 3.  Driver certification number. 4.  Volume of waste pumped. 5.  Name and signature of driver. 6.  Print name. c.  Disposer information: 1.  Name and physical address of facility. 2.  State, city or federal permit number of site. 3.  Volume of waste received. 4.  Signature of authorized representative. 5.  Print name. Upon receipt of the completed copy of the manifest from the transporter, the generator must mail a copy of the manifest within five days to the following: The City of Americus Georgia Department of Public Works 229 Railroad Street Americus, Georgia 31709 Attn: FOG Inspectors (3)  Shall accurately complete and sign the generator information section of the manifest to ensure that the transporter has noted on the manifest, the number of gallons of waste removed; and verify the generator information is correct. (4)  Shall keep a copy of all manifests for a period of three years on-site and shall make available for inspection by the city. (5)  Shall report any spills to the city upon becoming aware of a spill that could impact, any surrounding areas such as storm drains, adjacent streams or ground surface where the transporter has removed waste from the facility's pretreatment system. Failure to notify the city of a spill will constitute a violation and fines will be assessed to the commercial waste generator as well as the transporter. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-653. - Commercial waste permit issuance.     An annual permit will be required for all pretreatment systems existing and new. A fee will be charged for this permit. The permit fee will be based on the type of pretreatment system at the site. Failure to apply for a commercial waste permit shall be a violation of this article. The generator's environmental health department food service permit may be suspended by the Sumter County Health Department until the permit is obtained. (1)  All commercial waste permits shall be issued annually in conjunction with the business license renewal process. The following types of pretreatment system sizes shall be the basis for the fee schedule to be determined by the mayor and council and posted or maintained by the city clerk or the utilities director:  Annual permit fee shall be based on the type of facility. Pretreatment Size Type 1—5 tanks Subsurface system (exterior) 6—10 tanks Subsurface system (exterior) 11—15 tanks Subsurface system (exterior) 10—100 pounds (1—2 units) Manual (interior) 20—35 GPM (1—2 units) Automatic Grease Recovery Combination of systems Subsurface manual and automatic grease recovery  (2)  Permit conditions shall include, but are not limited to the following: a.  Permit duration. b.  Permit fee. c.  Permit transfer. d.  Frequency of inspections. e.  Pretreatment requirements. f.  Maintenance requirements. g.  Compliance schedules. h.  Requirements for maintenance records and submission of reports. i.  Right of entry. j.  Review of upgrades or repairs of a pretreatment system. k.  Other conditions deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinance, laws and regulations. (3)  Commercial hauler vehicle inspection and permit. A commercial waste hauler permit is required for all transporters operating in the city. If the transporter does not already have a permit issued by a local government authority, the city will issue a permit. The commercial waste transporter must meet the following criteria: a.  Operate a vehicle that is registered with the State of Georgia as a commercial vehicle. The vehicle must have a combined gross weight of 10,001 pounds or more and have a USDOT registration number and must conform to all 49 CFR transportation rules and the trucks container must meet the DOT rule for the type of material being transported; b.  The transporter must register with the environmental protection division and obtain a FOG number and permit; c.  The transporter must contact the public works department to schedule their truck or trucks to be inspected; and d.  The transporter on the day of inspection shall provide proof of the aforementioned information and pay a permit fee based on EPD rules. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-654. - Abandonment of systems. (a)  Wherever the use of a subsurface pretreatment system is discontinued due to a business closing or relocating, and the system is connected to the sanitary sewer, the commercial waste generator shall follow the following procedure: (1)  Contact the public works department (229-924-7111) before vacating the property. (2)  Resolve all outstanding violations. (3)  Clean the pretreatment system before vacating the business and submit a manifest to the city to substantiate the cleaning of the system. (b)  If the commercial waste generator fails to clean the pretreatment system and/or resolve outstanding violations it shall be considered a violation of this article. Management or property leasing will be notified. No commercial waste generator shall be allowed to occupy the facility until it is brought into compliance. If the existing pretreatment system is not adequate based on the new business operation, then the new commercial waste generator shall upgrade the pretreatment system. If the building or tenant space vacated will not be used for another commercial waste generator, then management leasing or the building owner shall follow the following tank abandonment procedures: (1)  Collapse tank or fill pretreatment system with sand. (2)  Seal over manholes so they are no longer accessible. (3)  Disconnect or reroute the kitchen waste line from the building to the pretreatment system. (4)  Contact the city to inspect the abandoned system prior to a new business opening. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-655. - Construction prohibitions.     It shall be the responsibility of persons under this rule to see that work contracted for and performed by them or under their supervision is carried out in conformance with the requirements of the city engineering standards and this article. Persons contracted for installation of pretreatment systems must be a licensed contractor or master plumber in the State of Georgia and their license must be current. Inspectors shall have the authority to request a copy of the license when approving all pretreatment system installations. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-656. - Construction violations.     The following will constitute a construction violation: (1)  No contractor shall construct, alter, modify, repair or install a pretreatment system without receiving a permit from the city; (2)  No contractor shall install, modify or repair a pretreatment system which will violate standards set forth in this article, without evidence that a variance has been granted; (3)  No contractor shall perform services which will cause or increase the likelihood of pollution to sanitary sewer and pose a threat to the health and safety of the public; (4)  Each contractor shall be responsible for maintaining records of services as required by this article and provide a copy of those records to the city upon request. Example of this would be an invoice verifying the purchase of the pretreatment system; (5)  Contractor initiating work to install, upgrade, or repair a system where no permit has been issued by the city. A permit is issued after construction is started but prior to completion of the contracted work. No site inspections performed; (6)  Contracted work is completed without a permit having been issued, or no permit application was received until contracted work was completed, resulting in missed inspection(s); (7)  Failure to call for required inspection(s); (8)  Abandoning, without good cause, a project in which the contractor is engaged or is under contractual obligation to perform. The failure of a contractor to perform work without just cause for 90 consecutive days shall create a presumption that the contractor has abandoned the project; (9)  Gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct which causes monetary or other harm to a customer or physical harm to any person. Example of such a violation would be the illegal disposal of a generator's waste when repairing a pretreatment system. (10)  Pretreatment system is not installed by a license contractor or master plumber. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-657. - Notification of violation.     When the public works department finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a commercial waste permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works department may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 15 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the public works, department. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the public works department to take emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-658. - Penalties.     When the public works department finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a commercial waste permit or any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works department may issue a citation to such user a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00, or the maximum civil penalty permissible whichever is greater for each violation and each day a violation continues, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. Citations shall be issued when the commercial waste generator fails to correct the same violation after a notice of violation has been issued. Any civil penalties issued will be required to be paid in 30 days from the day of issuance of the citation. A citation must be in writing and must describe the particular nature of the violation, including specific references to the provisions of this article violated and the time frame for correction. Refusal of the citation will not negate its issuance. (1)  Failure by user/generator to pay the designated citation 30 business days after citation has been issued shall result in the revocation of the generator's commercial waste permit. (2)  Issuance of a citation shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action. (3)  The following shall be considered violations of this article and the user, responsible person or company will be assessed civil penalties accordingly: a.  A licensed contractor, engineer or plumber who installs, modifies, or repairs a pretreatment system without a pretreatment permit, or is working on the installation of a pretreatment system, and obtains a permit after work has commenced. No inspections performed. b.  Commercial waste generator who has a pretreatment system installed without submitting plans for review; no permit application is received or on file and installation of system is completed. No final inspections of project performed. c.  Failure to call for required inspection(s) when a renovation or upgrade of a pretreatment system is required. d.  Commercial waste generator is in violation for failure to maintain their pretreatment system. e.  Commercial waste generator fails to provide the city with a manifest or maintenance documentation for their pretreatment system. f.  Commercial waste generator fails to inform the city a spill has occurred during pumping of a pretreatment system and it impacts the sanitary sewer, storm drain or environment. g.  Commercial waste generator fails to apply for the required commercial waste permit for a pretreatment system in the city. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-659. - Criminal penalties.     For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City of Americus, Public Works Department may issue a citation to the user, generator or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-660. - Administrative appeal.     Any person aggrieved by a decision or determination of the city public works department shall appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or determination to the mayor and city council or their designee and shall be entitled to a hearing within 45 days of receipt of the written appeal. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-661. - Judicial review.     Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city public works department after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Sumter County. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-662. - Fee schedule for commercial pretreatment.     A fee schedule shall be determined and modified as needed by the mayor and council and shall be posted or maintained by the city clerk or the utilities director. The following services shall be assessed a fee: (1)  Plan review for pretreatment system (new construction, existing facility renovation). (2)  Plan review (permit revision), (project changes for previously approved plan). (3)  Site evaluation of a pretreatment system (under change of operation or ownership). (4)  Re-inspection fee for modifications, repair and replacement of existing pretreatment systems in violation. (5)  New pretreatment system installation inspection (new construction). (6)  Re-inspection fee for new construction installation per visit. (7)  Revision to commercial waste permit during a permit year. (8)  A copy of permit inspection report (reissued), (new construction). (9)  Commercial hauler vehicle inspection and permit. (10)  Sewer surcharge fee for additional system cleaning resulting from the failure to maintain or install an adequate pretreatment system pursuant to this article. (Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Secs. 90-663—90-685. - Reserved. 
Chapter 94 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 94-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building.     Adult day care means a community-based program which provides nonmedical care, consisting primarily of social and recreational activities for persons aged 60 and over where such persons are in need of limited personal care assistance, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of normal daily living, or for the protection of such persons on less than a 24-hour basis. If necessary, such program and facility shall be appropriately licensed by the state.     Adult family day care center means adult day care business located in a private residence operated by the owner or a lessee of such private residence who receives consideration in return for the supervision and care of adults for a period of time of less than 24 hours per day for not more than six adults. If necessary, such day care shall be appropriately licensed by the state.     Adult group day care center means adult day care business located in a facility other than a private residence that provides supervision and care for consideration paid to the facility for a time period of less than 24 hours per day, for seven or more adults. If necessary, such day care center shall be appropriately licensed by the state.     Advertising signs means any freestanding or partly or wholly attached structure displayed for the purpose of conveying some information, knowledge, or idea to the public.     Alteration of building means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, beams, columns, girders, except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or of a building from one location to another.     Aquaculture is the farming of aquatic organisms such as fish, crustaceans, mollusks, and aquatic plants.     Boardinghouse means a dwelling with lodging for three or more persons where meals are regularly prepared and served to the residents thereof for compensation, and where food is placed upon a table family style, without service or ordering of individual portions from a menu. The owner of the residential structure is required to live in the structure as his personal residence in order for the residential structure to be classified as a boardinghouse.     Building or structure means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.     Building, accessory, means a building subordinate or supplemental to the main building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to that of a main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith.     Building, nonresidential accessory, means a subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the principal use or structure, the use of such subordinate structure being for storage, supplies, or other approved uses. Accessory buildings shall be constructed in accord with requirements of the city building code, provided that no mobile home or mobile office, whether or not placed upon a permanent foundation, nor any truck or trailer bodies may be used as an accessory building. Accessory buildings shall meet and comply with all existing building setback requirements of this Code. Buildings should be constructed of material similar to the principal structure or compatible with surrounding architecture, and which would not be obtrusive to the area, adjoining property owners, or from any street.     Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is located.     Carwash means an area of land and/or a structure with machine or hand-operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles.     Centerline of street means that the line surveyed and monumented by the city council shall be the centerline of the street, or if such a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of such street.     Child or children means any person under 18 years of age for whom day care service is provided in a home. For the purpose of these rules, the term shall not include children that are related to the registrant or children whose parents or guardians reside in the same residence, or children for whom no pay, either in cash or in kind, is received.     Child day care center means a licensed child care business that provides supervision and care for more than four hours per day, but fewer than 24 hours per day for 19 or more children.     Child family day care center means a private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care for more than four hours per day, but fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, three but not more than six, children under 18 years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence.     Child group day care center means a licensed private residence or a separate facility operated by any person who receives therein pay for supervision and care for more than four hours per day, but fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, seven, but not more than 18 children under 18 years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence.     Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common elements with other owners of a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential building. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. For the purpose of this Code, a condominium shall be further defined as provided in O.C.G.A. § 44-3-71, as amended.     Condominium dwelling means an individually owned dwelling unit in an attached, detached, or multifamily structure, combined with joint ownership of common area of the buildings and grounds.     Congregate housing means a single detached residential facility for four or more elderly persons within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services and room cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other services, including, but not limited to, transportation to routine social and medical appointments, and counseling. Such housing shall not include housing for persons needing medical treatment or institutional longterm or shortterm care. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "elderly person" means a person over 62 years of age.     Customary home occupation means a gainful occupation or profession for gain or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises (except that such family may employ not more than two nonfamily members to work in the business), conducted entirely within the principal building or in a rear building accessory thereto, and requiring only customary home equipment, provided that not more than 30 percent of the floor area of the principal building is used for such purpose and the total combined floor area of any building used for such purpose on the property does not exceed 500 square feet. A customary home occupation shall not be permitted where, as a result of the activity or activities arising out of the customary home occupation, a change is made or required to be made in the outside appearance of the dwelling or any other building located upon said property; where any outside activity visible from the street in connection with such occupation is permitted or required; where traffic, parking, sewage, or water use in excess of what is normal in the neighborhood is or may be generated; where any noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, electrical interference, or nuisances as defined under this Code is or may be created; or where engaging in the occupation results in or is likely to result in the storage of anything related to the business outside the principal dwelling or any other building located on the property. Any customary home occupation in existence as of June 20, 1988, shall continue to be authorized until such time as such customary home occupation ceases, but any new customary home occupation, whether upon property presently having a customary home occupation or not having a customary home occupation, shall be subject to the provisions of the article from which this section derives.     Dwelling unit means a dwelling or portion thereof providing complete living facilities for one complete housekeeping unit.     Dwelling, multifamily, means a building or portion thereof used for occupancy by four or more families living independently of each other and containing four or more dwelling units.     Dwelling, single-family, attached, multifamily, duplex, triplex, condominium or townhouse means one of two or more residential buildings having a common or party wall separating dwelling units.     Dwelling, single-family, detached, means a structure containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use that meets or exceeds the following standards: (1)  The house must be attached to a permanent foundation that is approved by the city's building official. A complete perimeter enclosure is required that will match or coordinate with other conventional foundations in the neighborhood and conform to the city's building code. (2)  The roof shall have a pitch equal to or greater than the average pitch on the roofs of all single-family dwellings within a 500-foot radius, and in no case shall the roof have a pitch of less than a ratio of 4:12, that is four feet of rise for every 12 feet of horizontal run. All roofs shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, or other material approved by the city's building official. (3)  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl, vinyl-covered, or other materials of like appearance with surrounding dwellings. (4)  The dwelling unit must have an overhang or soffit equal to or greater than the average overhang or soffit on single-family dwellings within a 500-foot radius, and in no case shall the overhang or soffit be less than 12 inches to ensure adequate ventilation. (5)  At each exit door, there must be a permanent porch or landing that extends outward from the structure a minimum of 48 inches by 48 inches. (6)  The dwelling must contain the minimum square footage as required by the regulation of the zone in which it is located. (See section 94-193(1).) (7)  The board may approve variances from one or more of the developmental or architectural standards provided herein on the basis of a finding that materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with the structures in the vicinity.     Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed or remodeled for use as two-dwelling units.     Efficiency or efficiency unit means a dwelling unit consisting of only one room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove directly off the principal room, provided the total floorspace of any efficiency unit shall not be less than 450 square feet of heated floor area.     Emergency shelter means a facility which provides shortterm residential care, not exceeding a total of 90 days in duration for persons in need of immediate assistance or relief due to physical, mental, or emotional difficulties, but such term shall not include alcohol or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for prisoners or former prisoners, detention centers, halfway houses, or other similar housing facilities which serve as an alternative to incarceration. Where required by state law, an emergency shelter shall be properly licensed by the state before such home can be located in any zoning district in which it is otherwise authorized to locate. This does not include a temporary weather-related emergency shelter operated by a federal, state, or local government agency, the Red Cross, or the Salvation Army.     Family means one or more persons living together, whether related to each other by birth or not, and occupying a dwelling unit as a single, nonprofit, housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, motel, group home for the handicapped, congregate housing, club, boardinghouse, roominghouse, fraternity or sorority house.     Family personal care home means a home for adults or children under the age of 18 years, whether or not related by blood or marriage, in a family-type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons who are either permanently or temporarily unable to provide one or more of his life functions for himself due to physical, mental, or emotional difficulties. Where required by state law, such home shall be properly licensed by the state before such home can be located in any zoning district in which it is otherwise authorized to locate.     Flea market means a building or open area in which stalls or sales areas are set aside as a consequence of rental agreements or otherwise, which are intended for use by various unrelated individuals for the purpose of selling articles that are either homemade, homegrown, handcrafted, old, obsolete, or antique, and may include the selling of such goods at retail prices by businesses or individuals who are usually and customarily engaged in retail trade. The term "flea market" shall not be deemed to include informal garage sales or yard sales.     Garden apartment dwelling means a multifamily dwelling, one or two stories in height, with one dwelling unit per story, a private entrance for each dwelling unit, and where the area immediately surrounding the dwelling is landscaped and may contain recreation facilities for the private use of dwelling occupants.     Group development project means two or more principal buildings devoted to a common or similar use constructed on a lot in one ownership and which are made a part of an integrated industrial, commercial, or dwelling unit project; provided, however, that such projects shall not include any use which is prohibited in the district in which such project is to be located.     Group homes for the handicapped means a single detached dwelling shared by four or more handicapped persons, in addition to resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit in a longterm, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "handicapped person" shall mean a person with a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual.     Group personal care home means a home for adults or children under the age of 18 years, whether or not related by blood or marriage, in a residence or other type of building which offers care to seven or more persons who are either permanently or temporarily unable to provide one or more of his life functions for himself due to physical, mental, or emotional difficulties. Where required by state law, such home shall be properly licensed by the state before such home can be located in any zoning district in which it is otherwise authorized to locate.     Incidental or accessory sign means a professional or announcement sign not more than one square foot in area.     Indoor recreational facilities means any establishment providing completely enclosed recreation activities. Accessory uses shall be permitted to include the preparation and serving of food and/or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses. Included in this definition shall be bowling, roller skating or ice skating, billiards, pool, theaters, and related amusement uses.     Industrialized or modular home means a home that is a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes, and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of either the Southern Building Code Congress International or the Georgia Industrialized Building Act.     Junkyard means a yard, lot, structure, place or land or any part thereof used primarily for the purchasing, collecting, storing, dismantling, salvaging, processing, or selling or offering for sale, either in whole or in part, machinery or vehicles not in running condition.     Kennel means the housing of four or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals for the purpose of providing an income or revenue.     Lot of record means a lot or parcel of land, the existence, location and dimensions of which have been legally recorded or registered in a deed or plat.     Lot, plot and parcel mean a portion of land devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same.     Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the depth at the setback line.     Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which when erected on site, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. This type of dwelling is fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home and Standards Act 42 USC 5401-5445, and which was manufactured on or after June 15, 1976.     Mobile home means a dwelling manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation.     Motor vehicle repair means a vehicle paint and bodywork, frame straightening and similar vehicle repair.     Multifamily dwelling means a building designed, constructed, altered, or used for three or more adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a party wall or walls and/or a party floor/ceiling connecting it with at least one other dwelling unit located on one lot of land.     Nonconforming use means a building, structure or use of land existing on December 17, 1959, and which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.     Nonfamily adult means a resident 18 years of age or older who is not related by blood within the third degree of consanguinity or by marriage to the owner or manager of the personal care home.     Nursery school, playschool, or kindergarten means a school for children two years of age through six years of age which operates for no more than four consecutive hours per day, and which may or may not have an established curriculum.     Outdoor recreational facilities means businesses which offer as their primary commercial business outdoor recreational activities including, but not limited to, miniature golf, batting cages, golf driving ranges, and similar outdoor amusements. Accessory uses shall be permitted within a building or buildings to be located upon the outdoor recreational facility property, including restrooms, equipment storage, and the preparation and serving of food and/or the sale of equipment related to the outdoor uses. Outdoor recreation uses which may cause excessive noise, as determined by the city council, must be located not less than 500 feet from any residential zone. In the event that an outdoor recreational facility is to be located adjacent to any residential zoning district, then a buffer as described in section 94-194 shall be required. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent or restrict outdoor recreational activities sponsored by a school, a church, a recreation authority, or other governmental or quasi-governmental entity that offers such recreational activities as part of its program.     Pawnshop means a business being owned and operated by a pawnbroker, with said business normally taking in personal property deposited as security for loans.     Personal care home means any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not for profit, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults or children under the age of 18 years, whether or not such persons are related by blood or marriage. For the purpose of this Code, personal care homes shall be classified as a family personal care home or a group personal care home. No personal care home shall provide services to or allow any person to reside therein where such person would constitute a threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term "personal care home" shall not include alcohol or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for prisoners or former prisoners, detention centers, halfway houses, or other similar housing facilities which serve as an alternative to incarceration. Where required by state law, a personal care home shall be properly licensed by the state before such home can be located in any zoning district in which it is otherwise authorized to locate.     Personal services means and includes, but is not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication, assistance with ambulation and transfers, and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting.     Pest control means a commercial venture engaging in the business of applying any attractant, fumigant, fungicide, insecticide, rodenticide and repellant to the property of another, the purpose of which is to control insects and vermin.     Resident means any nonfamily adult receiving personal assistance and/or residing in a personal care home.     Roominghouse means a residential structure which is only available for personal occupancy where the residents are provided lodging without meals, and where no provisions are made for cooking or meal preparation for the residents either as a group or individually in any of the rooms of the house, including any of the rooms occupied by paying guests. The owner of the residential structure is required to live in the structure as his personal residence in order for the residential structure to be classified as a roominghouse.     Self-service storage facility means a building or group of buildings that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of business and household goods or contractors' supplies.     Setback means the distance from the right-of-way line of the street to the nearest point of a building.     Setback line means a line illustrating the setback distance.     Shopping center means a commercial area apart from the central business district consisting of one or more businesses in one or more buildings in any linear or other arrangement and providing not less than 75 off-street parking areas.     Street means a public way for vehicular traffic that affords a primary means of access to abutting property.     Strip shopping center means a commercial area apart from the central business district consisting of two or more businesses in one or more buildings in any linear or other arrangement and providing at least 25 off-street parking spaces.     Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground.     Townhouse means one of a group of two or more attached single-family residences where the owner owns a fee simple interest in the residence and in the underlying realty that constitutes the approved lot. Each townhouse unit shall be separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved firewall or walls. Firewalls shall be located on the lot line. Each townhouse shall have a front and rear ground level entrance. The townhouse shall be located on its own approved, recorded lot, but setback lines as to interior lot lines shall not be applicable to townhouses.     Townhouse dwelling means one of a series of three or more attached dwelling units on separate lots that are separated from each other by firewalls extending at least from the lowest floor level to the roof.     Trailer camp means any lot on which are parked two or more trailers, or one or more trailers for a longer period of time than 48 hours.     Truck terminal means land and buildings used as a relay station for the transfer of a load from one vehicle to another or one party to another. The terminal cannot be used for permanent or longterm accessory storage for principal land uses at other locations. The terminal facility may include storage areas for trucks and buildings or areas for the repair of trucks associated with the terminal.     Used or occupied, as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."     Yard means an unoccupied space except possibly by an accessory building, open to the sky, on the same lot with a principal building.     Yard, front, means a yard measured at right angles from the front lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the full width of the lot.     Yard, rear, means a yard measured at right angles from a rear lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the full width of the lot.     Yard, side, means a yard measured at right angles from a side lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.     Zero-lot-line dwelling means one attached, one-family dwelling constructed against one or two lot lines rather than in the middle of the lot. Setbacks other than common wall areas shall be complied with in connection with such dwelling, including minimum lot area and width per dwelling unit where the same is required in section 94-161, unless otherwise provided. (Code 1962, § 27-2; Code 1986, § 23-1; Ord. No. O-88-02-04, § 1, 2-22-1988; Ord. No. O-88-06-22, 6-20-1988; Ord. No. O-91-04-12, 4-24-1991; Ord. No. O-91-10-38, 10-28-1991; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-94-09-32, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. O-95-09-32, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-47, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-98-03-12, 3-19-1998; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-99-04-12, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. O-99-05-19, 5-20-1999; Ord. No. O-00-04-17, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-10-41, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-00-12-49, 12-21-2000; Ord. No. O-01-06-21, 6-21-2001; Ord. No. O-02-07-19, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002; Ord. No. O-05-02-07, 2-24-2005; Ord. No. O-05-12-46, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. O-07-11-41, 11-15-2007; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 94-2. - Remedies.     In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building official, or any other appropriate city authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of each such building or use of land. (Code 1962, § 27-16; Code 1986, § 23-15) 
Sec. 94-3. - Prevailing law.     When the regulations of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any statute or other legal document, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. When the provisions of any statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. (Code 1962, § 27-18; Code 1986, § 23-16) 
Sec. 94-4. - Application of chapter.     Except as hereinafter provided, the application of this capter is as follows: (1)  Use. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. (2)  Buildings. No building shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered so as to exceed the height limit, or to accommodate or house a greater number of families than are required or specified in the regulations herein for the district in which it is located. (3)  Lots. No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, front, side, or rear yard, inner or outer curbs, lot area per family or other requirements of this chapter are not maintained. This subsection shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use. (4)  Yards. No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. (Code 1962, § 27-10; Code 1986, § 23-9) 
Secs. 94-5—94-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 94-27. - Enforcing officer.     The office of building official is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The duties of the building official shall include inspecting premises, issuing building permits, and certificates of occupancy for uses and buildings, and ensuring that all such buildings and uses are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Code 1962, § 27-11; Code 1986, § 23-10) 
Sec. 94-28. - Building permits.     Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions: (1)  Required. It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for any construction of any building; or to commence construction or moving or alteration of any building, or to commence the development of land for a use not requiring a building until the building official has issued a building permit for such work. (2)  Issuance. In applying to the building official for a building permit, the applicant shall submit two copies of a dimensional sketch or a to-scale plan signed by the owner or the owner's authorized agent, indicating the shape, size, and location of the lot to be built upon and the shape, size, height, use and location of the buildings to be erected, demolished, altered or moved and of any buildings already on the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, if any, the setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. If the proposed excavation, filling, construction or movement set forth in said sketch or plan are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. If the proposed excavation, filling, construction or movement set forth in said sketch or plan are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city then in force, the building official and fire department representative shall sign and return one copy of the sketch plan to the applicant and shall issue a building permit upon payment of any required fee. The building official shall retain one copy of the building permit and one copy of the sketch or plan. (3)  Refusal. If the sketch or plan submitted describes work which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the building official shall not issue a building permit, but shall return one copy of the sketch or plan to the applicant along with a signed refusal in writing. Such refusal shall state the reasons therefor and shall cite the portions of this chapter with which the submitted sketch or plan does not comply. The building official shall retain one copy of the sketch or plan and two copies of the refusal. (4)  Time limitations. Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have commenced within six months of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. (Code 1962, § 27-12; Code 1986, § 23-11) 
Sec. 94-28.1 - Waiver of permit fees for governmental entities. (a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no building permit fees, building inspection fees, or fire inspection fees shall be charged to a governmental entity in connection with the construction or renovation of a public-use governmental building located in the incorporated area of the city. (b)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:     Governmental entity means the State of Georgia and its respective departments and agencies, the Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia, the Sumter County Board of Commissioners, the Sumter County School District, any municipality located in Sumter County, any constitutional development authority established for Sumter County, any economic development authority established pursuant to Georgia law and operating wholly or partially in Americus, Sumter County, or in any other municipality within Sumter County, and any hospital authority established pursuant to Georgia law and operating wholly or partially in Americus.     Public-use governmental building means any building, and any and all appurtenances thereto, used or to be used solely by a governmental entity to carry out the lawful purposes of the governmental entity, but the term shall not include a building constructed and used, or to be used, by a private for-profit business or entity. (c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to eliminate the requirement that construction or renovation of a public-use governmental building located in the incorporated area of the city by a governmental entity be inspected by the city building inspector and the city fire marshal during such construction or renovation, and at such other times as may be authorized or required by city ordinance; provided, however, that such inspections by the city shall not be required where the city's authority to undertake such inspections has been pre-empted by state law or regulations. (d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow any such construction without the governmental entity obtaining a building permit from the city. (Ord. No. O-07-08-25, § 5-1.1, 8-23-2007) 
Sec. 94-29. - Certificate of occupancy.     Certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the building official in accordance with the following provisions: (1)  Required. A certificate of occupancy issued by the building official is required in advance of occupancy or use of: a.  A building erected after December 17, 1959. b.  A building altered so as to affect the height or the side, front or rear yard. c.  A change in type of occupancy or use of any building or premises. d.  Each nonconforming use created by the passage of subsequent amendments to this chapter. (2)  Issuance. Upon payment of any required fees, the building official shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building as stated on the certificate of occupancy is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter, and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan submitted for the building permit. One copy of the certificates of occupancy issued shall contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property signed by the owner or the owner's agent shall be kept on file in the office of the building official. Copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved, at said person's expense. (3)  Denial. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter or unless the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan upon which the building permit was issued. (Code 1962, § 27-13; Code 1986, § 23-12) 
Sec. 94-30. - Records.     It shall be the duty of the building official to keep a record of all building permits and certificates of occupancy issued, with a notation of all special conditions involved. Such official shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of such official's office and shall be available for the use of the city council, the zoning board of appeals, planning commission, and officials of the city. (Code 1962, § 27-14; Code 1986, § 23-13) 
Sec. 94-31. - Nonconforming uses.     In order to avoid individual hardship whenever reasonable and not in conflict with the general welfare of the city and, for the purposes herein outlined, the following provisions shall apply to all districts: (1)  When permitted. Except as herein specified, the lawful use of any building or land existing on December 17, 1959, may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. (2)  Unsafe structure. Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by a proper authority may be restored to a safe condition. (3)  Restoration. No nonconforming building or structure, damaged to the extent of more than 75 percent of its assessed value for city tax purposes, shall be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. (4)  Abandonment. Any nonconforming use after discontinuance for a period of one year shall not be reestablished except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. (5)  Change to another nonconforming use. No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use. (6)  Changes. A nonconforming use of a building or land, once changed to a conforming use, shall not be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. (7)  Enlargement. No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended in any way except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. (8)  Tenancy, etc., change. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of a nonconforming use or structure, provided there is no change in the nature or the character of the nonconforming use. (Code 1962, § 27-37; Code 1986, § 23-37) 
Sec. 94-32. - Planning commission to consider special exceptions.     Prior to any of the uses being permitted in subsection 94-150(4), R-2 residential district), subsection 94-155(25) (C-1 roadside business district), subsection 94-156(67) (C-2 general business district), subsection 94-158(26) (I-N institutional district), or subsection 94-159(22) (I, industrial district), a request for hearing before the planning commission must be made, and the following procedures shall be observed: (1)  The owner of the real property involved shall submit an application in writing to the community and economic development director of the owner's request for a special exception with a fee established by ordinance. Such application shall include the street address of the real property involved, the lot dimensions, a description of the structures on the real property, fences, the names of the adjacent owners, the present zoning designation of the property involved and of the property adjacent to the property involved, and such other information as the planning commission may require. (2)  The community and economic development director, upon receipt of an application for a special exception, shall, within three days from receipt of such application, notify the chairman of the planning commission and deliver a copy of such application to said chairman. (3)  The community and economic development director shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question a two-sided sign of not be less than four square feet in area, which shall contain information as to the proposed request for a special exception and the date, time, and place of the public hearing to be held by the planning commission. The planning commission shall fix a reasonable time for a public hearing on the request for a special exception and shall give at least 15 days public notice of the time and place of said hearing, to be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the city. (4)  The planning commission at said public hearing shall consider any testimony in favor of or opposed to said request for a special exception and shall either grant or deny said request for a special exception at the conclusion of said public hearing using the following standards: a.  The proposed use or structure shall be compatible with development and uses existing on adjacent and nearby property. b.  The proposed use or structure shall not have a substantial adverse impact upon the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. c.  The proposed use or structure shall not cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools or other public facilities. d.  Any other relevant factors, including the conformity of the proposed development with duly adopted land use and other physical development plans or policies for the area may also be considered. (5)  Said special exception, if granted by the planning commission, shall be granted only for the specific use authorized by the special exception and for no other use. Such special exception for such particular use shall continue to be valid and applicable to the property affected by such special exception, so long as such particular use remains in effect, regardless of whether the owner of the property at the time the special exception was issued sells, transfers, or otherwise conveys such property to a third party. Such sale, transfer, or conveyance shall not be deemed to have terminated the special exception, so long as the use authorized in the special exception remains the same before and after such transfer. A special exception issued under this section shall not be considered a nonconforming use under section 94-31. (Code 1986, § 23-73; Ord. of 12-22-1986, § 2; Ord. No. O-96-11-50, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-00-10-42, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-02-07-20, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-02-07-21, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-04-06-10, 6-24-2004; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Secs. 94-33—94-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHAPTER AND ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
Sec. 94-53. - Authority; procedure; filing fee, etc. (a)  This chapter, including the zoning map, may be amended from time to time, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. A property owner shall not initiate action for a zoning amendment affecting the same parcel more often than once every 12 months. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. (b)  Such person as may desire an amendment of this chapter by changing the zoning classification of property from one type of district to another shall: (1)  File a request in writing with the city's community development department with fee attached in the amount established by ordinance, setting forth in detail the desired amendment and describing by address or location of property to be reclassified, and the name or names of the legal owner or owners thereof. (2)  Such request shall have attached thereto three plats of survey prepared by a registered or certified engineer or land surveyor setting forth in detail the property described in the request, and showing further the present zoning designation, the requested zoning designation, and the zoning designation of all property abutting the subject property. (3)  The community development director or designee shall date stamp the request immediately upon receipt and shall direct the property owner to pay the filing fee to the finance director's office. The community development director or designee shall schedule the request for a hearing before the planning commission at the commission's next regular meeting, so long as the next regular meeting of the commission is more than one week from the date of filing. In the event that the rezoning request is filed less than one week prior to the next meeting of the planning commission, the community development director or designee shall be authorized, if said director or designee is unable to complete the necessary preliminary work on the rezoning request prior to the next commission meeting, to schedule the hearing for the next commission meeting after such director or designee anticipates having the preliminary work completed on the rezoning request. (4)  The recommendation of the planning commission shall be noted in the minutes of the commission meeting, and a copy of the minutes, along with a copy of the plat of survey filed with the rezoning request, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. (5)  The community development director or designee shall notify in writing the city council of the action of the planning commission. Such director or designee shall also have the proper notices posted in connection with any public hearing to be held by the city council regarding the rezoning request. (Code 1962, § 27-5; Code 1986, § 23-4; Ord. No. O-96-11-50, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 94-54. - Public hearing and procedures therefor. (a)  Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15, but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing, the city council shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the local government a notice of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. If the hearing concerns a proposed amendment to the official zoning map, then the notice shall also state, the location of the property, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification. (b)  Whenever a proposed amendment to this chapter involves changing the zoning classification of property from one type of district to another, the building official shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on said property one or more signs, each of which shall be a two-sided sign which shall not be less than four square feet in area, and each of which shall contain information regarding the time, place, and purpose of the hearing, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. Such signs shall be posted on the property for a period of not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. (c)  At least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing, the city clerk shall prepare an agenda of the proposed amendments to be considered at public hearings. Copies of the agenda and the planning commission report on each proposed amendment shall be available for public view in the city clerk's office during regular office hours for a period of at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. (d)  The mayor shall conduct the public hearing and shall open the hearing at the time and place specified in the hearing notice. The mayor shall announce the rules of the hearing before proceeding with a hearing upon each proposed amendment. For each proposed amendment, the mayor shall call upon the city manager, or his designee, to present the report of the planning commission. The mayor shall then call for a show of hands of those present wishing to speak in support of the proposed amendment. The mayor shall recognize each such person in turn and ask him or her to rise, state his name and address, and present his statement. The mayor shall then call for a show of hands of those present wishing to speak in opposition to the proposed amendment. The mayor shall recognize each such person in turn and ask him to rise, state his name and address, and present his statement. Those persons wishing to speak in favor of the proposed zoning amendment and those persons wishing to speak in opposition to the proposed zoning amendment shall be allowed at least ten minutes to present such data, evidence and opinion as such respective side deems appropriate; provided, however, that if either or both sides do not desire to use the full minimum time period, then such minimum time period may be waived. The mayor shall be further authorized to grant each side such additional amount of time beyond the minimum time period set out herein, but in all events, both sides shall be given the same amount of time within which to present their side at the hearing. After all persons have been given an opportunity to speak for or against the proposed amendment, the city council shall have the right to discuss the proposed amendment and, upon completion thereof, the hearing shall be closed. Unless the city council shall give unanimous consent, of those present and voting, to render its decision at the conclusion of the public hearing, the proposed amendment shall be tabled for final consideration at the next succeeding meeting of the city council. (e)  The clerk shall print copies of this section of this chapter and maintain such copies at his office for distribution to the public during regular business hours. (Code 1986, § 23-5; Ord. No. O-87-11-24, 11-23-1987; Ord. No. O-98-03-11, 3-19-1998; Ord. No. O-02-07-21, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 94-55. - Standards used in making zoning decisions. (a)  Whenever the planning commission and the city council consider an amendment to this chapter which involves changing the zoning classification of property from one type of district to another, they shall balance the interest of the community in promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right of property owners in the use of their property. In making such zoning recommendations and decisions, the planning commission and the city council shall use the following standards, where relevant: (1)  Whether the proposed amendment would permit a use that is suitable, in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; (2)  Whether the proposed amendment would likely have an adverse effect upon the existing use, usability or economic value of adjacent or nearby property; (3)  Whether the property to be affected by the proposed amendment has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; (4)  Whether the proposed amendment would likely result in a use which would or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools, or would otherwise have an adverse impact upon public health, safety, morality or general welfare; (5)  In the event that the city has adopted a land use plan, whether the proposed amendment is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; (6)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property that gives supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment; (7)  Whether the subject property itself is suitable for the proposed use to which it is intended to be put after being rezoned; (8)  The length of time that the subject property has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; (9)  Whether the property owner presently intends to develop the property in accord with the proposed amended zoning classification within a reasonable time after approval of the proposed amendment. (b)  The clerk shall print copies of this section of this chapter and maintain such copies at his office for distribution to the public during regular business hours. (Code 1986, § 23-6; Ord. No. O-87-11-24, 11-23-1987) 
Sec. 94-56. - Withdrawal of amendment petition.     Any petition for an amendment to this chapter may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request upon written notice to the community and economic development director. (Code 1962, § 27-8; Code 1986, § 23-7) 
Secs. 94-57—94-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS; APPEALS AND VARIANCES 
Sec. 94-86. - Authority; membership; terms; removal; rules.     The zoning board of appeals is hereby established. Said board shall consist of five members appointed by the city council for overlapping terms of three years. The initial appointment shall be as follows: two members for one year, two members for two years, and one member for three years; each successive appointment shall be for three years. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing. No member shall hold any other public office or position. The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the conduct of its affairs. (Code 1962, § 27-54; Code 1986, § 23-60) 
Sec. 94-87. - Procedure; officers; meetings; records. (a)  The board shall elect one of its members, other than the member of the planning commission, as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until such person is reelected or a successor is elected. The board shall appoint a secretary who may be a member of the planning commission. (b)  Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in the chairman's absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. (c)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. (Code 1962, § 27-55; Code 1986, § 23-61) 
Sec. 94-88. - Powers and duties.     The board shall have the following powers: (1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error on any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official in the enforcement of this chapter. (2)  Special exception . To hear and decide applications for special exceptions as specified in this chapter and for decision on any special questions upon which the board is authorized by this chapter to pass. When acting upon such application for special exception, the board shall give consideration to the following factors, where applicable: a.  The proposed design and location of the particular development. b.  The possible traffic-generating characteristics of the proposed development. c.  The effects the proposed development will have on the present or intended character of the area in which it proposes to locate. d.  The availability of public utilities, facilities and services. After such considerations, the board shall take such actions or establish such reasonable conditions, of approval, such as planted screens, as will accomplish the intents and purposes of this chapter. (3)  Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific individual cases such variances from terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship only upon a finding by the board that all of the following conditions exist: a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; b.  The application of the chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter; e.  Denying the variance will deprive the owner of rights commonly enjoyed by other landowners; f.  Granting the variance will not bestow on the owner rights not generally enjoyed by other similar property owners in that district; g.  Granting this variance will be in harmony with the overall intent of this chapter, and will not be detrimental to the public interests; h.  The special circumstances surrounding the request for a variance are not the result of acts by the applicant; i.  The existence of nonconforming uses in this district or of similar nonconforming uses in other districts will not be considered as a basis on which to grant other variances; j.  The variance requested is the minimum variance which will permit reasonable use of the land; and k.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings or structures that is not permitted by right or special exception in the district involved. (4)  Use variance prohibited. No variance may be taken for granted for a use of land or premises. (Code 1962, § 27-56; Code 1986, § 23-62) 
Sec. 94-89. - Request for variance procedures.     Requests for a variance shall be filed in writing with the community and economic development director. Within ten days after receiving a request for a variance, the community and economic development director shall: (1)  Send the request, with any comments such as the community and economic development director may deem necessary added thereto, to the secretary of the board; (2)  Cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property one or more signs, each of which shall be a two-sided sign which shall not be less than four square feet in area, and each of which shall contain information to the proposed change and the date and time of the public hearing before the board. (Code 1962, § 27-57; Code 1986, § 23-63; Ord. No. O-02-07-21, 7-18-2002) 
Sec. 94-90. - Action on appeals.     In exercising the powers specified in section 94-88, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions, or determination of the community and economic development director, and to that end shall have all the powers of the community and economic development director and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. (Code 1962, § 27-58; Code 1986, § 23-64) 
Sec. 94-91. - Appeals process. (a)  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city, affected by any decision of the community and economic development director or other city official based on this chapter. (b)  Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the community and economic development director and any other city official involved, and with the board, a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereto. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the board. (c)  When an appeal is for a variance or for a grant of special exception, a payment to the city of an amount sufficient to cover any required fees to defray costs of processing and erection of signs for variance must accompany the notice of appeal filed with the community and economic development director. (Code 1962, § 27-59; Code 1986, § 23-65) 
Sec. 94-92. - Public hearings on appeals.     The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals or other matters referred to it, and give at least 15 days' public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent, or by attorney. (Code 1962, § 27-60; Code 1986, § 23-66) 
Sec. 94-93. - Stay of proceedings.     An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the community and economic development director certifies to the board of appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with such community and economic development director that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in such community and economic development director's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on notice to the official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. (Code 1962, § 27-61; Code 1986, § 23-67) 
Secs. 94-94—94-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING MAP 
Sec. 94-115. - Zoning map—Adopted.     The boundaries of each district are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of Americus, Georgia". The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in section 42 of the zoning ordinance, City of Americus, Georgia", together with the date of December 17, 1959. Said map and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this chapter, and will hereinafter be referred to as the "zoning map". (Code 1962, § 27-3; Code 1986, § 23-2) 
Sec. 94-116. - Same—Amendments.     If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the zoning map, such change shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council, together with an entry on the zoning map as follows: "on (date), by official action of the city council, the following changes were made in the Official Zoning Map: followed by a brief description of nature of change", which entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. No amendment to this chapter that involves subject matter portrayed on the zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry have been made on said map. (Code 1962, § 27-4; Code 1986, § 23-3) 
Sec. 94-117. - Rules for determining boundaries.     Where uncertainty exists with request to the boundaries of any of the districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: (1)  Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following land lot lines, centerlines of streets, highways, alleys or railroads, centerlines or 500 feet from shorelines, whichever is less, of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries shall be construed to follow such lines. (2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, or the centerlines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or said lines extended, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. (3)  Where a district boundary line, as appearing on the zoning map divides a lot in single ownership on December 17, 1959, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extensions shall not include any part of such a lot more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line. (Code 1962, § 27-9; Code 1986, § 23-8) 
Secs. 94-118—94-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
Sec. 94-148. - Districts enumerated.     For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into 13 districts designated as follows: R-1 Residential R-2 Residential R-3 Residential R-3A Residential R-4 MH residential N-S Neighborhood shopping C-1 Roadside business C-2 General business C-3 Downtown general business I-N Institutional I Industrial AG Agricultural PMUD Planned mixed-use (Code 1962, § 27-22; Code 1986, § 23-20; Ord. No. O-89-10-28, 10-23-1989; Ord. No. O-04-08-14, 8-19-2004; Ord. No. O-06-12-46, 12-21-2006) 
Sec. 94-149. - R-1 residential district.     Within an R-1 residential district, the following uses are permitted: (1)  Dwelling, single-family, detached, but not including manufactured homes, or mobile homes. (2)  Public, private and parochial schools, not including nursery schools. (3)  Private clubs and golf courses of not less than 50 acres. (4)  Public parks and public recreational facilities. (5)  Noncommercial greenhouses, nurseries and truck gardens. (6)  Churches and other places of worship provided they are located on a major or collector street as designated on the official major street map of the city and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. (7)  Customary home occupations. (8)  Reserved. (9)  Accessory buildings, provided such shall be permitted only in a rear yard and shall not be less than five feet from any property line, and provided further that no mobile home, whether or not placed upon a permanent foundation, may be used as an accessory building. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a freestanding metal or wooden structure, whether constructed at the site or prefabricated, which is intended for use primarily as a carport, shall be considered an accessory building and may be located in either a side yard or a rear yard. Such carport structure shall not extend beyond the front of the residential structure located upon the premises. Any such structure to be constructed or located at a location upon residential property other than the location authorized in this subsection (9) shall be prohibited unless a proper variance therefor has been obtained from the zoning board of appeals. A building permit shall be obtained and a building permit and inspection fee shall be paid prior to the commencement of construction or location of an accessory building in accord with the provisions of section 14-30. (10)  Noncommercial clubs, lodges, and social and recreational centers provided they are located not less than 50 feet from any property line. (11)  Public utilities such as electrical substations, sewage treatment plants or pumping stations, etc., provided same are required for service of the immediate area. Said utilities shall be fenced with a chainlink-type woven wire fence and suitably landscaped. No offices shall be permitted and no equipment shall be stored on the site. (12)  Beautyshops and barbershops, where such beauty shop or barbershop meet the customary home occupation requirements established in section 94-1; provided, however, that any such beauty shop or barbershop that has employed only one nonfamily member not residing on the premises as of April 16, 1974, shall be allowed to continue such nonfamily member not residing on the premises. (13)  Bed and breakfast inns, provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32, and further provided that the bed and breakfast inn is established, maintained and operated in accord with the provisions of chapter 14 including, but not limited to, the provisions which relate specifically to the establishment, maintenance and operation of bed and breakfast inns contained in article V, therein. (14)  Child family day care center. (15)  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens and child group day care centers, provided such use is in a private residence, and that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32. (16)  Family personal care home. (17)  Group personal care home, provided such use is located in a private residence, and that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32. (18)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. (19)  Industrialized home. (20)  Adult family day care center. (Code 1962, § 27-23; Code 1986, § 23-21; Ord. No. O-87-10-20, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. O-92-08-23, 8-24-1992; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-02-07-19, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002; Ord. No. O-03-01-07, 2-20-2003; Ord. No. O-03-05-09, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. O-05-02-07, 2-24-2005) 
Sec. 94-150. - R-2 residential district.     Within an R-2 residential district, the following uses are permitted: (1)  All uses permitted in an R-1 residential district. (2)  Boardinghouses and roominghouses. (3)  Residential duplexes. (4)  The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the city planning commission in accordance with the provisions of section 94-32, entitling the planning commission to consider special exceptions: a.  Cemeteries. b.  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens, child group day care centers, provided that such uses are located in a private residence. c.  Undertaking establishments and funeral homes. d.  Professional offices, so long as the architectural design of the building occupied is, in keeping with the general architectural design and general appearance of the neighborhood. As a condition precedent to any building permit being issued under this section, or before any building under this section is used as a professional office, the city planning commission shall approve any plans, specifications, or the building itself to see that the architectural design or general appearance of the building is in keeping with the architectural design and general appearance of the neighborhood. The term "professional offices" shall be interpreted as meaning all persons engaging in the professions of attorneys, physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, naturopaths, psychotherapists, masseurs, electrotherapists, dentists, occulists, optometrists, chiropodists, pathologists, urologists, radiologists, certified public accountants, public accountants, architects, surveyors, engineers, public relations and consulting services, without the presence of retail sales, noisy commercial machinery or equipment and high volume traffic, and other categories which would normally be considered businesses of a professional nature. e.  Fraternity and sorority houses, so long as adequate space for off-street parking is provided for a minimum of 20 motor vehicles on the property to be used as a fraternity or sorority house. As a condition precedent to any building permit being issued under this subsection (e) or before any building under this subsection is used as a fraternity or sorority house, the city planning commission shall approve any plans or inspect the property site itself to be certain there is adequate space provided for the off-street parking of a minimum of 20 motor vehicles. f.  Zero-lot-line dwellings. g.  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. (Code 1962, § 27-24; Code 1986, § 23-22; Ord. of 12-22-1986, § 1; Ord. No. O-91-04-12, 4-24-1991; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-99-05-19, 5-20-1999; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-03-09-22, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-06-10, 6-24-2004) 
Sec. 94-151. - R-3 residential district. (a)  The R-3 residential district is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to meet the needs and demands for the development of higher density residential areas, and to protect the future development of land in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the city. (b)  Within an R-3 residential district, the following uses are permitted: (1)  All uses permitted in an R-2 residential district. (2)  Duplexes and triplexes. (3)  Multifamily dwellings, which include townhouses, condominiums, garden apartments, or any multifamily arrangements where more than three units are together on one piece of property. (4)  Accessory uses customary to dwellings. (5)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements. The minimum area per dwelling unit, less applicable setback shall not be less than indicated by dwelling type in the following table: Multiple-Family Dwelling Units Lot Area Requirements Unit type One-story(square feet Two-story(square feet) Efficiency units 2,200 1,491 1 bedroom 2,200 1,797 2 bedroom 2,880 2,475 3 bedroom 3,725 3,195 4 or more bedrooms 4,575 3,993  (6)  Zero-lot-line dwellings, provided the following physical requirements are met: a.  Minimum lot area: one-eigth acre, 5,445 square feet; b.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 700 square feet; c.  Minimum road frontage: 30 feet; d.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet as measured at the building line; e.  Minimum front yard: 20 feet; f.  Minimum rear yard: zero feet; g.  Minimum side yard: zero feet on one side and ten feet on the other side; h.  Maximum lot coverage by principal dwelling unit: 50 percent. (7)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. (8)  Manufactured homes, provided manufactured housing in this district meet the R-2 residential requirements in section 94-161. (Code 1962, § 27-24.1; Code 1986, § 23-23; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-99-05-19, 5-20-1999; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002; Ord. No. O-03-11-34, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 94-152. - R-3A residential district. (a)  The R-3A district is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to meet the needs and demands for the development of medium density residential areas, and to protect the future development of land in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the city. (b)  Within an R-3A residential district, the following uses are permitted: (1)  All uses permitted in an R-2 residential district. (2)  Duplexes and triplexes. (3)  Multifamily dwellings, which include townhouses, condominiums, garden apartments, or any multifamily arrangements where more than three units are together on one piece of property. (4)  Accessory uses customary to dwellings. (5)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements. The minimum area per dwelling unit less, applicable setback shall not be less than indicated by dwelling type in the following table: Multiple-Family Dwelling Units Lot Area Requirements Unit type One-story(square feet) Two-story(square feet) Efficiency units 4,350 3,112 1 bedroom 4,840 3,625 2 bedroom 5,440 4,840 3 bedroom 7,250 6,225 4 or more bedrooms 8,700 7,265  (6)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. (7)  Manufactured homes, provided manufactured housing in this district meet the R-2 residential requirements in section 94-161. (Code 1986, § 23-23.5; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002; Ord. No. O-03-11-34, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 94-153. - R-4 MH manufactured home residential district. (a)  No mobile homes as defined in section 94-1 shall be allowed within the city. Those that exist at the time of the adoption of the amendment from which this section is derived may remain in their present locations until such time as they are destroyed or moved from the city. (b)  The purpose of this zone is to provide a zone where lots may be rented as in a manufactured home park or purchased by individuals in a subdivision for the purpose of permanently locating a manufactured home or constructing a single-family residence. All manufactured home parks or subdivisions developed in this district shall be developed according to the requirements of chapter 86, subdivisions. (c)  Within an R-4 MH residential district, the following regulations and uses are permitted: (1)  Minimum development or subdivision size shall be five acres. (2)  Uses permitted: a.  Dwelling, single-family, detached. b.  Manufactured home. c.  Industrialized home. d.  Accessory buildings. e.  Trailer camps, as defined in section 50-21, providing that the following criteria shall apply: 1.  The trailer camp shall be established and operated in connection with a nonprofit business or entity and located in an R-4 MH residential district, which is not otherwise engaged in the operation of a trailer camp. 2.  The trailer camp shall be established and operated as incidental and accessory to such business or entity in its primary activities and be in furtherance of such activity. 3.  The units or lots of such trailer camps shall be a minimum of 1,000 square feet. 4.  Application for the establishment of such trailer camp shall be made in accord with the provisions of chapter 50, and all provisions of such chapter, except as related to lot size, shall be applicable to such trailer camp. f.  Child family day care center. g.  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, further, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. (3)  Standards for manufactured home parks. a.  At least ten percent of the site shall be open space. The open space shall not consist entirely of undevelopable lands and should be integrated into site design, not relegated to one corner of the park. b.  A density bonus or smaller lots may be granted by the planning commission where more recreational improvements will be provided. c.  In manufactured home parks there shall be not less than 20 feet of open, unoccupied space between each manufactured home. Front setbacks for private access streets within a park, which are not considered major, collector, or other shall be 25 feet. (Code 1962, § 27-24.2; Code 1986, § 23-24; Ord. No. O-90-07-18A, 7-23-1990; Ord. No. O-99-05-19, 5-20-1999; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002) 
Sec. 94-154. - N-S neighborhood shopping district. (a)  Intent and purpose. The N-S neighborhood shopping district, is intended to be composed of only those establishments that supply convenience goods or personal services, satisfying the daily needs of the residents of the abutting neighborhoods. These districts are small and are within convenient walking distance of most of the areas they will serve. All businesses, servicing, and/or storage within this district must not be objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise, vibration or congestion. All businesses, servicing, and/or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, e.g., off-street loading, childcare playground, vehicle fuel pumps. Any commercial structure within this district shall not exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area. (b)  Permitted uses. Within an N-S neighborhood shopping district, the following uses are permitted: (1)  Gasoline service stations, where the primary function is the retail sale of vehicle fuel, oil, grease, tires, batteries and accessories, and where services are limited to installation of items sold, washing, polishing, and greasing, with no fulltime mechanic service. Provided, however, that all storage tanks, dispensing devices, and canopies which shield dispensing device areas from the weather shall be located not less than 20 feet from any right-of-way or property line. All buildings shall be located not less than 15 feet from all storage tanks and dispensing devices. (2)  Churches and other places of worship provided they are located on a major or collector street as designated in section 94-214, classification of streets, and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. (3)  Banks, including drive-through banks. (4)  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, and self-service laundries. (5)  Florists and gift shops. (6)  Barber and beauty shops. (7)  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens, child group day care centers and child day care centers. (8)  Nonresidential accessory building. (9)  Restaurants where food and beverages are served and consumed only within the enclosed structure. Not permitted are outdoor dining areas, drive-ins, drive-thrus, pickup windows or other exterior service facilities. (10)  Convenience stores with or without gasoline or diesel fuel. (11)  Public utilities, such as phone or electrical substations, water or sewage pumping stations, etc., provided the same are required for service of the immediate area. Said utilities shall be fenced with a chainlink-type woven wire fence and landscaped according to section 94-194(a)(2) of the buffer requirements. No offices shall be permitted and no equipment shall be stored on the site. (12)  Video sales and rentals. (13)  The following use may be permitted as special exception, by the city planning commission in accordance with the provisions of section 94-32, entitled planning commission to consider special exceptions: telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI. Provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. (Code 1962, § 27-25; Code 1986, § 23-25; Ord. No. O-89-04-09, 4-24-1989; Ord. No. O-92-02-07, 2-24-1992; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-95-03-09, 3-24-1995; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-97-04-11, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-03-10, 3-23-2000) 
Sec. 94-155. - C-1 roadside business district.     Within a C-1 roadside business district, the following uses shall be permitted: (1)  Hotels, motels, tourist courts. (2)  Restaurants and eating establishments. (3)  Bus stations. (4)  Private clubs and accessory facilities and activities. (5)  Nonresidential accessory building. (6)  Commercial recreational facilities. (7)  Drive-in theaters, provided that there shall be not less than 200 feet of sight distance at any exit onto a major or connector street and provided that there shall be off-street storage space to accommodate waiting automobiles at the ratio of one space for each five theater accommodations. (8)  Any other retail sales or retail service establishments or use which, by virtue of the type, character or location of the business conducted, rely upon automobiles, trucks or other such motor vehicles for the transportation of its customers to and from its own particular business location. (9)  Gasoline service stations, which shall be defined as an establishment where gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is sold at retail, and dispensed at full service or self-service dispensing devices which may include facilities for minor repairs and services. Provided, however, that all storage tanks, dispensing devices, and canopies which shield dispensing device areas from the weather shall be located not less than 20 feet from any right-of-way or property line. All buildings shall be located not less than 15 feet from all storage tanks and dispensing devices. All buildings or other structures located on said lot shall be located in accord with the minimum setback provisions of section 94-161. In the event that the gasoline service station is located on a corner lot at the intersection of two or more streets, the means of ingress and egress thereto shall not be less than 20 feet from the intersection of street lines and such ingress and egress shall be designed so as to minimize the interference with the flow of traffic. (10)  Shopping centers/strip shopping centers. (11)  Offices and banks. (12)  Wholesaling and warehousing; provided, however, that neither toxic materials nor flammable liquids nor explosives shall be permitted; and further provided that the building utilized for such warehousing shall be no larger than 8,000 square feet; and further provided that the operation of such building for such warehousing purpose shall not cause any injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable conditions. (13)  Adult entertainment establishments. (14)  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens, child group day care centers and child day care centers. (15)  Self-service storage facilities, provided, that the owner complies with the buffer requirements in section 94-194 prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such a facility. (16)  Museums and historic buildings which are open to the public or where the owner thereof conducts guided tours for the public upon request; provided, however, that upon approval by the city council, a portion of such museum or historic building may be used for residential purposes, so long as the residential area of such museum or historic building meets all applicable building and other such codes for residential buildings in the city. (17)  Motor vehicle repair, provided, however, that no outside storage of motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts associated with such business shall be permitted unless the area where such storage is located is properly screened in accord with the requirements of subsection 14-136(c)(1). (18)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. (19)  Automotive facilities which include new and used sale and repair and servicing, provided that: a.  The primary purpose of all such facilities and activities shall be to provide retail sales and services to the general public; b.  All general automotive repair, paint and body shop operations, and any open lot display of used automotive vehicles for sale shall be permitted only as accessory repair, servicing or sales functions of a new car dealer; c.  Servicing, except customary services in conjunction with the dispensing of gas and oil, is undertaken entirely within the enclosed structures; d.  All outside automobile storage and parking areas are properly screened in accordance with the requirements of subsections 14-136(c)(1) or (2). (20)  Indoor recreational facilities. (21)  Outdoor recreational facilities. (22)  Churches, faith-based organizations, and other places of worship. (23)  Adult group day care center. (24)  An alternative educational services facility for students in grades 6-12 of the Sumter County School District subject to the following provisions: a.  The alternative educational services shall be provided either by the Sumter County School District or by a commercial third party education services business or entity in accord with a written contract with the Sumter County School District; b.  The actual building or building space to be used for the provision of such services shall contain at least 4,500 square feet; c.  Such educational services shall be provided in a building or building space which is a single separate and distinct unit of a shopping center or strip shopping center that has at least 50 parking spaces on the site of the building where the educational services are to be provided which are available to students and faculty of the educational services building; and d.  The educational services facility shall only be operated during daylight hours. (25)  Aquaculture, subject to special exception authorization pursuant to section 94-32 of the City Code. (26)  Ambulatory health care professionals, including allied health care professionals that are licensed by the State of Georgia; provided that the building where such use is located shall not exceed 7,500 square feet of floor space. (Code 1962, § 27-26; Code 1986, § 23-26; Ord. No. O-88-05-19, 5-23-1988; Ord. No. O-88-05-21, 5-23-1988; Ord. No. O-88-08-28, 8-22-1988; Ord. No. O-92-02-07, 2-24-1992; Ord. No. O-93-06-23, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-95-02-08, 2-23-1995; Ord. No. O-95-03-09, 3-24-1995; Ord. No. O-95-09-32, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-47, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-97-04-11, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-01-01, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-03-12, 3-23-2000; Ord. No. O-00-04-17, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-12-49, 12-21-2000; Ord. No. O-01-06-21, 6-21-2001; Ord. No. O-02-02-06, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. O-05-02-07, 2-24-2005; Ord. No. O-05-05-13, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-05-12-46, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. O-11-05-04, 5-19-2011; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012; Ord. No. O-2013-19, 7-18-2013) 
Sec. 94-156. - C-2 general business district.     Within a C-2 general business district, the following uses shall be permitted: (1)  Baking establishment. (2)  Bus station. (3)  Dance studios/schools. (4)  Physical fitness facilities. (5)  Dry cleaners/tailors. (6)  Newspaper offices, printing establishments. (7)  Gasoline service stations, which shall be defined as an establishment where gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is sold at retail, and dispensed at full service or self-service dispensing devices which may include facilities for minor repairs and services. Provided, however, that all storage tanks, dispensing devices, and canopies which shield dispensing device areas from the weather shall be located not less than 20 feet from any right-of-way or property line. All buildings shall be located not less than 15 feet from all storage tanks and dispensing devices. All buildings or other structures located on said lot shall be located in accord with the minimum setback provisions of section 94-161. In the event that the gasoline service station is located on a corner lot at the intersection of two or more streets, the means of ingress and egress thereto shall be not less than 20 feet from the intersection of street lines and such ingress and egress shall be designed so as to minimize the interference with the flow of traffic. (8)  Parking lots and parking garages. (9)  Public building or use. (10)  Nonresidential accessory building. (11)  Soft drink bottling and distribution plants. (12)  Undertaking establishments and funeral homes. (13)  Wholesale use not requiring warehousing. (14)  Veterinary hospitals; provided, however, that no outside boarding of dogs, cats, or any other domestic animal shall be permitted. (15)  Shopping centers/strip shopping centers. (16)  Upper floor residential use is permitted in multistory buildings. (17)  Offices and banks. (18)  Restaurants and eating establishments to include: New York style deli, candy shop, sandwich shop, coffeeshop, regional and ethnic dining and fine dining. (19)  Adult entertainment establishment. (20)  Hardware (small convenience). (21)  Specialty meat/fish market. (22)  Grocery store. (23)  Men's/boys', women, children, family apparel. (24)  Women's accessories/specialties. (25)  Shoes, dress and casual. (26)  Furniture store. (27)  Floor covering. (28)  Drapery/upholstery. (29)  Radio/TV/electronics. (30)  Computers/software. (31)  Records/tapes/CDs. (32)  Musical instruments. (33)  Drugstore. (34)  Liquor/wine store. (35)  Antiques. (36)  Sporting goods/bicycles. (37)  Books. (38)  Stationery. (39)  Jewelry. (40)  Hobby/toy/games. (41)  Camera/supply. (42)  Gift/novelty. (43)  Sewing/piece goods. (44)  Florists. (45)  Newsstand. (46)  Optical. (47)  Art galleries/framing. (48)  Office supplies. (49)  Beauty shops/barbershops. (50)  Shoe repair/shoeshine. (51)  Video rental. (52)  Motor vehicle repair; provided, however, that no outside storage of motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts associated with such business shall be permitted unless the area where such storage is located is properly screened in accord with the requirements of subsection 14-136(c)(1). (53)  Hotels, motels, tourist courts. (54)  Personal service establishments, to include tanning salons and massage therapy offices. (55)  Photography studios. (56)  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens, child group day care centers and child day care centers. (57)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32, provided, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. (58)  Automotive facilities which include new and used sale and repair and servicing, provided that: a.  The primary purpose of all such facilities and activities shall be to provide retail sales and services to the general public; b.  All general automotive repair, paint and body shop operations, and any open lot display of used automotive vehicles for sale shall be submitted only as accessory repair, servicing or sales functions of a new car dealer; c.  Servicing, except customary services in conjunction with the dispensing of gas and oil, is undertaken entirely within the enclosed structures; d.  All outside automobile storage and parking areas are properly screened in accordance with the requirements of subsections 14-136(c)(1) or (2). (59)  Carwash. (60)  Pawnshop. (61)  Pest control, provided, that all parking of service vehicles be done in off-street parking in the rear of the building or in a properly screened area in accord with the requirements of subsection 14-136(c)(1). (62)  Indoor recreational facilities. (63)  Outdoor recreational facilities. (64)  Churches, faith-based organizations, and other places of worship. (65)  Convenience store with or without gasoline or diesel fuel sales. (66)  Adult group day care center. (67)  Aquaculture, subject to special exception authorization pursuant to section 94-32 of the City Code. (Code 1962, § 27-27(p); Code 1986, § 23-27; Ord. of 6-30-1986; Ord. No. O-88-05-20, 5-23-1988; Ord. No. O-89-04-09, 4-24-1989; Ord. No. O-92-02-07, 2-24-1992; Ord. No. O-93-06-23, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-95-02-08, 2-23-1995; Ord. No. O-95-09-32, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-47, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-97-04-11, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-01-01, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-04-17, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-10-41, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-00-12-49, 12-21-2000; Ord. No. O-01-06-21, 6-21-2001; Ord. No. O-02-02-06, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. O-04-08-14, 8-19-2004; Ord. No. O-05-02-07, 2-24-2005; Ord. No. O-05-05-13, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-05-12-46, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 94-157. - C-3 downtown general business district.     Within a C-3 downtown general business district, the following uses shall be permitted: (1)  Baking establishments. (2)  Tailor shop and dress making. (3)  Printing/publishing. (4)  Hotels. (5)  Parking lots and parking garages. (6)  Public building or use. (7)  Wholesale use not requiring warehousing. (8)  Veterinary hospitals; provided, however, that no outside boarding of dogs, cats, or any other domestic animal shall be permitted. (9)  Upper floor residential use is permitted in multistory buildings. (10)  Offices and banks. (11)  Restaurants and eating establishments to include: New York style deli, candy shop, sandwich shop, coffeeshop, regional and ethnic dining and fine dining. (12)  Nonresidential accessory building. (13)  Hardware (small convenience). (14)  Specialty meat/fish market. (15)  Grocery store. (16)  Mens'/boys', women, children, family apparel. (17)  Women's accessories/specialties. (18)  Shoes (dress and casual). (19)  Furniture and furnishing store. (20)  Floor covering. (21)  Drapery/upholstery. (22)  Radio/TV/electronics. (23)  Computers/software. (24)  Records/tapes/CDs. (25)  Musical instruments. (26)  Drugstore. (27)  Beer/wine store. (28)  Antiques. (29)  Sporting goods/bicycle. (30)  Books. (31)  Stationery. (32)  Jewelry. (33)  Hobby/toy/games. (34)  Camera/supply. (35)  Gift/novelty. (36)  Sewing/piece goods. (37)  Florists. (38)  Newsstand. (39)  Optical. (40)  Art galleries/framing. (41)  Office supplies. (42)  Beauty shops and services, barber, hairdresser, and/or stylist shops, beauty supply retail, beauty/health spas, manicure establishments. (43)  Shoe repair/shoeshine. (44)  Video rental. (45)  Dance studios/schools. (46)  Physical fitness facilities. (47)  Tanning center. (48)  Photography studios. (49)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. (50)  Indoor recreational facilities. (51)  Convenience store with or without gasoline or diesel fuel sales. (52)  Administrative or research facilities. (53)  Business or trade school. (54)  College or university. (55)  Parks and open areas. (56)  Theaters. (57)  Sidewalk cafes. (58)  Optometry offices. (Code 1986, § 23-27.5; Ord. No. O-89-10-28, 10-23-1989; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-95-02-08, 2-23-1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-47, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-10-41, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-00-12-49, 12-21-2000; Ord. No. O-04-08-14, 8-19-2004; Ord. No. O-2013-6, 1-17-2013) 
Sec. 94-158. - I-N institutional district.     Within an I-N institutional district, the following uses shall be permitted: (1)  Hospitals. (2)  Nursing or convalescent homes. (3)  Schools, including colleges and universities. (4)  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens, child group day care centers and child day care centers. (5)  Sorority or fraternity houses, provided they are located not less than 50 feet from any property line which abuts a residential district. (6)  Professional offices. (7)  Undertaking establishments and funeral homes. (8)  Churches and other places of worship provided they are located on a major or collector street as designated on the official major street map of the city and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. (9)  Florist shops. (10)  Drugstores. (11)  Offices or clinics for medical, dental or chiropractic practice. (12)  Clinical laboratories. (13)  Restaurants and eating establishments. (14)  Motels. (15)  Antique shops. (16)  Public buildings and use. (17)  Fraternal organizations. (18)  Any other activity that is customarily considered as being accessory to a hospital, school, college or university. (19)  Residences; provided, however, that no residence shall be closer to any other institutional use than 150 feet on the same side of the street within the same block. (20)  Financial institutions exclusive of small loan companies. (21)  Nonresidential accessory buildings. (22)  Group personal care home. (23)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32, provided, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. (24)  Emergency shelters. (25)  Adult group day care center. (26)  Aquaculture, subject to special exception authorization pursuant to section 94-32 of the City Code. (Code 1962, § 27-28; Code 1986, § 23-28; Ord. No. O-93-12-45, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-02-07-19, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-05-02-07, 2-24-2005; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 94-159. - I industrial district.     Within an I industrial district, the following uses shall be permitted: (1)  All retail uses dependent upon or closely related to industry. (2)  Any industry not causing injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable conditions. (3)  Wholesaling and warehousing. (4)  Airports. (5)  Truck and bus terminals. (6)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI. (7)  Restaurants. (8)  Gasoline service stations, which shall be defined as an establishment where gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is sold at retail, and dispensed at full service or self-service dispensing devices which may include facilities for minor repairs and services. Provided, however, that all storage tanks, dispensing devices, and canopies which shield dispensing device areas from the weather shall be located not less than 20 feet from any right-of-way or property line. All buildings shall be located not less than 15 feet from all storage tanks and dispensing devices. All buildings or other structures located on said lot shall be located in accord with the minimum setback provisions of section 94-161. In the event that the gasoline service station is located on a corner lot at the intersection of two or more streets, the means of ingress and egress thereto shall be not less than 20 feet from the intersection of street lines and such ingress and egress shall be designed so as to minimize the interference with the flow of traffic. (9)  Farm supply and equipment sales. (10)  Storage yards, including building materials and lumberyards. (11)  Junkyards, provided that any area on the premises, other than indoors, where junk is kept shall be enclosed, except for exits and entrances to the junkyard, with a solid vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of ten feet measured from ground level. Such vertical wall or fence shall comply with all setback requirements of the district. All dismantling, storage, processing or repair work with respect to the junk shall take place within the walled or fenced area. Exits and entrances shall not be wider nor more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of business. Junk located within the junkyard area shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height. No junkyard shall be authorized which will be located within 500 feet of any residential zone as defined by this Code. In the event that property is rezoned for use as a junkyard in accord with this Code, such use shall not commence until such time as the vertical wall or fence required by this provision shall have been constructed. (12)  Feed and seed processing plant. (13)  Veterinary hospitals and kennels, with outside boarding of dogs, cats and other domestic animals being permitted. (14)  Adult entertainment establishment. (15)  Nonresidential accessory building. (16)  Flea market. (17)  Self-service storage facility, provided, that the owner complies with the buffer requirements in section 94-194 prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such facility. (18)  Carwash. (19)  Pest control. (20)  Waste transfer stations, provided that such waste transfer stations shall only be authorized to handle construction and demolition debris in accord with the provisions of Rule 391-3-4-06 of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, as that rule may now exist or be hereafter amended. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such waste transfer station shall be located in an industrial district unless a special exception has been granted for such use particular to the property upon which such use is to be located. Such special exception shall be approved or denied by the planning commission in accord with the procedures established in subsections 94-32(1)—(3). In considering the grant or denial of such a special exception, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and, at the conclusion of the public hearing, shall grant or deny the application for special exception using the following standards: a.  The proposed use shall not have a substantial adverse impact upon the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. b.  The proposed use shall not cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools or other public facilities. c.  Any other relevant factors, including but not limited to, the conformity of the proposed use with duly adopted land use and other physical development plans or policies for the area, may also be considered. The provisions of subsection 94-32(5) shall be applicable to a special exception granted in accord with the provisions of this subsection. (21)  Materials recovery facility, provided that such materials recovery facility shall only be authorized to handle construction and demolition debris in accord with the provisions of Rule 391-3-4-06 and Rule 391-3-4-09 of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, as that rule may now exist or be hereafter amended. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such materials recovery facility shall be located in an industrial district unless a special exception has been granted for such use particular to the property upon which such use is to be located. Such special exception shall be approved or denied by the planning commission in accord with the procedures established in subsections 94-32(1)—(3). In considering the grant or denial of such a special exception, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and, at the conclusion of the public hearing, shall grant or deny the application for special exception using the following standards: a.  The proposed use shall not have a substantial adverse impact upon the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. b.  The proposed use shall not cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, or other public facilities. c.  Any other relevant factors, including but not limited to, the conformity of the proposed use with duly adopted land use and other physical development plans or policies for the area, may also be considered. The provisions of subsection 94-32(5) shall be applicable to a special exception granted in accord with the provisions of this subsection. (22)  Aquaculture, subject to special exception authorization pursuant to section 94-32 of the City Code. (Code 1962, § 27-29; Code 1986, § 23-29; Ord. No. O-88-02-05, 2-22-1988; Ord. No. O-92-02-07, 2-24-1992; Ord. No. O-93-06-23, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-94-09-32, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. O-95-09-32, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. O-97-04-11, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-04-17, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-10-41, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-05-12-46, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. O-08-03-04, 3-20-2008; Ord. No. O-10-06-21, 6-24-2010; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 94-160. - A-G agricultural district.     Within an A-G agricultural district, the following uses shall be permitted: (1)  Nonresidential accessory building. (2)  Any form of horticulture or agriculture. (3)  Airports. (4)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI. (5)  Restaurants. (6)  Farm supply and equipment sales. (7)  Feed and seed processing plants. (8)  Stockyards, provided, that no structure shall be less than 200 feet from any property line. (9)  Churches and other places of worship provided they are located on a major or collector street as designated on the official major street map of the city and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. (10)  Veterinary hospitals and kennels, with outside boarding of dogs, cats and other domestic animals being permitted. (11)  Aquaculture. (Code 1962, § 27-30; Code 1986, § 23-30; Ord. No. O-88-02-06, 2-22-1988; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-10-41, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 94-161. - Other requirements by district. Min. setback for front yard purposes Min. yards Corner lot Min. setback for side yards District Min. lot area per D.U.* (sq. ft.) Min. lot width per D.U.* (feet) Max. lot coverage by bldg. (gross)† (per cent) Major streets (feet) Collector streets (feet) Other streets (feet) Side (feet) Rear (feet) Max. height (feet) Maj. sts. (feet) Collector sts. (feet) Other sts. (feet) R-1 Residential 30 40 35 30 8 25 35 40 35 30  Single 8,000 75  Rural ditch section (Single) 15,000 100 50 50 50 15 25 50 50 50 R-2 Residential 35 40 35 30 8 25 35 40 35 30  Single 7,000 60  Two-family 3,700 35  Rural ditch section (Single) 13,000 100 50 50 50 15 25 50 50 50 R-3 Residential  Multifamily 40 35 30 10 25 75 40 35 30 R-3A Residential  Multifamily 40 35 30 10 25 75 40 35 30 R-4 MH residential  MH Park 5,000 45 40 150** 75** 75** — — — — — —  MH Subdivision 6,000 50 40 30 30 30 8 20 25 25 25 25 N-S Neighborhood  Shopping 40 50 40 35 10 25 40 50 40 35 C-1 Roadside  Business 40 50 40 35 10 25 35 50 40 35 C-2 General Business 40 50 40 35 10 25 35 50 40 35 C-3 Downtown general business 100 — — — — — — — — — I-N Institutional 50 50 40 35 10 25 40 50 40 35 I Industrial 50 50 40 35 15‡ 30‡ 40 50 40 35 A-G Agricultural 30 60 50 40 8 25 35 50 40 35   *  Dwelling units. **  Lot line of entire park.  †  Provided parking and loading requirements are met.  ‡  Minimum of 75 feet shall apply when abutting any residential district.  (Code 1962, § 27-31; Ord. No. O-88-08-29, 8-22-88; Ord. No. O-89-10-28, 10-23-89; Ord. No. O-90-02-04, 2-26-90; Ord. No. O-97-04-12, 4-24-97; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-98; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-02) 
Sec. 94-162. - PMUD (planned mixed-use district). (a)  Purposes of the planned mixed-use district. (1)  The purpose of this district is to provide for appropriate planned development of quality mixed-use projects within the City of Americus by allowing greater freedom of design, by improving the opportunity for flexibility and creativity in the land development process, by undertaking techniques which foster community and pedestrianism, and by limiting the expenditure of public funds in an effort to achieve the objectives and intent of the city's comprehensive plan. Specifically, this district is intended to: a.  Allow diversification of uses, structures, densities and open spaces when not in conflict with existing and permitted land uses on abutting properties; b.  Reduce development costs through a more efficient use of land and a smaller network of utilities and streets than is possible through the application of standards contained in conventional land development regulations; c.  Conserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging the preservation of environmentally significant, scenic and functional open space; d.  Provide maximum opportunity for the application of innovative site planning concepts through the creation of aesthetically pleasing environments for living, shopping and working on properties of adequate size, shape and location; e.  Insure that development will occur according to the advantages and limitations of land, site design, population density, building coverage, improvement standards and construction phasing as authorized through the approval of a comprehensive site development plan; f.  Provide a mechanism to incorporate and implement the goals and intent of the City of Americus Comprehensive Plan; and g.  Encourage pedestrianism and transportation alternatives. (2)  This district is not intended to increase overall density or development intensity on a particular property except in relation to an improved design and benefit to the public. The use of open space, public meeting areas and recreational uses should be included as part of any project. This district is intended to provide a vehicle for improved development through creative design and appropriate mixtures of land uses. (3)  There are two variations of the planned mixed-use district: Mixed-use village and mixed-use center. The city's comprehensive plan should be consulted to determine when and where each of these variations may be appropriate. (b)  Minimum design requirements. (1)  Consistency with comprehensive plan. All projects must be reasonably consistent with the goals and intents of the City of Americus Comprehensive Plan. (2)  Variations to development standards. a.  Variations to local development standards (i.e. development and zoning regulations), including variations in lot sizes, widths, building setbacks, densities, parking requirements, right-of-way widths, street widths, buffers and other components may be approved to improve said project. Any variation to an adopted regulation or requirement must be expressly submitted and reviewed as part of an overall plan. All variations must be included in a "list of standards" agreed to and accepted by the city. b.  The city will not consider variations to standards or regulations of other regulating jurisdictions, such as erosion control regulations, fire codes, floodplain control, stream buffers or other similar regulations, without the express written consent and approval of applicable jurisdiction. Furthermore, said consent shall not guarantee, nor require the city to waive any or all requirements. (3)  Design requirements. All projects should incorporate traditional neighborhood design principles. Interconnectivity, pedestrianism, good design, architectural detail and appropriate scale are essential elements. Where appropriate, separate land uses are encouraged to be integrated both horizontally and vertically. (4)  At a minimum all projects shall include and/or incorporate the following components: a.  All planned mixed-use development projects must have a minimum of two distinct type of land use (commercial and single-family, industrial and multifamily, etc.). b.  All projects must have a professionally prepared master plan for the entire project. It must be designed and incorporated together to provide a harmonious transition from one use to another. Common architecture, themes, significant natural features, connectivity and other items must be included. c.  A functional town center, community green, park, or other focal point must be included to create character and identity. d.  Interconnections to adjoining property, whether developed or undeveloped, should be included and incorporated into the design where appropriate. e.  All projects should have adequate and appropriate access. f.  Other standards, as outlined in the City of Americus Comprehensive Plan Design Guidelines, which are appropriate for the site's specific location and character area should be included. (5)  When determining the appropriateness and viability of a proposed project, the city shall consult the City of Americus Comprehensive Plan. Projects that prove that the use of innovative or creative design will benefit the city may be considered for said district. (c)  Permitted uses. (1)  Planned mixed-use village. a.  Planned mixed-use villages shall be primarily residential in character and may include a mixture of single-family and multifamily residential uses. Overall residential density shall be limited to no more than _____ units per acre. Lower densities may be required by the city where appropriate. b.  Supplemental nonresidential uses (office and limited retail) are permitted when complimentary to and compatible with the orderly operation of the residential project, provided that all such uses shall not constitute more than 20 percent of the total project land area or gross floor area, whichever is less, or as otherwise permitted by the city council. Residential uses may be attached, semi-attached, detached and/or located within multi-story buildings above nonresidential office or commercial development. c.  Mixed-use villages shall be designed using the adopted Comprehensive Plan Design Guidelines adopted by the City of Americus. Favorable projects will incorporate most, if not all, of these standards. d.  All projects shall incorporate good design and engineering principles. (2)  Planned mixed-use center. a.  Planned mixed-use centers shall be primarily nonresidential in character and may include a mixture of office, commercial and industrial uses. b.  Supplemental residential uses may also be permitted when complimentary to and compatible with the orderly development of the planned project; provided that all such residential uses shall not exceed the net density in excess of what the least restrictive conventional residential zoning would permit or that density outlined by the city's comprehensive plan, whichever is greater. Lower residential densities may be required by the city council if adjacent to lower density residential areas, or where otherwise appropriate. c.  All projects shall incorporate good design and engineering principles. (d)  Site development standards. (1)  Minimum site area. The minimum site area shall consist of no less than _____ acres of contiguous land area. (2)  Perimeter development requirements. No housing type, use, setback, height, and coverage requirements are established. However, existing residential development along the perimeter of the planned mixed-use development shall be adequately protected by setbacks, landscaped walls and/or other buffers to be established as part of the site development plan review. (3)  Internal development requirements. a.  No minimum lot sizes or shapes shall be required, except as may be established as part of the site development plan review. b.  No minimum distance between on-site structures shall be required, except as may be established as part of the site development plan review; however, applicable fire code requirements shall be met. c.  No minimum yard setbacks shall be required, except as may be established as part of the site development plan review. (4)  Off-street parking and loading. Adequate off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided. However, reductions in total parking requirements is strongly encouraged. The sharing of off-street parking areas between uses is allowed and encouraged as well as parallel on-street where appropriate. The use of porous alternative parking areas is allowed and encouraged where appropriate. (5)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall meet or exceed all of the minimum requirements of the city's zoning ordinance. The preservation of mature trees and tree stands is strongly encouraged. (6)  Underground utilities. All on-site utilities shall be installed underground. The developer shall provide adequate landscaping to screen all above ground facilities. (7)  Accessibility. Every residential unit or permitted use shall have direct access to a public street via a private road, common easement, or other area dedicated or reserved for public use. (8)  Common open space requirements. a.  All designated common open spaces shall be preserved by one or more of the following methods: (i)  Public dedication, subject to acceptance by the city council by formal vote. (ii)  Conveyance to a property owners' association or nonprofit land conservation organization. (iii)  Retention of ownership, control and maintenance by the developer with a permanent conservation easement donated to a nonprofit land conservation organization. b.  All privately-owned common open space shall conform to its intended use and remain as expressed in the approved site development plan through the inclusion in all deeds of appropriate covenant. Said deed restrictions shall run with the land. (9)  Environmental considerations. Protections of wetlands, creeks and streams should be provided where appropriate. (e)  Application procedures. (1)  The following procedures, applications and exhibits shall be required when applying for rezoning to a planned unit development district: a.  Pre-application conference: Before submitting an application for rezoning to a planned mixed-use development district, the applicant shall confer with the community development director to determine the feasibility for the proposed plan and its relationship to the city's comprehensive plan. b.  Professional service requirement: Any plan or exhibit as part of an application for a planned unit development shall certify that the services of two or more of the following professionals were utilized in the design or planning process: (i)  A planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners; (ii)  A landscape architect registered by the State of Georgia; (iii)  An architect licensed by the State of Georgia; and/or (iv)  A professional civil engineer registered by the State of Georgia. c.  Application fees required: Fees shall be required at the time of submittal of an application for rezoning to a planned mixed-use development district in conformance with the city's fee schedule. d.  Review information required site development plan: All applications for rezoning to a planned mixed-use development district shall include the following information on the site development plan and supporting documents: (i)  A recent (less than three years) boundary survey with north arrow and scale; (ii)  A full legal description of the property with attached copies of any instruments referred to such as deeds, plats, covenants or restrictions; (iii)  The names and addresses of the owners of the property to be rezoned and evidence of unified control of the property; (iv)  The names and addresses of all adjoining property owners; (v)  The total area of the site in acres and square feet; (vi)  A map indicating the location, arrangement and dimensions of the following existing features within and immediately adjacent to the property: Vegetation (including tree preserve areas), state waters, land uses, buildings, structures, utilities, drainage ways, easements, public street rights-of-way, railways and property lines; (vii)  A statement as to how the proposed project conforms to the city's adopted comprehensive plan design guidelines; (viii)  Plans showing the location, arrangement and dimensions of all proposed land uses, including the number of floors per building (other than single-family residential); the height of all nonresidential and multifamily buildings above finished grade; building setbacks from perimeter boundaries and from public rights-of-way; a proposed traffic circulation plan showing the location and dimensions of all streets, driveways, walkways, bikeways, parking spaces and loading areas; and all proposed common elements including utilities, open spaces and recreation areas; (ix)  A plan or statement showing the manner of improving common open spaces, together with provisions, restrictions and conditions anticipated for the use, maintenance and operation of such common elements; (x)  A statement, in tabular form, of the anticipated gross residential density and overall project density, the total number of dwelling units by type, size and number of bedrooms, and gross floor area devoted to business or other nonresidential uses; (xi)  Proposals for providing stormwater drainage and on-site retention areas and, at the city's discretion, may include rough calculations, approximate size of retention areas, methods of pollutant removal, location of berms, swales, culverts, and sewers, anticipated finished grades and proposed slopes and grades adjacent to bodies of water; and (xii)  An architectural sketch or sketches of typical proposed structures. e.  Planning commission: After receiving a staff recommendation from the community development director, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the governing body of the city as required in the city's the zoning ordinance. f.  City council: (i)  Upon receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall, at a public hearing, review said recommendation and proposed project. The city council may then either approve, approve subject to conditions or disapprove the application. (ii)  Any and all variations to the city's development regulations, zoning ordinance, or other standards shall be outlined in a "list of standards" and illustrated on the site plan adopted by the city. (iii)  In the event the rezoning is approved by the city council, the site development plan shall be certified by the city, and said certified copy shall be filed as a permanent record. Without exception, the approved plan shall be binding upon all existing and future owners and assigns. (2)  Conformance to approved site development plan. a.  After rezoning to a planned mixed-use district, no permits shall be issued and no development shall commence unless in conformance with the approved site development plan, unless a change or deviation is approved by the city. b.  The community development director may approve minor changes and deviations from the approved site development plan which are in compliance with the provisions and intent of this article and which do not depart from the principal concept of the approved site development plan. c.  Should the community development director determine that a requested change or deviation from the approved site development plan does not comply with the provisions and intent of this article, or departs from the principles of the planned mixed-use development, the applicant may apply for approval of such change or deviation to the city council as a plan amendment. (3)  Failure to begin planned unit development. If no construction has been initiated or no use established in the planned unit development within 18 months from the time of rezoning, the approved site development plan shall lapse and become null and void until the plan is resubmitted for approval or a new site plan is approved as a plan amendment. (Ord. No. O-06-12-46, 12-21-2006) 
Sec. 94-163. - Commercial corridor district. (a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the commercial corridor district is to address issues of public safety, health and general welfare, including controlling the visual and architectural character of commercial corridors through the use of design requirements in order that commercial strips are visually compatible with the development of Americus. (b)  Requirements. All new development and existing development, when the building outline is proposed to change, shall adhere to the requirements of this section. (c)  Parking and on-site circulation. (1)  A landscape buffer strip at least ten feet wide around parking areas shall be densely planted with shrubs and trees of a type that possess growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact evergreen planting screen. (2)  In addition to a planted buffer, trees and shrubs shall be at least three feet high at the time of planting and capable of growing to a height of at least six feet within three years. (3)  There shall be one tree with a 2½-inch diameter planted for every eight parking spaces in a the parking lot. (4)  Raised pedestrian walkways shall be installed through parking areas of 50 or more spaces or more than 100 feet in average width or depth. (5)  Parking lots with 50 spaces or more shall be divided into separate areas and divided by landscaped areas or walkways at least ten feet in width, or by a building or group of buildings. (6)  Developments of two acres or more must provide a pedestrian circulation plan for the site. Pedestrian walkways shall be directly linked to entrances. (7)  Connections shall be made when feasible to any streets adjacent to the property and to any pedestrian facilities that connect with the property. (8)  Parking lots shall be connected with adjacent parking lots. (9)  Maximum allowable number of spaces. The number of spaces provided by any particular use in ground surface lots shall not exceed the required number of spaces provided by this chapter by more than 50 percent; except that for professional service and office uses, including medical and dental, parking spaces may be approved not to exceed a total of six spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area under the staff permit procedure, provided that any parking that exceeds the required number of spaces by more than 50 percent shall be shown to be necessary and shall be on improved pervious surface with one tree per five spaces. Spaces provided on-street, or within the building footprint of structures, such as in rooftop parking, or under-structure parking, or in multi-level parking above or below surface lots, shall not apply towards the maximum number of allowable spaces. (10)  Curb cuts shall be kept to a minimum, and shall in no case be greater than 30 feet in length, nor closer than 200 feet to another curb cut. (d)  Connectivity. (1)  All developments shall provide sidewalks having a minimum width of six feet along all frontages of the lot that abut a public street. (2)  Continuous on-site sidewalks having a minimum width of four feet shall be provided from the public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance of all buildings on the site. Such sidewalks shall provide weather protection features such as awnings or arcades along the building facade within 30 feet of all customer entrances. Sidewalks shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, street crossings, building and store entrances. (3)  Sidewalks having a minimum width of six feet shall be provided along the full length of the building facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. (4)  All buildings shall provide direct pedestrian access from on-site parking areas as well as the public sidewalk. (5)  All on-site sidewalks shall be distinguished from vehicular surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety. (e)  Setbacks and buffer requirements. (1)  For setback requirements, see C-2 general business. District Max. lot coverage by bldg. (gross)* (percent) Min. Setback for Front Yard Purpose. Major Streets (Feet) Max. Setback for Front Yard Purpose. Major Streets (Feet) Collector Streets (Feet) Other Streets (Feet) Min. Yards Side (Feet) Rear (Feet) Corner Lot Min. Setback for Side Yards. Max. Height (Feet) Major Streets (Feet) Collector Streets (Feet) Other streets (Feet) C-1 Roadside Business 40 25 60 40 35 10 25 35 50 40 35 C-2 General Business 40 25 60 40 35 10 25 35 50 40 35 C-3 Downtown General Business 100 - - - - - - - - - I-N Institutional 50 25 60 40 35 10 25 40 50 40 35 I Industrial 50 25 60 40 35 150 300 40 50 40 35  (2)  A maximum front and side yard setback shall correspond to the size of the buffer requirement in all commercial development. (3)  Side and rear yard buffers. Whenever the zoning ordinances require side and rear yard buffers, one or more, or a combination of the following buffers shall be installed along the lot line of the subject property, as follows: a.  Natural buffer strip. A strip at least 25 feet wide, having an existing natural growth equivalent to a density planted evergreen screen. A landscape plan identifying all existing trees of six-inch caliper or greater which are to be retained inside the 25-foot natural buffer strip, along with any proposed trees and shrubs, must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; b.  Landscape buffer strip. A strip at least ten feet wide, densely planted with shrubs and trees at least three feet high at the time of planting, of a type that possesses growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact evergreen planting screen capable of growing to a height of at least six feet within three years. A landscape plan identifying all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strips must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; or c.  Landscape buffer wall. A buffer strip at least ten feet wide, containing an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet in height. Buffer strips shall have five feet of landscape plantings on the exterior side of the wall and shall be planted with appropriate trees, shrubs and groundcover as to provide a transition from the wall to both edges of the buffer strip. A landscape plan identifying the location and construction of the wall or barrier and all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strip must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction. (4)  It is permissible for any part of subsections (3)b or (3)c of this section to be intermingled with some natural landscape materials, as long as they meet the intent of this section. (5)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city until any buffers required by this section are planted or installed. (6)  All developments shall to the extent practical provide entryway berming for the purpose of shielding parking areas, loading docks, dumpsters, and similar areas from view by employing the following methods, in order of preference: a.  Preservation of natural land forms, trees and other landscape elements. b.  Landscaped berms with asymmetrical groupings of plant materials, including trees and shrubs which are long lived, and indigenous to Americus and this part of Georgia and 50 percent of which shall be evergreen species. (7)  Buildings shall incorporate live plant materials as foundation plantings. (8)  Any site furnishings such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and bicycle racks shall complement the building design and style. (9)  One canopy tree shall be planted for every 250 square feet of landscaped area. Shrubs shall be planted at a ratio of three for every one tree. (10)  A minimum of 20 percent of all existing trees having a diameter of 16 inches or greater shall be retained. This requirement shall be in addition to the standards of any required landscape area; however, such retention may be achieved through tree preservation within such areas. (f)  Orientation and scale. (1)  Buildings shall have their primary orientation toward the street rather than the parking area. Public sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to a public street along the street frontage. (2)  For corner lots, buildings shall be oriented towards both roads by addressing the corner as the primary facade and the minimum front yard setback shall be observed on both street frontages. (3)  The building shall cover no more than 50 percent of the site width. When measuring site width, only buildable portions of the site shall be included. (4)  The maximum gross lot coverage of the building shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot. (5)  Trash storage areas, mechanical equipment and similar areas are not permitted to be visible from the street, nor are permitted between the building and the street. (6)  All dumpsters shall be screened with building material consistent with the main structure. (7)  All dumpsters shall have gates that act as screens. (8)  Building frontages greater than 100 feet in length shall have offsets, or other distinctive changes in the building facade. (9)  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface or finish to give emphasis to entrances. (10)  Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from the rain and sun. (11)  All on-site circulation systems shall incorporate a streetscape, which includes curbs, sidewalks, pedestrian scale light standards, and street trees. (g)  Roof shape. (1)  Roof lines shall be articulated to provide visual interest and minimize large expanses. This shall be accomplished through the use of gables, parapets, hi-roof design, or changes in the height of the roofline along the course of the building. (2)  Rooflines shall be broken up such that the roofline shall not exceed 60 feet without changing height on all sides of the building. (3)  The pitch of a structure's exposed (in plain view) roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of 2½ feet for every 12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction or a standing seam metal roof. (4)  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual relief. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at a minimum rate of every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or such features shall be one foot, and may be provided as height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. (5)  Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way or residential zoning district within 150 feet as viewed from five feet above ground level. Roof screens and parapet walls shall be coordinated with the building to present a unified appearance. (h)  Building materials. Exterior building finishes and materials shall be compatible with that of downtown Americus. (1)  Fifty percent of the front facade shall be constructed using brick or stone. (2)  The remainder of the facade shall be constructed using brick, wood, stucco, stone or Hardiplank© or Hardiplank© type materials. (3)  Trashcans and benches shall be constructed using brick, wood, stucco, stone, metal, or Hardiplank© or Hardiplank© type materials. (4)  All main and secondary power utilities must be underground including site lighting. (i)  Signage. (1)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: a.  Maximum number. No more than one sign shall be allowed per business. Unless, the building has road frontage on two sides, one sign per side. b.  Maximum size. Shall not exceed one square foot per linear foot of store frontage. c.  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the bottom of the roofline. (2)  Group signs. In addition to other permanent signs that are allowed, each group development shall be allowed group signs subject to the following limitations: a.  Maximum number. No more than one group ground sign shall be allowed per street frontage. b.  Maximum area. The maximum sign area for a ground sign shall be limited to 32 square feet per tenant and shall not exceed an aggregate size in excess of 120 square feet. c.  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed 20 feet for a ground sign. A wall sign shall not exceed the signable area. d.  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback five feet from all lot lines. (3)  Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be no more than ten feet tall and ten feet wide and shall be a pedestal type sign with no more than 70 square feet of signage area. (4)  All signs shall only be constructed of brick, wood, stucco, stone and Hardiplank© type material. No exposed metal or wood post columns. (5)  Billboard signs. Billboard signs shall not exceed 300 square feet of sign area. Billboard signs shall not exceed ten feet in height or 35 feet in length (Americus Code § 74-85). (j)  Accessory buildings. (1)  Accessory buildings and structures shall comply with all requirements for the principal use except where specifically modified by this chapter and shall comply with the following limitations: a.  Mechanical equipment shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Such equipment shall not be located between the main structure on the site and any street adjacent to a front or side yard, and every attempt shall be made to place such equipment so that it is not visible from adjacent public streets. Any installation of mechanical equipment shall require a building permit. (2)  Signs, fences, parking, driveways, accessory dwellings, and temporary structures are not subject to the provisions of this section. (k)  Fenestration. (1)  All types of structures shall have regular fenestration. The length of facade without intervening fenestration or entryway shall not exceed 20 feet. (2)  Fenestration shall be provided for a minimum of 70 percent of the length of street frontages. Entryways may be counted towards fenestration requirements. (3)  Primary entrance. The primary public entrance of a building shall face a street and be directly linked to a public sidewalk. It shall be positioned no more than five feet above the finished grade at the front of the building. (4)  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface, or finish to give emphasis to entrances. (5)  Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from the rain and sun. (6)  Transparency. Transparency at the street level shall be measured from the finished grade at the street to ten feet above grade for the entire width of the wall. (7)  The following alternative design treatments may be used, singularly or in combination, to meet half of the transparency requirement at the street level: a.  Wall art, including murals, sculptural and other decorative treatment of exterior walls; b.  Landscaping, which is to be at least three feet high at the time of planting and of a type that will produce an opaque, evergreen planting screen capable of growing to a height of at least six feet within three years. (8)  Windows must allow views into working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances or display areas. (l)  Easements. (1)  Easements at least ten feet wide, five feet wide on each side of side lot lines shall be provided for utilities for utility service to those lots only. (2)  Easements at least 15 feet wide shall be provided along all rights-of-way of new roads and along the frontages of new developments and subdivisions developed on existing roads. (3)  Public water and sanitary sewer easements, if determined by the utilities authority to be necessary shall be required. Easement placement and widths will be determined by the utilities authority. (Ord. No. O-12-02-03, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 94-164. - RR (railroad) district.     Railroads, railroad rights-of-way, and railroad crossings owned or leased by a railroad authorized to do business in the State of Georgia which are located within the corporate limits of the City of Americus. Such property zoned for railroads may only be used for railroad and railroad-related transportation purposes and for accessory uses and structures incidental to any legally permitted use. In addition, the following shall apply with respect to the RR district: (1)  Any structures located in such zoning district upon railroad owned or leased property shall be located solely within the railroad property and shall not be closer than five feet to the side or rear lot lines of the railroad property. (2)  No general advertising sign, off-premises sign, or any digital general advertising sign or digital off-premises sign shall be located within such railroad zoning district. (Ord. No. O-2013-20, 7-18-2013) 
Sec. 94-165. - Entertainment overlay zoning district.     There is hereby established in the incorporated limits of the city an entertainment overlay zoning district. Such district shall be subject to the provisions and regulations set out herein. (1)  Purpose and intent. a.  The purpose of the entertainment overlay district is to address issues of public safety, health, and general welfare, including controlling the visual and architectural character of commercial corridors through the use of design requirements in order that commercial strips are visually compatible with the development of Americus. b.  Requirements. All new development and existing development, when the building outline is proposed to change, or the building has an occupancy change to allow the sale of alcohol on or off premise, the requirements of this Section shall be followed. (2)  Parking. a.  There shall be a minimum ten foot vegetative buffer around parking areas. Buffers shall consist of densely planted trees and shrubs. b.  Trees shall be at least two and one-half inch diameter. c.  There shall be on tree planted for every eight parking spaces in the parking lot. d.  Shrubs shall be at least one and one-half feet in height. There shall only be one row of parking between the building and the curb. The majority of the parking shall be at the sides and rear of the building. e.  Raised pedestrian walkways shall be installed through parking areas of 50 or more spaces or more than 100 feet in average width or depth. f.  Parking lots with 50 spaces or more shall be divided into separate areas and divided by landscaped areas or walkways at least ten feet in width, or by a building or group of buildings. g.  Developments of two acres or more must provide a pedestrian circulation plan for the site. Pedestrian walkways shall be directly linked to entrances. h.  Curb cuts shall be kept to a minimum to prevent problems with vehicular and pedestrian traffic. i.  Parking lots shall connect with adjacent parking lots. j.  Where possible, curb cuts shall be shared between neighboring properties. k.  Maximum allowable number of spaces. The number of spaces provided by any particular use in ground surface lots shall not exceed the required number of spaces provided by this title by more than 50 percent; except that for professional service and office uses, including medical and dental, parking spaces may be approved not to exceed a total of six spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area under the staff permit procedure, provided that any parking that exceeds the required number of spaces by more than 50 percent shall be shown to be necessary and shall be on improved pervious surface with one tree per five spaces. Spaces provided on-street, or within the building footprint of structures, such as in rooftop parking, or under-structure parking, or in multi-level parking above or below surface lots, shall not apply towards the maximum number of allowable spaces. (ACC § 9-30-2) l.  Curb cuts shall be kept to a minimum, and shall in no case be greater that 30 feet in length, nor closer that 200 feet to another curb cut. (3)  Setbacks. a.  A maximum front and side yard setback shall correspond to the size of the buffer requirement in all commercial development. b.  Structures shall front upon primary thoroughfares. c.  No structures other than signs shall be placed between the front property line and the building's façade. d.  Side and rear yard buffers. Whenever the zoning ordinances require side and rear yard buffers, one or more, or a combination of the following buffers shall be installed along the lot line of the subject property, as follows: 1.  Natural buffer strip. A strip at least 25 feet wide, having an existing natural growth equivalent to a density planted evergreen screen. A landscape plan identifying all existing trees of six-inch caliper or greater which are to be retained inside the 25-foot natural buffer strip, along with any proposed trees and shrubs must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; 2.  Landscape buffer strip. A strip at least ten feet wide, densely planted with shrubs and trees at least three feet high at the time of planting, of a type that possesses growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact evergreen planting screen capable of growing to a height of at least six feet within three years. A landscape plan identifying all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strips must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; or 3.  Landscape buffer wall. A buffer strip at least ten feet wide, containing an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet in height. Buffer strips shall have five feet of landscape plantings on the exterior side of the wall and shall be planted with appropriate trees, shrubs and ground cover as to provide a transition from the wall to both edges of the buffer strip. A landscape plan identifying the location and construction of the wall or barrier and all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strip must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction. e.  It is permissible for any part of subsection (e)(2) or (3) of this section to be intermingled. f.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city until any buffers required by this section are planted or installed. g.  All developments shall to the extent practical provide entryway berming for the purpose of shielding parking areas, loading docks, dumpsters, and similar areas from view by employing the following methods, in order of preference: 1.  Preservation of natural land forms, trees and other landscape elements. 2.  Landscaped berms with asymmetrical groupings of plant materials, including trees and shrubs which are long lived, and indigenous to Americus and this part of Georgia and 50 percent of which shall be evergreen species. h.  Buildings shall incorporate live plant materials as foundation plantings. i.  Any site furnishings such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and bicycle racks shall complement the building design and style. j.  One canopy tree shall be planted for every 250 square feet of landscaped area. Shrubs shall be planted at a ratio of three for every one tree. k.  A minimum of 20 percent of all existing trees having a diameter of 16 inches or greater shall be retained. This requirement shall be in addition to the standards of any required landscape area; however, such retention may be achieved through tree preservation within such areas. (4)  Orientation. a.  Buildings shall be oriented to face the primary thoroughfare. b.  Public sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to a public street along the street frontage. c.  For corner lots, buildings shall be oriented towards both roads by addressing the corner as the primary façade and the minimum front yard setback shall be observed on both street frontages. d.  Trash storage areas, mechanical equipment, and similar areas are not permitted to be visible from the street nor are permitted between the building and the street. e.  All dumpsters shall be screened with building material consistent with the main structure. f.  All dumpsters shall have gates that act as screens. g.  Building frontages greater than 100 feet in length shall have offsets or other distinctive changes in the building facade. h.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface or finish to give emphasis to entrances. i.  Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from the rain and sun. j.  All on-site circulation systems shall incorporate a streetscape, which includes curbs, sidewalks, pedestrian scale light standards, and street trees. (5)  Connectivity. a.  All developments shall provide sidewalks having a minimum width of six feet or to match the existing sidewalks along all frontages of the lot that abut a public street. b.  Continuous on site sidewalks having a minimum width of four feet shall be provided from the public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance of all buildings on the site. Such sidewalks shall provide weather protection features such as awnings or arcades along the building facade within 30 feet of all customer entrances. Sidewalks shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, street crossings, building and store entrances. c.  Sidewalks having a minimum width of six feet shall be provided along the full length of the building facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. d.  All buildings shall provide direct pedestrian access from on-site parking areas as well as the public sidewalk. e.  All on site sidewalks shall be distinguished from vehicular surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety. (6)  Roof shape. a.  Roof lines shall be articulated to provide visual interest and minimize large expanses. This shall be accomplished through the use of gables, parapets, hi-roof design, or changes in the height of the roofline along the course of the building. b.  Rooflines shall be broken up so that the roofline shall not go for more than 100 feet without changing height. c.  Cornices shall be utilized on the front of the building. d.  The pitch of a structure's exposed (in plain view) roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of four feet for every 12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction or a standing seam metal roof. e.  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual relief. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at a minimum rate of every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or such features shall be one foot, and may be provided as height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. f.  Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way or residential zoning district within 150 feet as viewed from five feet above ground level. Roof screens and parapet walls shall be coordinated with the building to present a unified appearance. A flat roof must be concealed by a parapet along the roofline so that mechanical equipment on the roof is concealed on all sides of the structure. (7)  Materials. a.  Exterior building finishes and materials shall be compatible with that of downtown Americus. 1.  Fifty percent of the front façade shall be constructed using brick or stone, 2.  The remainder of the façade shall be constructed using brick, wood, stucco, stone or Hardiplank© or Hardiplank© type materials. 3.  Trashcans and benches shall be constructed using brick, wood, stucco, stone, metal, or Hardiplank© or Hardiplank© type materials. 4.  All main and secondary power utilities must be underground including site lighting. b.  Roofing materials must be consistent with the pitch of the roof, form of the structure, and its use. Some appropriate materials include standing seam metal, asphalt shingles, and slate. Exposed storm drainage devices such as gutters and downspouts should be consistent with the roofing system and building forms, with references to Americus' historic built design. (8)  Fenestration. a.  All types of structures shall have regular fenestration. b.  Entryways may be counted towards fenestration requirements. (9)  Accessory structures. a.  Accessory structures shall be consistent with the design of the dominant structure. b.  Trashcans and benches shall be free from advertisements and shall be constructed using metal, wood, brick, or stone. (10)  Mechanical equipment, utilities, and dumpsters/receptacles. a.  Architectural features such as parapets shall be used to screen mechanical and HVAC equipment from view by pedestrian and vehicular traffic. b.  Mechanical equipment, HVAC systems, and/or utilities located at ground level shall be screened from pedestrian and vehicular traffic through the use of fencing and vegetation. c.  Any dumpster, trash, grease, or waste receptacle shall be located at the rear of the property. Any such receptacle shall not be visible from the public right-of-way and shall be enclosed (i.e., not seen from front, sides, or rear) by a wall. (11)  On premise alcohol sales. a.  Business that have a on premise alcohol license shall abide with the following requirements. 1.  Outdoor seating must be divided off with a fence or wall. b.  Hours of operation. 1.  Alcoholic beverages by the drink. Sale of any alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-premises consumption: licensees shall not engage in the sale of any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily. All alcoholic beverages will be consumed or removed by 2:45 a.m. and all patrons must be out of the premises by 3:00 a.m. (Ord. No. O-2017-8, 7-20-2017) 
Secs. 94-166—94-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 94-193. - Construction and related requirements for residential dwellings in certain zoning districts.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the following provisions shall apply to residential dwellings in the city: (1)  Minimum heated floor area. Residential dwellings within the city shall be required to have the following minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit, measured in square feet, as follows: a.  R-1 residential district. Eight hundred fifty square feet for single-family detached residences; 500 square feet per residence for nonsingle-family residences; b.  R-2 residential district. Eight hundred fifty square feet for single-family detached residences; 450 square feet per residence for nonsingle-family residences; c.  R-3 and R-3A residential district. Eight hundred fifty square feet for single-family detached residences; 450 square feet per residence for nonsingle-family residences; d.  R-4 MH residential district. Four hundred fifty square feet per residence. (2)  Minimum frontage and depth. Any structure constructed in a R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-3A residential district shall have a minimum frontage of not less than 24 linear feet and a minimum depth front building line to rear building line of not less than 24 feet. (3)  Number of doors. All single-family, detached dwellings, in any residential district, shall be required to have at least two doors that provide ingress and egress into and outside the residential dwelling. (4)  Applicability to all types. The provisions of this section shall apply to all types of residential dwellings, regardless of the manner or method of construction thereof. (5)  Applicability to construction. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to any construction of residential dwellings on any lot or lots upon which no such structure exists as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. With respect to lots upon which there are located residential dwellings on September 1, 1994, in the event that such residential dwelling is completely or partially destroyed, or is otherwise required to be rebuilt, then, at a minimum, the owner shall be authorized to rebuild the same size residential dwelling, as to square footage that was formerly located on the lot as of September 1, 1994, or to rebuild in accord with the square footage requirements set out in subsection (1) of this section, whichever square footage is lesser. (6)  Cluster housing development. a.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in cluster housing developments: 1.  Single-family residence cluster housing. 2.  Accessory buildings. b.  Density standards. The cluster housing development shall not be less than the following: Zoning Classification Density R-1 One dwelling unit per 8,000 square feet of land R-2 One dwelling unit per 7,000 square feet of land  c.  Common areas. 1.  A cluster housing development allows individual lot areas which may have less than the minimum lot area for dwelling units required in the zoning district from which the cluster housing development was created; provided, however, the land area at least equal to the reduction in each individual lot area shall be placed in usable common areas. 2.  The land in streets, common off-street parking areas, and storm drainage detention facilities shall not be included as part of the usable common area requirement. However, full credit for lot reduction shall be allowed for usable detention facilities. 3.  The plan for cluster housing development shall provide for ownership, maintenance and control of common areas. 4.  The usable common area shall be fully credited to calculations of density. d.  Minimum design and development criteria. 1.  Minimum cluster housing development site shall be 1 3/4 acres. 2.  Buildings shall set back 25 feet from any street right-of-way. 3.  Within a cluster housing development, the rear of a cluster housing dwelling unit will have no setback requirement and the sides of a cluster housing dwelling unit will have no setback requirement for one side only; provided, however, that every cluster housing dwelling unit shall have at least one side with a setback of at least 15 feet from another cluster housing dwelling unit. In addition, a cluster housing dwelling unit shall have a side setback of at least 15 feet and a rear setback of at least 40 feet from the property line of any adjacent property that is not developed as a part of the cluster development. 4.  Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 5.  No more than 60 percent of the gross land area may be covered by impermeable surfaces including, but not limited to, buildings, off-street parking and drives, tennis courts, and the like, nor by swimming pools and drainage facilities. On the remaining 40 percent of the gross land area, permeable surfaces may be contained within either individual building lots or common areas or within a combination of the two areas. Usable detention facilities may be used to help achieve the 40 percent permeable surface requirement: 6.  Usable detention facilities shall comply with the following criteria: i.  The maximum depth of the detention facility shall not exceed 2 1/2 feet below the existing ground elevation measured beneath the rim of the depression. ii.  The detention facility shall be designed and constructed to drain completely after each rain event. iii.  The detention facility shall be designed and constructed with a minimum ratio of 3:1 side slopes. iv.  The detention facility shall be grassed or sodded. 7.  To preserve the integrity of the surrounding area, the planning commission may require certain screening buffers as part of the new development. 8.  All cluster housing developments shall be designed so that no separate dwelling unit will be constructed on top of another separate dwelling unit. 9.  In a R-1 zoning classification, there shall be a minimum lot width of 50 feet as measured at the building line and a minimum dwelling size of 1,500 square feet. As to cluster housing located in a R-2 zoning classification, there shall be a minimum lot width of 45 feet as measured at the building line and a minimum dwelling size of 1,200 square feet. e.  Review criteria. In reviewing a cluster housing development site plan, the city staff and the planning commission shall consider the following criteria to the extent relevant in each case, in evaluating the merits and purposes of a cluster plan. Individual lots, buildings, streets and parking areas should be designed and situated to: 1.  Minimize alteration of the natural features and topography. 2.  Minimize the adverse effects of noise and traffic on off-site residents. 3.  Minimize the area devoted to serve motor vehicles. 4.  Allow for proper and adequate access for firefighting purposes and access to service areas to provide garbage and waste collection and for other accessory services. 5.  Achieve a compatible relationship between development and land as well as with adjacent developments and land. f.  Approval of cluster housing development required. No plat or plan of a cluster housing development shall be filed or recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county, or any building permit issued until it has been approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the planning commission. g.  V ariances. Where the developer can show that a provision of these standards would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning on which the departure was justified set forth. (7)  Manufactured homes located in R-3 and R-3A districts. With respect to manufactured homes to be located in zoning districts R-3 and R-3A: a.  Each manufactured home in such zoning districts must be set on an appropriate permanent foundation; b.  The transportation mechanisms, including wheels, axles, and hitches, must be removed prior to the occupancy of a manufactured home or an industrialized home in such zoning districts; c.  Each manufactured home in such zoning districts shall be installed in accord with installation instructions provided by the manufacturer; d.  Each manufactured home located in such zoning districts shall be connected to a public sewer system, if available, or if such public sewer system is not available, to a community sewage system or to an on-site septic system with available capacity, such community sewage system and such on-site septic system to be approved by the appropriate health officials of the city or the county, as the case may be. e.  The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure of each manufactured home in such districts and the ground, including stairways, shall be underpinned with masonry that completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage and attached stairways, except for proper ventilation and access openings; f.  The exterior siding of each manufactured home located in such districts shall consist of brick, vinyl, wood or hardboard siding material; g.  Each manufactured home located in such districts shall have a pitched roof with a slope of at least four feet in height for each 12 feet in width, and roof materials shall be wood shake, tile, or asphalt shingle material; h.  A covered porch, deck, or entry area at least 48 inches by 48 inches shall be added for each entrance to the manufactured home prior to occupancy. (8)  Manufactured homes in R-4 MH districts. With respect to manufactured homes located in the R-4 MH residential districts within the city, the following installation and compatibility standards shall apply: a.  Each manufactured home located in such zoning district must be set on an appropriate foundation as approved by the city building official; b.  The transportation mechanisms, including wheels, axles, and hitches, must be removed prior to occupancy of any manufactured home in such zoning district prior to occupancy; c.  The manufactured home in such zoning districts shall be installed in accordance with installation instructions provided by the manufacturer of the home; d.  Each manufactured home located in such zoning districts shall be connected to a public sewer system, if available, or if such public sewer system is not available, to a community sewage system or to an on-site septic system with available capacity, such community sewage system and such on-site septic system to be approved by the appropriate health officials of the city or the county, as the case may be. e.  The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure and the ground of each manufactured home located in such districts shall be skirted or underpinned with brick, masonry, finished concrete, or siding, of like or similar character to the manufactured home, which completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage, except for proper ventilation and access openings. f.  At each exit door there must be a landing that is a minimum of 36 inches by 36 inches. (Code 1986, § 23-32; Ord. No. O-94-09-31, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-00-10-40, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002) 
Sec. 94-194. - Buffer requirements. (a)  Side and rear yard buffers. Whenever the zoning ordinances require side and rear yard buffers, one or more, or a combination of the following buffers shall be installed along the lot line of the subject property, as follows: (1)  Natural buffer strip. A strip at least 25 feet wide, having an existing natural growth equivalent to a density planted evergreen screen. A landscape plan identifying all existing trees of six-inch caliper or greater which are to be retained inside the 25-foot natural buffer strip, along with any proposed trees and shrubs, must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; (2)  Landscape buffer strip. A strip at least ten feet wide, densely planted with shrubs and trees at least three feet high at the time of planting, of a type that possesses growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact evergreen planting screen capable of growing to a height of at least six feet within three years. A landscape plan identifying all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strips must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; or (3)  Landscape buffer wall. A buffer strip at least ten feet wide, containing an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet in height. Buffer strips shall have five feet of landscape plantings on the exterior side of the wall and shall be planted with appropriate trees, shrubs and groundcover as to provide a transition from the wall to both edges of the buffer strip. A landscape plan identifying the location and construction of the wall or barrier and all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strip must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction. (b)  It is permissible for any part of subsections (a)(2) or (3) of this section to be intermingled with some natural landscape materials, as long as they meet the intent of this section. (c)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city until any buffers required by this section are planted or installed. (d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, the buffers required by this section shall not be required unless the subject lot abuts a residential zoning district. (Code 1986, § 23-33; Ord. No. O-95-09-29, 9-21-1995) 
Sec. 94-195. - Construction of fences. (a)  The following definitions shall be applicable to this subsection: (1)  Fence means any structure constructed or erected to provide a barrier, either physical or visual, for the purpose of protecting property, providing for security and privacy, and properly containing activities on the property. (2)  Fence height means the vertical dimension from the natural ground level to the top of the fence measured at any point along the length of the fence. (3)  Yard, front means that area bounded by a line along the front of the principal structure extended to intersect the side property lines; those side property lines; and the front property line. (4)  Principal structure means the principal building or other structure on a lot or building site designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted, excluding attached accessory structures or architectural features (i.e., bay windows, chimneys, decks and porches). (b)  Fences upon private property in the City of Americus shall be located as follows: (1)  Fences (walls and decorative fences) shall not be located outside or beyond the property or lot lines of the lot to be served by such fence. (2)  Fences located in side and front yards shall be placed no closer than eight feet from the back of the street curb, or when curbing does not exist, from the edge of pavement but no closer than two feet from the sidewalk. (3)  No fence or wall constructed hereunder shall be constructed or maintained in a manner that will create a hazard to vehicular traffic or that will impair the ability of drivers to see and avoid other traffic or pedestrians. (c)  All fences shaii conform to the following height designs and fence types: (1)  Fences shall not be constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, or other discarded materials. (2)  Barbed wire fences or barbed wire assemblies or additions atop fences shall be prohibited in all residential and commercial districts. (3)  Barbed wire fences are permitted in agricultural and industrial districts with the following restrictions: a.  Barbed wire assemblies or additions shall be restricted to three horizontal wire strands not to exceed a maximum of 18 inches; b.  Barbed wire assemblies shall only be erected atop fences which have a minimum height of six feet; and c.  Razor ribbon or razor wire shall be prohibited. (4)  Fences shall lean at a vertical plane of no more than five percent. (d)  This section shall be applicable only to fences permitted and constructed beginning on July 19, 2013; provided, however, that if any fence constructed prior to said date is destroyed or substantially damaged, from whatever cause, such fence shall only be reconstructed in compliance with the provisions of this section. For purposes of this subsection, the terms "destroyed" or "substantially damaged" mean that the fence structure is damaged to the extent of more than 75 percent of its assessed value for city tax purposes. (Ord. No. O-2013-21, 7-18-2013) 
Secs. 94-196—94-211. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOT AND BULK RESTRICTIONS 
Sec. 94-212. - Districts limited to one principal building per lot.     Within residential districts only, except group housing developments, no more than one principal building with its customary accessory buildings may occupy or be constructed upon any lot of record. (Code 1962, § 27-34; Code 1986, § 23-34) 
Sec. 94-213. - Street access.     No building shall hereafter be constructed on one lot which does not have at least 30 feet of frontage on a publicly dedicated, accepted, and maintained street. (Code 1962, § 27-35; Code 1986, § 23-35; Ord. No. O-00-06-26, 6-23-2000; Ord. No. O-04-11-28, 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 94-214. - Classification of streets. (a)  For the purposes of this chapter, all streets in the city and all streets located in the county but fronting upon property located within the city are hereby divided into three classes: (1)  Major streets. (2)  Collector streets. (3)  Residential streets. (b)  Major streets within the city are more particularly designated as follows: (1)  U.S. Highway 280, GA. Highway 30, GA. Highway 49, GA. Highway 27, U.S. Highway 19; (2)  Lee Street; (3)  Tripp Street; (4)  Felder Street; (5)  McGarrah Street; (6)  Reese Street; (7)  Cotton Avenue, from Forsyth Street to McGarrah Street; (8)  Souther Field Road; (9)  Carter Street, from Lee Street to Souther Field Road; (10)  Upper River Road from Georgia Highway 49 East; (11)  Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard from the southern city limits of the city to the northern city limits of the city. (c)  Collector streets within the city are more particularly designated as follows: (1)  Glessner Street, from Oak Avenue to Wheatley Street; (2)  Forrest Street, from Lamar Street to Oak Avenue; (3)  Elm Avenue, from Lee Street to Reese Street; (4)  College Street, from Oak Avenue to Elm Street; (5)  Taylor Street, from Lee Street to Reese Street; (6)  Spring Street, from U.S. Highway 19 to Church Street; (7)  North Jackson Street, from Church Street to Rucker Street; (8)  Prince Street, from Cotton Avenue to Church Street; (9)  Ashby Street, from Lee Street to Mayo Street; (10)  Jefferson Street, from Prince Street to Oglethorpe Avenue; (11)  Mayo Street, from Souther Field Road to Lamar Street; (12)  Oglethorpe Avenue, from Jefferson Street to U.S. Highway 49; (13)  Rucker Street, from U.S. Highway 19 to Northside Drive; (14)  Northside Drive, from Rucker Street to Souther Field Road; (15)  Cotton Avenue, from Forsyth Street to Lamar Street; (16)  Brown Street, from Taylor Street to Church Street; (17)  North Lee Street, from Carter Street to Rucker Street; (18)  Wheatley Street, from Glessner Street to Simmons Street; (19)  Simmons Street, from Wheatley Street to Tripp Street; (20)  Oak Avenue, from West Glessner Street to Forrest Street; (21)  Magnolia Street, from Georgia Highway 30 to Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard; (22)  Rose Avenue, from Glessner Street to Lee Street; (23)  Armory Drive, from Georgia Highway 30 to Patton Drive; (24)  Patton Drive, from U.S. Highway 19 to Armory Drive; (25)  Railroad Street from N Lee Street to Mayo Street; (26)  Magnolia Street from Highway 30 to Highway 19; (27)  Amory Drive from Patton Drive to Highway 30; (28)  Rose Avenue from S Lee Street to West Glessner Street. (d)  All streets not specifically designated as major streets or collector streets in this section are deemed to be residential streets for the purposes of this chapter. (Code 1962, § 27-36; Code 1986, § 23-36; Ord. No. O-88-12-42, 12-27-1988; Ord. No. O-98-12-48, 12-17-1998) 
Sec. 94-215. - Curb cuts.     Curb cuts shall in no case, except in residential districts, be greater than 30 feet in length, nor closer than 20 feet to another curb cut. (Code 1962, § 27-43; Code 1986, § 23-43) 
Secs. 94-216—94-238. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 
Sec. 94-239. - Generally.     At the time of the erection of any type of building or structure hereinafter listed or at the time any such building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity, there shall be provided for such new construction, enlargement or increased capacity only, off-street automobile parking or storage space in accordance with the following minimum requirements. Such parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street, and can be provided in a required setback. For all nonresidential uses, off-street parking must not be so planned or designed where vehicles ingress or egress from a parking space which enters or exits directly onto any street; a physical division must be provided between the street and parking area. (1)  Residential uses. a.  Dwellings; one space per dwelling unit. b.  Multiple-family dwelling; 1 1/2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit located in a multifamily district. c.  Dormitories; one parking space for each bed. d.  Hotels and motels, including clubs; one parking space for each sleeping room. If, in addition to sleeping rooms, there are other uses operated in conjunction with and as part of the hotel/motel, additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided for such other uses as would be required by this section if such uses were separate from the hotel/motel to the extent of 35 percent of the off-street parking specified in this article for retail stores, offices, services, establishments, bars, restaurants, dining rooms, night clubs, cabarets, ballrooms, banquet halls, meeting rooms, auditoriums. e.  Housing for elderly; one parking space for each unit. f.  Fraternities and sororities; one parking space for each 75 square feet of total floor area of building. g.  Where upper floor residential use is permitted in multistory buildings in zoning district C-3 downtown business district, and where more than three such units are proposed in a multistory building, the developer must submit plans which will provide for 1 1/2 off-street parking spaces per unit for proposed tenants of such multistory building. (2)  Commercial uses. One parking space is required per square footage indicated in each category: a.  One hundred square feet: Bars. Beer gardens. Cafeterias. Cocktail lounges. Nightclubs. Restaurants. Taverns. Theaters. b.  One hundred fifty square feet: Auto repairs shops. Auto service stations. Bakeries. Beauty shops. Butcher shops. Carwash. Convenience stores. Delicatessens. Dry cleanings. Grocery stores. Ice cream parlors. Laundries. Liquor/package stores. Self-service laundries. Take-out foods. Adult entertainment establishments. c.  Two hundred square feet: Animal hospitals. Auction galleries. Automotive parts and supply stores. Barbershops. Business schools. Child care centers. Civic clubs. Community centers (nongovernmental). Contractor shops: general, electrical, plumbing, roofing, air conditioning, etc. Dance schools. Dental clinics. Drugstores. Health institutions. Kennels. Libraries. Medical and dental offices. Medical clinics. Post offices. Trade school. Vehicle salesrooms. Veterinarians. Vocational schools. Video stores. Physical fitness center d.  Three hundred square feet: Bank, savings and loans and finance companies. Building supply stores. Business and professional offices. Financial companies. Government offices. Hardware stores. Household equipment. Household repairs. Marine supplies. Pet grooming. Retail stores. Swimming and pool supplies. Travel agencies. Wholesale medical supplies. Wholesale stores. e.  Five hundred square feet: Art galleries. Carpet and flooring materials retail stores. Furniture stores. Industrial uses. Manufacturing uses. Printing and engraving. Research and testing laboratories. Sign shops. Storage buildings. Telephone exchange, housing automatic equipment only. Warehouses. (3)  Miscellaneous uses. a.  Hospitals: one space for each two beds intended for patients. b.  Places of public assembly, assembly halls, convention halls, exhibition halls, dance halls, skating rinks, sport arenas, community center, libraries, theater, museums, amusement centers: one parking space for each five seats or one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross area; whichever is greater. c.  Places of worship: one parking space for each 50 square feet of auditorium or chapel area, not including Sunday-school classrooms. d.  Funeral homes: one parking space for each four fixed seats in public rooms, plus one parking space for 90 square feet in public rooms with moveable seat. e.  Bowling centers: six parking spaces for each lane. f.  University or college, senior high schools, junior high schools, public or private schools: one parking space for each classroom, plus one parking space for each five students or one-half of the additional parking spaces for rooms used for public assembly as otherwise required by this section, whichever may be greater. g.  Elementary schools, public or private: one parking space for each classroom, plus one-half of the additional parking spaces for rooms used for public assembly as otherwise required by this section. h.  Private clubs, lodges, fraternal buildings, union halls: one parking space for each 100 square feet of assembly hall and auditorium, and one parking space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area occupied by guests, customers, patrons, members or other occupants, whichever may be greater. i.  Sanitarians, asylums, orphanages, convalescent homes, home for the infirm: one parking space for each five beds for patients. j.  Stadiums: one parking space for each five seats. k.  Shopping centers: one parking space for each 150 square feet of total floor area. l.  Private court club: five spaces per court. m.  Flea markets: one parking space for each 100 square feet of booth or floor area of the flea market. n.  Nursery schools and kindergartens: one parking space for each six children enrolled. (4)  Calculating required parking spaces. a.  Uses not specifically mentioned. The requirements for off-street parking for any unspecified uses in this section shall be the same as provided in this section for the use most similar to the one sought as determined by the planning department. It is the intent to require all uses, except agricultural to provide off-street parking. b.  Fractional spaces. When units or measurements determining number of required off-street parking spaces result in requirement of fractional space, any such fraction equal to or greater than one-half shall require a full off-street parking space. c.  Mixed uses. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately, and off-street parking space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off-street parking for any other use. d.  Measurements . For the purposes of this article, gross floor area shall mean the floor area inside of the exterior walls excluding elevators, stairwells, meter rooms and power equipment rooms. In hospitals, bassinets shall not count as beds. In stadiums, sport arenas, places of worship and other places of assembly in which occupants utilize benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 20 lineal inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of computing off-street parking requirements. e.  Areas over 2,000 square feet. All off-street parking areas over 2,000 square feet, shall meet landscaping requirements as provided in chapter 14, article III. (Code 1962, § 27-38; Code 1986, § 23-38; Ord. No. O-94-09-32, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. O-95-04-13, 4-20-1995; Ord. No. O-96-07-26, 7-18-1996; Ord. No. O-00-11-40, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 94-240. - Principal use vehicle parking and storage space requirements.     If vehicle parking or storage space required cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such space may be provided on other off-street property provided such space lies within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such vehicle parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. (Code 1962, § 27-39; Code 1986, § 23-39) 
Sec. 94-241. - Combined parking spaces.     The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls, the peak attendance of which will be at night on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at nights or on Sundays. (Code 1962, § 27-40; Code 1986, § 23-40) 
Sec. 94-242. - Size of spaces. (a)  Each space shall have not less than 180 square feet and shall be not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet in length, exclusive of passageways. There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street. In the cases of 25 or more required parking spaces, one-quarter or 25 percent of the required spaces may be of an area not less than eight feet by 16 feet and must be so marked for compact vehicles. (b)  Off-street parking requirements for handicapped parking shall be provided per the "Americans with Disabilities Act Handbook," appendix B, section 4, pertaining to accessible elements and spaces: scope and technical requirements. (Code 1962, § 27-41; Code 1986, § 23-41; Ord. No. O-95-04-13, 4-20-1995) 
Sec. 94-243. - Loading and unloading space.     Every building or structure used for business, trade, or industry shall provide as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to a public alley or, if there is no alley, to a public street. (1)  Retail business. One space,ten feet by 25 feet, for each 3,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. (2)  Wholesale and industry. One space, ten feet by 50 feet, for each 10,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. (3)  Bus and truck terminals. Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. (Code 1962, § 27-42; Code 1986, § 23-42) 
Secs. 94-244—94-264. - Reserved. 
DIVISIONS 4. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 
Sec. 94-265. - Lot of record.     Any lot of record on December 17, 1959, which did not meet the lot width and/or lot area requirements herein provided, may be used as a building site for a single-family residence, provided, however, the required yards are maintained. (Code 1962, § 27-46; Code 1986, § 23-46) 
Sec. 94-266. - Adjoining and vacant lot of record.     If two or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after December 17, 1959, and such lots individually are less than the lot width requirements for the district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall together be considered as a single lot or shall be grouped into several lots of minimum permitted size and the resulting lot or lots shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of the chapter. (Code 1962, § 27-47; Code 1986, § 23-47) 
Sec. 94-267. - Dwelling setback requirement exceptions.     The setback requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on developed lots which are located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot and within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same street as such lot is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such lots may be less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on developed lots. (Code 1962, § 27-48; Code 1986, § 23-48) 
Sec. 94-268. - Group housing developments.     Group housing developments may be permitted in R-3 residential districts and I-N institutional districts provided that all of the following conditions are met: (1)  Such housing development shall consist of two or more buildings; (2)  These buildings will be constructed on a plot of ground of not less than two acres in area, and in one ownership; (3)  This parcel is not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and will not be so subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impractical to apply the requirements of this chapter to individual dwellings in such group developments; (4)  Provided the arrangement of buildings is such that access of firefighting equipment to the buildings is maintained, as certified in writing by the fire chief; and (5)  Provided that the minimum lot area per family set forth in this chapter for the district is observed, and that the height requirements are observed. (Code 1962, § 27-49; Code 1986, § 23-49) 
Sec. 94-269. - Exceptions to height limits.     The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, aerials. (Code 1962, § 27-50; Code 1986, § 23-50) 
Sec. 94-270. - Satellite dish antennas. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commercial and industrial districts means those districts established in the zoning ordinance of the city described as N-S neighborhood shopping, C-1 roadside business, C-2 general business, C-3 downtown general business, I-N institutional, I industrial, and AG agricultural, according to the system of zoning classifications appearing in this Code.     Rear yard means that portion of the yard of a residence or business located opposite the front entrance of said residence or business.     Residential district means those districts established in the zoning ordinance of the city described as R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 according to the system of zoning classification appearing in this Code.     Satellite dish antenna means a satellite earth station, which is more than one meter in size, capable of being used to receive or send satellite signals from a space station, stations, or satellite.     Uninhabited lot means a lot of land within the city limits of the city upon which there is no building, residence, business or other structure. (b)  Requirements. Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted in all zoning districts of the city, provided that the following requirements are met at the time such antennas are installed and at all times thereafter: (1)  Such antennas shall be allowed in residential districts, so long as the antenna is located only in the rear yard of the residence. There shall be no such antennas located on the roof of any building in a residential zone. (2)  Such antennas shall be allowed in commercial and industrial districts, so long as the antenna is located in the rear yard of the main building or any accessory buildings to the rear of the main building, or upon the roof of the main building or any accessory buildings to the rear of the main building. (3)  Such antennas shall not be located on any uninhabited lots within the city. (4)  There shall be no more than one satellite dish antenna per lot, except for satellite dish antennas required for radio stations and television stations in the conduct of their business. (5)  All satellite dish antennas shall meet applicable building setback requirements for the districts in which said antennas are located. (6)  In residential districts, the ground-based satellite dish antenna shall not exceed 20 feet in height. In commercial and industrial districts, a ground-based satellite dish antenna shall not exceed 20 feet in height. No such antenna, whether ground-based or otherwise, shall exceed the department of transportation, Federal Aviation Administration height limitations for the zoning district in which said antenna is located. (c)  Exception. Any satellite dish antenna installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall not be affected by the requirements contained herein; provided, however, that, in the event that such antenna installed prior to such effective date is removed or replaced by another such satellite dish antenna, then the new satellite dish antenna shall be subject to the provisions hereof. (Code 1986, § 23-51; Ord. No. O-88-06-23, 6-20-1988; Ord. No. O-94-10-35, 10-27-1994; Ord. No. O-97-06-21, 6-19-1997) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1962 CODE This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1986 Code. 1962 Code Section Section  New Code 1-4 1-4 2-5 2-143 2-9 2-55 2-10 2-48 2-12, 2-13 2-50 2-14, 2-15 2-51, 2-52 2-17 2-53 2-19 2-54 2-28, 2-29 2-21, 2-22 2-32, 2-33 2-113 2-33 2-114 2-38 2-92 2-39, 2-40 2-56, 2-57 2-43, 2-44 2-89, 2-90 2-74, 2-75 58-1, 58-2 3-2 6-2 3-3 6-1 3-5—3-10 6-6—6-11 3-11 6-11 3-12 6-3 3-22 6-36 3-29 6-38 3-39—3-45 6-42—6-48 3-46(a), (b) 6-49 3-46(c) 6-4 3-46(d)—(h) 6-49 3-47, 3-48 6-50, 6-51 3-50 6-37 3-52 6-52 3-53, 3-54 6-40, 6-41 3-55 6-15 3-61, 3-62 6-12, 6-13 3-62a 6-14 4-1 10-1 4-2, 4-3 10-5, 10-6 4-4, 4-5 10-3, 10-4 4-6 10-2 4-7 10-7 4-8—4-10 10-9—10-11 4-11 10-8 4-22 10-12 5-1—5-1.3 14-29 5-2 14-30 6-1 18-1 6-2 18-11 6-3 18-10 6-4 18-9 6-5, 6-6 18-6, 18-7 6-7, 6-8 18-7, 18-8 6-9 66-1 6-10 18-2 6-12—6-14 18-3—18-5 6-15 66-3 6-16 66-2 7-8 30-22 8-1 14-29 8-4, 8-5 14-51 8-5 14-54 8-5—8-8 14-53 14-55 8-7 14-51 14-54 14-56—14-59 8-8 14-56 8-10 14-52 9-5 38-1 9-6 30-1 9-8 38-2, 38-3 9-10, 9-11 38-4, 38-5 9-13—9-15 38-49—38-51 9-16—9-18 38-53—38-55 9-19 38-52 10-22 90-1 11-1 14-29 11-2 14-107 11-3, 11-4 14-109, 14-110 11-5 14-106 11-6 14-29 11-11 14-108 12-3 34-1 12-4 14-5 12-5 14-4 13-1, 13-2 46-94, 46-95 13-6 46-93 13-16 46-93 13-25 46-92 13-29, 13-30 46-90, 46-91 13-71 46-331 13-72 46-330 13-73—13-75 46-332—46-334 13-76 46-338 13-77—13-79 46-335—46-337 13-82 46-339 15-2 62-26 15-5 62-173 15-6 62-116 15-7 62-113 15-9 62-23 15-11, 15-12 62-208, 62-209 15-13 38-6 15-14 62-153 15-15 62-59 15-17 46-2 15-18, 15-19 62-114, 62-115 15-20, 15-21 62-110, 62-111 15-22 62-174 15-27 62-58 15-27.01 78-5 15-28 62-151 15-30 66-3 15-31, 15-32 62-206 15-33 62-204 15-34 62-206 15-35.1 62-205 15-37 62-207 15-38—15-40 62-150 15-41 62-21 15-42 62-25 15-46 62-24 15-48—15-50 62-81—62-83 15-51 62-152 17-1 14-29 17-9 14-78 17-11 14-81 17-15 14-79 17-18 14-77 18-5 62-61 19-1 1-13 19-2—19-5 54-1 20-3, 20-4 78-3, 78-4 20-5 62-117 20-6 62-114 20-7 62-118 20-8, 20-9 78-1, 78-2 20-10 62-22 20-12 62-60 20-16—20-19 78-29—78-32 20-24(a), 20-24(b) 78-93, 78-94 20-24(f) 78-96 20-24(g) 78-98 20-24(h) 78-97 20-24(i) 78-95 22-5 46-24 22-13 46-23 23-6 86-208 23-8 86-209 23-9, 23-10 86-25, 86-26 23-12 86-27 23-15—23-19 78-125—78-129 23-27 86-3 23-28 86-76 23-31 86-77 23-32 86-27 23-34 86-80 23-38 86-82 23-40 86-83 23-41 86-81 23-42 86-79 23-45 86-84 23-47 86-85 23-48 86-87 23-49 86-86 23-54, 23-55 86-27 23-58 86-88 23-62 86-28 23-64 86-27 23-71 86-29 23-79 86-113 23-82, 23-83 86-114, 86-115 23-97 86-118 23-98 86-117 23-106, 23-107 86-172, 86-173 23-108, 23-109 86-173, 86-174 23-109.1 86-175 23-110 86-176 23-112 86-176, 86-177 23-118, 23-119 86-27 23-120 86-89 23-142, 23-143 86-48, 86-49 23-144 86-47 23-146 86-50 23-150 86-51 23-152(a) 86-1 23-153 86-2 26-1, 26-2 90-162, 90-163 26-3, 26-4 90-165, 90-166 26-4 90-291 26-4.1 90-167 26-5 90-161 26-6 90-160 26-7 90-130 26-8, 26-9 90-169, 90-170 26-11 90-159 26-12 90-168 26-16—26-18 90-293—90-295 26-18.1 90-292 26-19, 26-20 90-296, 90-297 26-21 90-289 26-22 90-165 90-290 26-23 90-288 26-24—26-26 90-298—90-300 27-2 94-1 27-3, 27-4 94-115, 94-116 27-5 94-53 27-8 94-56 27-9 94-117 27-10 94-4 27-11—27-14 94-27—94-30 27-16 94-2 27-18 94-3 27-22—27-24 94-148—94-150 27-24.1 94-151 27-24.2 94-153 27-25, 27-26 94-154, 94-155 27-27(p) 94-156 27-28—27-31 94-158—94-161 27-34—27-36 94-212—94-214 27-37 94-31 27-38—27-42 94-239—94-243 27-43 94-215 27-46—27-50 94-265—94-269 27-54—27-61 94-86—94-93 27-72—27-74 70-21—70-23 71-10 14-80  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1986 CODE This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1986 Code. 1986 Code Section Section  New Code 1-1—1-10 1-1—1-10 1-11 1-12 1-13 70-1 2-1, 2-2 2-89, 2-90 2-6, 2-7 2-113 2-7 2-114 2-10.1 2-91 2-12 2-92 2-13 2-142 2-21, 2-22 2-21, 2-22 2-24 2-48 2-24.1 2-49 2-26—2-28 2-50—2-52 2-30 2-53 2-32, 2-33 2-54, 2-55 2-35, 2-36 2-56, 2-57 2.5-1—2.5-23 46-187—46-209 2.5-24 46-2010 2.5-25 46-211 3-1 6-1 3-3, 3-4 6-2, 6-3 3-7 62-116 3-8—3-20 6-4—6-16 3-30—3-32 6-36—6-38 3-50—3-62 6-40—6-52 4-1—4-11 10-1—10-11 4-20—4-23 10-43—10-46 4-24, 4-25 10-67, 10-68 4-26 10-66 4-30 10-12 5-1, 5-2 14-29, 14-30 5-5, 5-6 14-4, 14-5 5-7 14-31 5-8 14-1 5-9 14-3 5-23, 5-24 14-51, 14-52 5-31—5-37 14-53—14-59 5-50—5-69 34-21—34-40 5-70—5-78 34-69—34-77 5-79.1 14-2 5-80—5-84 14-166—14-170 5-85(a) 14-171 5-85(b)—(f) 14-172 5-86—5-91 14-173—14-178 5-93, 5-94 14-179, 14-180 5-106 14-77 5-108 14-78 5-110 14-79 5-112, 5-113 14-80, 14-81 5-120 14-106 5-123—5-126 14-107—14-110 5-130—5-137 14-268—14-275 5-151—5-154 14-199—14-202 5-156 14-203 5-171 74-2 5-172 74-1 5-173—5-178 74-49—74-54 5-179 74-4 5-180—5-185 74-82—74-87 5-186, 5-187 74-29, 74-30 5-188 74-3 5-189 74-88 5-189.1 74-5 5-190—5-197 14-134—14-141 5-210—5-220 34-98—34-108 5-251—5-258 14-230—14-237 5-271—5-274 34-131—34-134 5-277 34-135 5-279 34-130 5-331—5-334 34-155—34-158 5-336, 5-337 34-159, 34-160 5-339 34-161 5-341 34-154 6-1, 6-2 18-1, 18-2 6-4—6-12 18-3—18-11 7-8 30-22 8-2 1-13 8-3—8-6 54-1 8-9 54-2 9-7 26-1 9-9, 9-10 26-2, 26-3 9-13 26-4 10-1—10-4 2-199—2-202 10-4.1—10-4.4 2-203—2-206 10-5—10-7 2-143—2-145 10-23 46-23 10-25 46-24 10-28 46-25 10-30—10-41 46-54—46-65 10-50—10-56 2-174—2-180 11-2 38-1 11-3 30-1 11-4—11-8 38-2—38-6 11-20—11-26 38-49—38-55 12-1 34-1 12-2—12-4 62-58—62-60 12-5, 12-6 62-110, 62-111 12-7, 12-8 58-1, 58-2 12-35—12-42 58-47—58-54 12-70—12-73 42-19—42-22 13-1, 13-2 90-1, 90-2 13-20—13-25 90-159—90-164 13-25 90-199 13-26—13-29 90-165—90-168 13-30 90-130 13-31, 13-32 90-169, 90-170 13-40—13-49 90-23—90-32 13-60—13-72 90-288—90-300 13-80—13-91 90-251—90-262 13-100—13-106 90-340—90-346 13-130 90-366 13-150 90-78 13-161—13-169 90-100—90-108 13-200—13-204 90-194—90-198 14-1—14-7 46-90—46-96 14-8 46-89 14-9—14-39 46-97—46-127 14-39.1 46-128 14-40 46-1 14-50 46-261 14-51, 14-52 46-294, 46-295 14-53, 14-54 46-262, 46-263 14-55—14-57 46-296—46-298 14-58, 14-59 46-264, 46-265 14-60—14-69 46-330—46-339 14-70 46-2 14-80—14-86 22-19—22-25 14-91—14-95 46-155—46-159 14-200, 14-201 46-230, 46-231 14-202 46-229 14-203—14-212 46-232—46-241 15-1 62-204 15-3 62-205 15-5, 15-6 62-206, 62-207 15-7—15-11 62-21—62-25 15-13 62-26 15-15, 15-16 62-112, 62-113 15-17, 15-18 62-150, 62-151 15-19, 15-20 62-114, 62-115 15-21 62-27 15-22 62-173 15-24 62-174 15-25, 15-26 62-117, 62-118 15-27, 15-28 62-152, 62-153 15-29, 15-30 62-208, 62-209 15-31, 15-32 62-81, 62-82 15-34 62-83 15-35 62-28 15-36 62-175 16-1—16-3 66-1—66-3 16-10—16-24 78-53—78-67 17-8 2-88 18-1—18-4 78-29—78-32 18-5—18-8 78-1—78-4 18-20, 18-21 78-93, 78-94 18-25—18-28 78-95—78-98 19-1 82-1 19-2—19-4 82-4—82-6 19-20—19-23 82-31—82-34 19-30—19-37 82-57—82-64 19-38, 19-39 82-2, 82-3 20-1, 20-2 86-1, 86-2 20-4—20-6 86-25—86-27 20-8—20-12 78-125—78-129 20-13 78-5 20-15, 20-16 86-208, 86-209 20-17 86-28 20-22 62-61 20-30 86-3 20-31—20-33 86-76—86-78 20-35—20-37 86-79—86-81 20-39 86-82 20-40 86-29 20-41 86-83 20-43—20-46 86-84—86-87 20-48—20-52 86-88—86-92 20-60—20-69 86-113—86-122 20-70—20-75 86-172—86-177 20-80—20-83 86-47—86-50 20-86 86-51 20-91, 20-92 86-143, 86-144 21-1—21-12 50-21—50-32 21-16 50-1 22-1—22-16 46-367—46-382 23-1 94-1 23-2, 23-3 94-115, 94-116 23-4—23-7 94-53—94-56 23-8 94-117 23-9 94-4 23-10—23-13 94-27—94-30 23-15, 23-16 94-2, 94-3 23-20—23-23 94-148—94-151 23-23.5 94-152 23-24—23-27 94-153—94-156 23-27.5 94-157 23-28—23-31 94-158—94-161 23-32, 23-33 94-193, 94-194 23-34—23-36 94-212—94-214 23-37 94-31 23-38—23-42 94-239—94-243 23-43 94-215 23-46—23-51 94-265—94-270 23-60—23-67 94-86—94-93 23-70—23-72 70-21—70-23 23-73 94-32  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES This table gives the location within the Code of Ordinances Ordinance Number  Date Section  Section in Code 12-28-1983(Ord.) 1—5 46-155—46-159 12-27-1984(Ord.) 2-88  4-22-1985(Ord.) 6-1 6-11 6-13—6-15 6-40, 6-41 O-85-05-12  5-27-1985 90-166 90-291, 90-292 O-85-07-16  6-27-1985 1.1, 1.2 90-24, 90-25 2 90-23 3.1 90-26 3.2.1, 3.2.2 90-27 3.2.3—3.2.7 90-28—90-32  3-26-1986(Ord.) 1 14-269 2 14-268 3—7 14-270—14-274  6-30-1986(Ord.) 94-156  8-25-1986(Ord.) 6-11 11-24-1986(Ord.) 2-88 12-22-1986(1)(Ord.) 1 94-150 2 94-32 12-22-1986(2)(Ord.) (a) 90-165 (b) 90-290 O-87-03-05  3-23-1987 2-89 O-87-04-07  4-27-1987 86-78 O-87-04-08  4-27-1987 2-89 O-87-06-11  6-22-1987 86-90 O-87-06-12  6-22-1987 A—C 86-119 O-87-06-13  6-22-1987 86-91 O-87-08-17  8-24-1987 1—4 2-142 O-87-10-18 10-19-1987 38-51 O-87-10-19 10-19-1987 14-203 14-199—14-202 O-87-10-20 10-19-1987 94-149 O-87-11-23 11-23-1987 70-21 O-87-11-24 11-23-1987 94-54, 94-55 O-87-11-25 11-23-1987 62-28 O-87-12-27 12-21-1987 90-163, 90-164 90-343, 90-344 O-88-02-04  2-22-1988 1 94-1 O-88-02-05  2-22-1988 94-159, 94-160 O-88-02-08  2-22-1988 6-38 O-88-02-09  2-22-1988 90-165 O-88-03-10  3-28-1988 14-29, 14-30 14-53 O-88-03-11  3-28-1988 86-120 O-88-03-13  3-28-1988 86-143, 86-144 O-88-04-16  4-25-1988 90-290 O-88-05-19  5-23-1988 94-155, 94-156 O-88-05-21  5-23-1988 94-155 O-88-06-22  6-20-1988 94-1 O-88-06-23  6-20-1988 94-270 O-88-07-25  7-25-1988 2-199—2-206 O-88-08-28  8-22-1988 94-155 O-88-08-29  8-22-1988 94-161 O-88-08-30  8-22-1988 14-270 O-88-08-31  8-22-1988 66-3 O-88-11-38 11-28-1988 46-23 O-88-12-42 12-27-1988 94-214 O-89-01-01  1-23-1989 90-290 O-89-01-03  1-23-1989 6-38 O-84-03-05b  3-27-1989 90-291 O-89-03-05a  3-27-1989 90-166 O-89-03-06  3-27-1989 90-162 O-89-04-09  4-24-1989 94-154 94-156 O-89-04-10  4-24-1989 2-144 O-89-6-17  6-26-1989 86-91 O-89-7-23  7-24-1989 86-91 O-89-07-19  7-24-1989 2-144 O-89-10-28 10-23-1989 94-148 94-157 94-161 O-89-10-29 10-23-1989 86-119 O-89-12-41 12-18-1989 90-290 O-89-12-42 12-18-1989 2-89 O-89-12-43 12-18-1989 86-119 O-90-02-04  2-26-1990 94-161 O-90-02-06  2-26-1990 10-43—10-46 10-66—10-68 O-90-05-14  2-26-1990 34-69—34-76 O-90-04-10  4-24-1990 90-293 O-90-06-16  6-28-1990 86-121 O-90-07-18  7-23-1990 50-24 O-90-07-18A  7-23-1990 94-153 O-90-07-19  7-23-1990 50-21—50-23 50-25—50-32 O-90-09-22  9-24-1990 10-12 10-44 10-46 O-90-12-20 12-26-1990 6-38 O-90-12-31 12-26-1990 90-162 O-90-12-33 12-26-1990 38-51 O-90-12-35 12-26-1990 90-290 O-91-02-04  2-25-1991 14-31 O-91-03-07  3-25-1991 2-89 O-91-03-08  3-25-1991 90-160 O-91-04-12  4-24-1991 94-1 94-150 O-91-06-18  6-20-1991 86-209 O-91-07-23(a)  7-29-1991 86-91 O-91-08-25  8-26-1991 86-209 O-91-10-34 10-28-1991 86-209 O-91-10-35 10-28-1991 86-122 O-91-10-36 10-28-1991 86-91 O-91-10-38 10-28-1991 94-1 O-91-11-40 11-25-1991 38-51 O-92-01-01  1-28-1992 90-165 O-92-01-02  1-28-1992 90-290 O-92-01-04  1-28-1992 90-166 90-291 O-92-01-05  1-28-1992 14-29 O-92-02-07  2-24-1992 94-154—94-156 94-159 O-92-03-12  3-23-1992 86-209 O-92-03-13  3-23-1992 14-29 O-92-03-15  3-23-1992 78-30 78-32 78-95 78-97 86-27 86-29 86-143, 86-144 O-92-03-16  3-23-1992 86-78 O-92-06-18  6-22-1992 86-113 O-92-08-23  8-24-1992 94-149 O-92-08-24  8-24-1992 90-159, 90-160 O-92-08-26  8-24-1992 86-116 O-92-09-29  9-25-1992 90-167 O-92-09-28  9-28-1992 1—7 14-134—14-140 O-92-10-105 10-26-1992 42-19—42-22 O-92-11-107 10-26-1992 2-174—2-180 O-92-12-109 12-28-1992 14-136 O-93-01-02  1-26-1993 90-165 O-93-01-03  1-28-1993 90-290 O-93-02-05  2-22-1993 2-144 O-93-02-06  2-22-1993 14-29 O-93-02-07  2-22-1993 90-165 O-93-02-08  3-26-1993 90-345 O-93-04-15  4-26-1993 86-120 O-93-06-20  6-24-1993 14-134 14-136 O-93-06-23  6-24-1993 94-155, 94-156 94-159 O-93-06-25  6-24-1993 46-187—46-209 46-211 46-2010 O-93-11-36 11-22-1993 14-136 O-93-11-37 11-22-1993 38-51 O-93-12-40 12-27-1993 6-16 O-93-12-41 12-27-1993 2-145 O-93-12-44 12-27-1993 94-149 94-154—94-156 94-159, 94-160 O-93-12-45 12-27-1993 94-158 O-94-01-02  1-25-1994 62-173 O-94-01-04  1-25-1994 90-165 O-94-01-05  1-25-1994 90-290 O-94-01-07  1-25-1994 94-1 94-154—94-160 O-94-01-08  1-25-1994 2-145 O-94-02-09  1-25-1994 2-145 O-94-05-14  5-19-1994 86-120 O-94-05-15  5-19-1994 14-275 O-94-07-23  7-21-1994 34-1 O-94-07-24  7-21-1994 86-120 O-94-07-26  7-21-1994 14-29 O-94-09-31  9-22-1994 94-193 O-94-09-32  9-22-1994 94-1 94-159 94-239 O-94-10-35 10-27-1994 94-270 O-94-10-36 10-27-1994 14-29 O-94-11-38 11-28-1994 14-29 O-94-12-40 12-22-1994 86-120 O-94-12-41 12-22-1994 46-1 O-94-12-46 12-22-1994 2-56 O-95-01-01  1-26-1995 86-78 O-95-02-08  2-23-1995 94-155—94-157 O-95-02-05  2-27-1995 2-89 O-95-02-06  2-27-1995 70-1 O-95-03-10  3-23-1995 90-163 90-343 O-95-03-09  3-24-1995 94-154, 94-155 O-95-04-13  4-20-1995 94-239 94-242 O-95-05-15  5-18-1995 78-1 O-95-06-22  6-22-1995 86-78 O-95-06-23  6-22-1995 86-120 O-95-07-26  7-20-1995 58-47—58-54 O-95-09-29  9-21-1995 94-194 O-95-09-30  9-21-1995 38-51 O-95-09-31  9-21-1995 14-272 34-69—34-76 O-95-09-32  9-21-1995 94-1 94-155, 94-156 94-159 O-95-11-35 11-30-1995 90-23 90-25 90-27, 90-28 90-30—90-32 O-95-11-36 11-30-1995 14-29 O-95-11-37 11-30-1995 46-25 O-95-12-41 12-21-1995 46-89 46-96—46-128 O-95-12-42 12-21-1995 6-38 O-95-12-44 12-21-1995 2-89 O-95-12-45 12-21-1995 14-136 14-141 O-95-12-47 12-21-1995 94-1 94-155—94-157 O-95-12-50 12-21-1995 6-38 O-96-01-04  1-25-1996 90-290 O-96-03-11  3-21-1996 86-91 O-96-03-12  3-21-1996 86-120 O-96-03-13  3-21-1996 86-78 O-96-04-15  4-18-1996 90-78 O-96-06-20  6-20-1996 86-120 O-96-06-24  6-20-1996 6-42 O-96-07-26  7-18-1996 94-239 O-96-08-33  8-22-1996 86-88 O-96-09-40  9-19-1996 14-29 O-96-09-41  9-19-1996 2-91 O-96-09-38  9-22-1996 94-1 94-149, 94-150 94-154—94-156 94-158 O-96-10-46 10-24-1996 62-175 O-96-11-48 11-21-1996 94-1 94-149, 94-150 94-154—94-156 94-158 O-96-11-49 11-21-1996 46-23 O-96-11-50 11-21-1996 94-32 94-53 O-97-01-01  1-23-1997 90-346 O-97-02-03  2-20-1997 50-1 O-97-03-05  3-20-1997 82-1—82-6 82-31—82-34 82-57—82-64 O-97-03-06  3-20-1997 14-2 O-97-03-07  3-20-1997 14-29 O-97-04-11  4-24-1997 94-154—94-156 94-159 O-97-04-12  4-24-1997 94-161 O-97-05-16  5-22-1997 90-428 O-97-06-21  6-19-1997 94-270 O-97-07-25  7-24-1997 46-95 O-97-08-30  8-21-1997 14-141 O-97-08-31  8-21-1997 14-141 O-97-08-31A  8-21-1997 86-119 O-97-11-34 11-20-1997 1—3 78-29—78-31 O-97-11-36 11-20-1997 90-2 O-97-11-38 11-20-1997 14-1 O-97-12-39 12-18-1997 46-1 O-98-01-01  1-22-1998 90-165 O-98-01-02  1-22-1998 90-290 O-98-01-04  1-22-1998 90-170 O-98-03-11  3-19-1998 94-54 O-98-03-12  3-19-1998 94-1 O-98-03-13  3-20-1998 90-31 O-98-05-19  5-21-1998 90-251—90-262 O-98-06-24  6-18-1998 14-29 O-98-11-39 11-19-1998 86-78 O-98-11-41 11-19-1998 86-91 O-98-12-47 12-17-1998 94-1 94-149—94-152 94-161 94-193 O-98-12-48 12-17-1998 94-214 O-99-01-05 12-17-1998 90-165 O-99-01-06 12-17-1998 90-290 O-99-01-03  1-21-1999 1—9 90-100—90-108 O-99-02-08  2-18-1999 82-33 O-99-03-11  3-18-1999 14-2 O-99-04-12  4-22-1999 94-1 O-99-04-16  4-22-1999 86-91 O-99-05-18  5-20-1999 62-117 O-99-05-19  5-20-1999 94-1 94-150, 94-151 94-153 O-99-06-25  6-24-1999 2-144, 2-145 O-99-08-31  8-19-1999 94-149—94-160 O-99-08-34  8-19-1999 82-34 O-99-08-35  8-19-1999 1—4 14-230—14-233 4 14-234 5 14-236 6 14-235 8 14-237 O-99-10-39 10-18-1999 6-40 O-99-10-40 10-21-1999 1—4 34-131—34-134 7 34-135 9 34-130 O-99-10-41 10-21-1999 46-107 O-99-11-42 11-18-1999 14-3 O-99-11-45 11-18-1999 86-91 O-99-12-46 12-16-1999 90-289 O-00-01-01  1-20-2000 94-155, 94-156 O-00-01-02  1-20-2000 1—4 34-155—34-158 6, 7 34-159, 34-160 9 34-161 11 34-154 O-00-03-10  3-23-2000 94-154, 94-155 O-00-04-17  4-20-2000 94-1 94-155, 94-156 94-159 O-00-04-21  4-20-2000 2-200 O-00-05-22  5-18-2000 38-49, 38-50 O-00-06-24  6-22-2000 1—4 34-155—34-158 6, 7 34-159, 34-160 9 34-161 11 34-154 O-00-06-26  6-23-2000 94-213 O-00-07-32  6-23-2000 90-162 O-00-07-31  7-20-2000 86-92 O-00-08-34  8-24-2000 78-53—78-66 O-00-09-38  9-21-2000 58-51 O-00-10-40 10-19-2000 94-193 O-00-10-41 10-19-2000 94-1 94-156, 94-157 94-159, 94-160 O-00-11-40 11-16-2000 94-239 O-00-11-47 11-16-2000 34-21—34-40 O-00-12-48 12-21-2000 1 34-69 2—4 34-70 5, 6 34-71 7, 8 34-74 9, 10 34-76, 34-77 O-00-12-49 12-21-2000 94-1 94-155—94-157 O-01-01-03  1-18-2001 90-165 O-01-01-04  1-18-2001 90-290 O-01-01-05  1-18-2001 90-165 90-345 O-01-04-15  4-19-2001 86-120 O-01-04-17  4-19-2001 46-54—46-64 O-01-06-21  6-21-2001 94-1 94-155, 94-156 O-01-10-37 10-18-2001 86-120 O-01-12-40 12-20-2001 14-275 O-01-12-42 12-20-2001 6-40 O-02-01-02  1-24-2002 90-165 O-02-01-03  1-24-2002 90-290 O-02-02-06  2-21-2002 94-155, 94-156 O-02-02-07  2-21-2002 86-88 O-02-03-08  3-21-2002 30-1 O-02-03-09  3-21-2002 6-16 O-02-03-12  3-21-2002 2-144 O-02-04-14  4-18-2002 14-166—14-180 O-02-07-18  7-18-2002 86-78 O-02-07-19  7-18-2002 94-1 94-149 94-158 O-02-07-21  7-18-2002 94-54 94-89 O-02-09-25  9-19-2002 2-144, 2-145 O-02-10-29 10-24-2002 94-1 94-149 94-151—94-153 94-161 94-193 O-02-12-33 12-19-2002 22-19—22-25 O-03-01-01  1-23-2003 90-165 O-03-01-02  1-23-2003 90-290 O-03-01-04  1-23-2003 6-11 O-03-01-07  2-20-2003 94-149 O-03-05-09  5-22-2003 94-149 O-03-05-10  5-22-2003 86-120 O-03-08-18  8-21-2003 86-120 O-03-08-19  9-18-2003 90-162 O-03-09-22  9-18-2003 94-150 O-03-09-23  9-18-2003 54-1 O-03-09-24  9-18-2003 86-78 O-03-09-25  9-18-2003 46-229—46-241 O-03-09-26  9-18-2003 86-88 O-03-09-27  9-18-2003 2-144, 2-145 O-03-10-33 10-23-2003 34-98—34-108 O-03-11-34 11-20-2003 94-151, 94-152 O-03-11-36 11-20-2003 86-120 O-03-11-37 11-20-2003 46-261—46-265 46-294—46-298 O-03-12-41 12-18-2003 46-367—46-382 O-04-01-03  1-22-2004 86-78 O-04-02-04  2-19-2004 86-92 O-04-03-06  3-18-2004 54-2 O-04-06-10  6-24-2004 94-150 O-04-06-11  7-22-2004 90-194—90-199 O-04-07-13  7-22-2004 86-88 O-04-08-14  8-19-2004 94-148 94-156, 94-157 O-04-09-19  9-23-2004 34-70 34-72—34-74 O-04-10-20 10-21-2004 86-78 O-04-10-21 10-21-2004 86-120 O-04-11-23 11-18-2004 2-49 O-04-11-24 11-18-2004 86-78 O-04-11-28 11-18-2004 94-213 O-04-11-29 12-16-2004 90-162 90-289 O-04-12-32 12-16-2004 2-200 O-04-12-33 12-16-2004 1-2 2-56 2-89 2-91, 2-92 2-113, 2-114 18-1 38-51 46-1 46-23—46-25 46-54 46-58—46-63 46-90, 46-91 46-96 46-104 46-109 46-116 46-122 46-157—46-159 46-189 46-231 46-234 46-241 46-261 46-294, 46-295 46-297, 46-298 46-367, 46-368 46-371 46-373 46-382 54-1 58-47 58-50, 58-51 78-31 78-60 78-66 82-6 82-32 90-1, 90-2 90-104 90-106, 90-107 90-163, 90-164 90-167 90-343, 90-344 90-346 94-53 O-05-01-04  1-20-2005 14-29 O-05-01-06  1-20-2005 exh. A 2-91, 2-92 2-143 6-3 6-42 6-52 46-195, 46-196 46-198—46-200 46-207 58-47 58-50, 58-51 O-05-02-07  2-24-2005 94-1 94-149 94-155, 94-156 94-158 O-05-04-11  4-21-2005 34-104 O-05-05-13  5-19-2005 94-155, 94-156 O-05-05-14  5-19-2005 78-53—78-55 78-57 78-60 78-66, 78-67 O-05-07-15  7-21-2005 86-120 O-05-07-16  7-21-2005 46-65 O-05-07-17  7-21-2005 86-91 O-05-07-18  7-21-2005 90-163 90-166 O-05-08-19  8-18-2005 74-1—74-5 74-29, 74-30 74-49—74-54 74-82—74-88 O-05-08-21  8-18-2005 90-291 O-05-08-22  8-18-2005 90-166 O-05-08-20  8-19-2005 86-120 O-05-09-29  9-22-2005 86-120 O-05-10-33 10-20-2005 70-21 O-05-10-37 10-20-2005 6-11 O-05-11-39 11-17-2005 14-271 O-05-11-41 11-17-2005 6-40 O-05-12-46 12- 5-2005 94-1 94-155, 94-156 94-159 O-06-01-03  1-19-2006 90-165 O-06-01-04  1-19-2006 90-290 O-06-04-11  4-20-2006 86-92 O-06-05-15  5-18-2006 58-23—58-29 O-06-06-19  6-22-2006 74-84 O-06-07-22  7-20-2006 86-209 O-06-98-26  8-24-2006 78-1 O-06-09-35  9-21-2006 14-272 5-138 14-276 O-06-10-36 10-20-2006 6-1 6-5 6-9 6-37, 6-38 6-40 6-50, 6-51 3-33 6-39 O-06-11-41 11-16-2006 exh. A, § 13-110 90-365 exh. A, § 13-111— 90-397—90-403 exh. A, § 13-117 exh. A, § 13-118, 90-428, 90-429 exh. A, § 13-119 exh. A, § 13-120 90-404 exh. A, § 13-121— 90-430—90-432 exh. A, § 13-123 exh. A, § 13-124 90-405 exh. A, § 13-125 90-367 exh. A, § 13-126 90-406 exh. A, § 13-127 90-369 exh. A, § 13-128 90-368 exh. A, § 13-129 90-407 O-06-12-46 12-21-2006 94-148       Added 94-162 O-07-03-11  3-22-2007 18-201—18-206       Added 78-201—78-206 O-07-03-12  3-22-2007 18-100—18-104       Added 78-150—78-154 O-07-03-13  3-22-2007 18-150—18-154       Added 78-180—78-184 O-07-07-20  7-19-2007 20-16.1       Added 86-210 O-07-07-21  7-19-2007 20-16 86-209 O-07-08-23  8-23-2007       Added 86-91(13) O-07-08-24  8-23-2007       Added 86-91(14) O-07-08-25  8-23-2007 5-1.1       Added 94-28.1 O-07-09-31  9-20-2007       Added 86-92(4) O-07-09-33  9-20-2007 10-2.1       Added 2-207 O-07-10-36 10-18-2007 14-71       Added 46-3 O-07-11-39 11-15-2007       Rpld 46-261—46-298 14-300—14-308       Added 46-261—46-269 O-07-11-41 11-15-2007 94-1 O-08-02-01 2-21-2008 exh. A       Added 46-401 O-08-03-06 3-20-2008       Added 90-456 O-08-03-04 3-20-2008       Added 94-159(20) O-08-05-11 5-22-2008       Added 6-40.1 O-08-05-12 5-22-2008       Added 6-37(b)(5)       Added 6-37.1 O-08-06-13 6-19-2008 90-196 O-08-08-19 8-21-2008       Added 86-120(a)(24) O-08-08-20 8-21-2008       Added 62-2 O-08-10-33 10-23-2008 78-55(4), (5) 78-56 O-08-10-34 10-23-2008       Added 86-120(a)(25) O-08-11-37 11-20-2008       Added 6-11.1       Added 6-37(b)(6), (7)       Added 6-39(t), (u)       Added 6-40.2—6-40.5 O-08-12-40 12-18-2008 2-143 O-08-12-42 12-18-2008 exh. A 46-401 O-09-03-06 3-19-2009 exh. A 46-401 O-09-03-07 3-19-2009       Added 90-171       Added 90-347, 90-348 O-09-04-12 4-23-2009 exh. A 46-401 O-09-04-13 4-23-2009 exh. A 46-401 O-09-04-14 4-23-2009       Added 2-301—2-313 O-09-05-16 5-21-2009 exh. A 46-401 O-09-05-17 5-21-2009       Added 34-200—34-203 O-09-06-18 6-18-2009       Added 6-37.2 O-09-06-19 6-18-2009       Added 34-41 O-09-07-21 7-23-2009       Added 78-301 O-09-07-22 7-23-2009 10-43       Added 10-67.1 10-68(d)       Added 10-69 O-09-07-23 7-23-2009       Added 86-120(a)(26) O-09-08-27 8-20-2009 90-397(b) 90-398(d) 90-402(d), (e) O-09-08-28 8-20-2009       Added 34-36(3)d.3 34-41 O-09-08-29 8-20-2009       Added 46-451, 46-452 O-09-12-35 12-17-2009 46-401 O-10-01-02 1-21-2010 90-167(e) O-10-02-04 2-19-2010       Dltd 34-69—34-77       Added 34-69—34-78 O-10-04-09 4-22-2010 exh. A 46-401 O-10-04-10 4-22-2010       Added 14-170.1—14-70.3 O-10-04-11 4-22-2010 14-167 O-10-04-12 4-22-2010 58-1, 58-2       Rpld 58-54 O-10-04-13 4-22-2010       Added 90-501—90-510 O-10-05-15 5-20-2010 1       Added 90-601—90-610 O-10-05-16 5-20-2010 86-209(b) O-10-05-17 5-20-2010 90-398(d) 90-402(a), (f), (h)       Added 90-402(j) O-10-05-18 5-20-2010       Added 10-13 O-10-05-19 5-20-2010       Added 70-100—70-103 O-10-06-20 6-24-2010 74-5 O-10-06-21 6-24-2010       Added 94-159(21) O-10-07-23 7-22-2010 38-4(c)       Dltd 38-49—38-55       Added 38-49—38-52 O-10-08-24 8-19-2010       Added 6-39(v), (w) O-10-08-25 8-19-2010 86-209(b) O-10-08-26 8-19-2010 90-194       Rpld 90-195—90-197 O-10-08-27 8-19-2010 90-398(d)       Dltd 90-402(j) O-10-09-31 9-20-2010 90-161(b) O-10-11-40 11-18-2010       Added 86-93 O-10-11-42 11-18-2010 6-11(a) O-10-12-43 12-16-2010 exh. A 46-401 O-11-05-04 5-19-2011       Added 94-155(24) O-11-08-15 8-18-2011 34-1(a) O-11-09-18 9-22-2011       Added 58-54 O-11-11-24 11-17-2011 exh. A       Added 90-641—90-662 O-11-11-25 11-17-2011 exh. A       Dltd 90-23—90-31       Added 90-23—90-31.1 O-11-12-31 12-15-2011       Added 86-91(15) O-11-12-34 12-15-2011 46-401 O-12-01-01 1-19-2012       Dltd 62-153       Dltd 62-174       Added 62-241—62-261 O-12-02-02 2-23-2012 exh. A 46-401 O-12-02-03 2-23-2012       Added 94-163 O-12-03-06 3-22-2012 1       Rpld 46-54—46-65 2(exh. A)       Added 46-54—46-65 O-12-03-08 3-22-2012 2-49(b) O-12-04-08 4-19-2012       Added 86-94 O-12-04-09 4-19-2012 90-25.1(1) O-12-04-11 4-19-2012 exh. A 46-401 O-2012-13 5-24-2012       Added 86-88(a)(3) O-2012-14 5-24-2012 6-11(a) O-2012-18 5-24-2012 2-51 O-2012-19 7-19-2012 46-261—46-269       Added 46-270—46-285 O-2012-21 7-19-2012 94-1 94-32       Added 94-155(25)       Added 94-156(67)       Added 94-158(26)       Added 94-159(22)       Added 94-160(11) O-2012-26 10-18-2012 46-117 46-401 O-2012-29 12-20-2012 exh. A 46-401 O-2012-31 12-20-2012 6-11(a) O-2013-3  2-21-2013       Added 62-119 O-2013-4  2-21-2013 1, 2 86-1, 86-2 O-2013-6  1-17-2013 94-157(2), (3) 94-157(15), (19) 94-157(27) 94-157(42), (47)       Added 94-157(52)—(58) O-2013-10  4-18-2013 46-401 O-2013-19  7-18-2013       Added 94-155(26) O-2013-20  7-18-2013       Added 94-164 O-2013-21  7-18-2013       Added 94-195 O-2013-24  9-19-2013       Added 90-110—90-115 O-2013-25  8-22-2013 2-89(a) O-2013-29 10-24-2013       Added 2-89(a)(1)i.       Rnbd 2-89(a)(1)i.       as 2-89(a)(1)j. O-2013-31 11-21-2013 14-29(a)       Added 14-29(c)(4)       Added 14-32 O-2014-8  3-20-2014 2-49(b) O-2014-16  9-18-2014 1       Rpld 14-166—14-180       Added 14-166—14-184 2       Added 14-300—14-307 O-2014-17 10-20-2014 2-49 O-2014-20 10-20-2014 6-1, 6-2 6-40 6-52 O-2014-21 12-18-2014 46-401 O-2014-26 11-20-2014 34-1 O-2015-7  4-15-2015 exh. A 46-401 O-2015-8  3-19-2015 6-11(c)       Added 6-11(d) O-2015-9  6-18-2015 Exh. A 74-1 74-3(b)(1) 74-4(9)       Added 74-4(10), (11) 74-30 74-49 74-50(8)       Added 74-81 74-85(c), (d)       Dltd 74-85(g) 74-88       Added 74-89 O-2015-10  6-18-2015 2-49(a) O-2015-12  7-23-2015       Rpld 2-174—2-180       Added 2-174—2-183 O-2015-14  7-23-2015 2-56 O-2015-15  7-23-2015 2-49(e)       Rpld 2-89       Added 2-89.1—2-89.4 2-92 2-142(a), (b) 2-199 2-202 2-207(2) 2-306(d) 2-311 6-37.2(d) 10-67.1(a) 34-1(c) 46-195(2) 46-209 46-234(b) 46-382(c) 46-452 50-28 58-54(b) 70-21(b) 78-53(b), (d) 78-54(2) 78-55(5) 78-57 78-59, 78-60 78-66, 78-67 90-101 90-102(a) 90-103(c) 90-104(a) 90-106(3) 90-368 90-397, 90-398 90-399(a) 90-400(a) 90-404 90-405(g)(6) 90-406(a) 90-608 94-54(d) O-2015-17 10-22-2015 exh. A 46-401 O-2015-18 11-19-2015 90-290(b) O-2015-19 12-17-2015 exh. A 46-401 O-2016-1  3-24-2016       Added 2-89.2(a)(8) O-2016-4  7-21-2016 6-11(b) O-2016-7 12-22-2016 46-401 O-2017-3  3-23-2017 6-40.1 O-2017-4  4-20-2017       Rpld 6-1—6-16 6-36—6-52       Added 6-1—6-5 6-31—6-73 6-87—6-112 6-131—6-138 O-2017-5  6-22-2017 6-11 O-2017-6  6-22-2017 46-401 O-2017-8  7-20-2017       Added 94-165 O-2017-9  9-21-2017       Rpld 6-70 O-2017-11 10-19-2017       Added 6-74 O-2017-12 10-19-2017 90-430(b) O-2017-14 12-21-2017 46-40  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE COURT ORDERS This is a listing of the court orders of the city used in this Code. Court Order Section Section this Code 7A-7 26-4 8 26-1 10 26-2 11 26-3  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. O.C.G.A. Section  in Code 1-3-1 et seq. 1-2 1-3-3 34-70, 34-71 90-194 2-10-105 46-110 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6 3-2-26 6-111 3-3-2 Ch. 6 3-3-2(a) 6-31 3-3-2(b)(1) 6-32 3-3-7(1) 6-93 3-3-9 6-71 3-3-20 6-93 3-3-21 6-41 6-42 3-3-23 6-89 6-91 6-134 6-135 6-138 3-3-26 6-99 3-3-23(h) 6-91 3-4-3 6-104 3-3-24.2 6-90 3-3-42 6-88 3-6-5 6-93 3-6-21.1 6-1 3-11-1 et seq. 6-56 3-11-2(e) 6-52 4-3-1 et seq. Ch. 10 4-8-6 Ch. 10 4-8-20 et seq. Ch. 10 Ch. 10, Art. II, Div. 2 4-8-25 10-67 4-8-28 10-66 4-11-1 et seq. Ch. 10 5-3-29 14-175 tit. 8, ch. 2 14-167 8-2-20 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)—(VIII) 14-29 8-2-23 14-29 8-2-25 14-29 10-1-622(1) 46-101 tit. 11, ch. 15 62-175 11-15-1 et seq. 62-175 12-2-8 34-72 12-4-72 34-71 12-5-20 et seq. 34-70 12-5-20 34-70 12-5-23 34-72 12-5-30(f) 34-70—34-72 12-5-440 et seq. 34-70, 34-71 ch. 12-7 34-70 12-7-1 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. III 34-72 34-76 12-7-4 Ch. 34, Art. III 12-7-6 34-71 12-7-6(b) 34-71, 34-72 12-7-6(c) 34-72 12-7-7 et seq. 34-72 12-7-7(f)(1) 34-73 12-7-7.1 34-71 12-7-8(a) 34-73 12-7-12 et seq. 34-74 12-7-17(9), (10) 34-73 12-7-19(b)(1) 34-76 12-7-19(b)(4) 34-76 12-7-20 34-73, 34-74 34-76 12-7-20 et seq. 34-76 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. VII 90-405 12-8-61 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. VII 14-13-7 46-98 16-2-13 14-167 16-5-20 et seq. 62-112 16-6-8 62-112 16-6-9 et seq. 62-150 16-7-4 Ch. 90, Art. VII 16-7-20 et seq. 38-1 16-7-22 et seq. 18-9 62-21—62-25 16-7-25 62-28 16-7-40 90-367 16-8-5 90-161 90-342 16-10-23 62-206 16-10-24 62-204 16-10-26 et seq. 62-208, 62-209 16-10-27 30-1 16-10-30 62-205 16-10-52 62-207 16-10-71 46-281 16-11-34 2-49 16-11-41 62-116 16-11-44 62-113 16-11-61 62-151 16-11-100 62-59 16-12-4 Ch. 10 10-3 16-12-20 et seq. 62-241 16-12-20(2) 62-245 16-12-20(3) 62-246 16-12-35 62-254 16-12-35(a)—(i) 62-245 16-12-35(b)—(d) 62-247 16-12-35(c) 62-252, 62-253 16-12-35(d)(1), (2) 62-252, 62-253 16-12-35(d)(1)(B)       62-247 16-12-35(d)(1)(C)       62-247 16-12-80 74-4 16-13-1 et seq. 62-152 16-13-20 et seq. 14-166 16-17-22 et seq. 66-1, 66-2 16-20-30 62-204 17-7-21(a)(3) 62-27 20-2-690 62-175 62-251 20-2-698 62-175 20-2-1180 62-115 21-2-1 et seq. Char. § 5-101 Char. § 5-104 Char. § 5-109 Ch. 26 21-2-310 et seq. 26-4 22-1-1 et seq. Char. § 1-103 tit. 25, ch. 2 14-167 25-10-1 et seq. 38-6 31-2-13 14-177 31-3-5.2 90-194 31-12A-1 Ch. 42, Art. II 31-12A-12 Ch. 42, Art. II 31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 10 32-4-92 Ch. 78 32-6-20 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. VI 33-3-5 46-1 33-3-5(2) 46-1 33-8-4 46-1 33-8-8 et seq. 46-1 46-110 33-8-8.1 46-1 33-8-8.2 46-1 33-34-5.1 46-379 tit. 36, ch. 36, art. 2 90-166 90-291 tit. 36, ch.61 14-301 36-18-1 34-71 36-30-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-30-8 1-8 36-32-1 et seq. Ch. 54 36-32-2(2) Ch. 2, Art. III 36-32-4 54-1 36-32-10(a) 6-138 36-33-5, 36-33-6 2-142 36-34-2 Ch. 2 36-35-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-35-6(a)(2) 1-8 36-36-20 et seq. 90-166 90-291 36-42-1 et seq. 22-24 36-43-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II 22-19 36-43-4 22-20, 22-21 36-60-4 Ch. 58, Art. III 36-64-1 et seq. Ch. 66 36-66-1 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. II, Div. 2 36-71-2(8) 46-89 36-76-6 90-456 36-76-6(b) 90-456 36-80-19 1-1 36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 36-81-4 2-183 36-81-5, 36-81-6 2-179 36-82-62 90-502 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II tit. 40 46-374 40-1-1 86-1 40-1-1 et seq. 46-374 Ch. 86 40-6-1—40-6-397       86-1 40-6-9 86-78 40-6-122 86-82 40-6-123— 40-6-125 86-82 40-6-181 86-76 40-6-183 86-78 40-6-200 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. IV 40-6-206 86-176 40-6-207 86-47, 86-48 40-6-252 86-90 40-6-371 Ch. 86 40-6-371(a)(1) Ch. 86, Art. IV 86-91, 86-92 40-6-371(a)(4) 86-88 40-6-372 Ch. 86 40-6-372—40-6-376       86-1 40-11-1 86-172 40-11-3 86-176 41-1-1 et seq. Ch. 58 41-2-7 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. IV 41-2-8— 41-2-17 14-230 14-232 14-236 41-2-12 14-304 41-2-14 14-178 42-8-60 6-1 43-8-1(3) 62-247 43-14-12 14-107 tit. 43, ch. 34 46-101 43-34-1 et seq. 46-101 tit. 43, ch. 39A 14-175 44-1-14 62-58 44-3-71 94-1 44-10-1 et seq. 14-270 44-10-20 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. VII 44-10-21 14-269 44-10-22 14-268 44-10-24 14-270 44-10-26 14-270, 14-271 44-10-27 et seq. 14-273 44-10-29 14-274 44-12-130 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. VII 45-1-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III tit. 46, ch. 3 46-110 46-3-1 et seq. 46-110 46-5-1 et seq. 46-452 46-5-1(b)(8) 46-451 46-5-1(b)(9) 46-451 46-7-15 46-110 47-37-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. IX tit. 48 46-107 tit. 48, ch. 4 14-174 48-1-1 et seq. 46-107 48-2-41 46-59 48-2-43 46-59 48-3-9 14-166 48-4-5 14-175 48-4-78 14-175 48-4-80 14-175 48-4-81 14-175 46-25 48-5-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II 48-5-7.4 34-135 34-161 48-5-354 46-101 48-5-355, 48-5-356 46-110 48-5-359.1 14-175 48-5-380 46-60 48-5-512 46-23 48-6-93 46-110 46-155 48-6-93(c), (d) 46-157 48-13-5 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. IV 48-13-5— 48-13-26 46-103 48-13-6 46-94—46-96 48-13-7 46-94—46-96 46-98 48-13-9 46-97 48-13-9(b) 46-97 48-13-9(c) 46-101 48-13-9(c)(1)— (c)(18) 46-101 48-13-10(f)(2) 46-127 48-13-10(g) 46-101 48-13-13 46-102 48-13-28 46-124 48-13-50 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. III 46-54 48-13-51 46-55 48-13-51 et seq. 46-57 48-13-51(a) 46-54 48-13-51(a)(4.2) 46-65 48-13-55 46-110 48-17-1 46-101 48-17-1(2)(A), (B) 62-247 48-17-2 62-255 48-17-2(a.1) 62-255 48-17-2(b) 62-255 48-17-9 46-101 62-255 49-6-47 86-88 tit. 50, ch. 14 2-179 50-14-1 et seq. 2-179 51-2-6 Ch. 10  