THE CODE OF THE CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA ____________ Published in 2007 by Order of the City Council ____________ OFFICIALS of the CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Barry Blount, Mayor Walton Grant Eloise Paschal Eddie Rhea Walker Lou Chase Steve Jones Lorenzo Johnson City Council ____________ Charlotte D. Cotton City Administrative Officer ____________ Paula Martin City Clerk ____________ James Skipper City Attorney PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Americus, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior Code, and any ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Charlotte Cotton, Chief Administrative Officer, Ms. Paula Martin, City Clerk, and Mr. James Skipper, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. © ;hg;Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. 2007. 
Chapter 42 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING AND CITY OWNED BUILDINGS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Smoking in public, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1; local smoking ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-12. 
Sec. 42-19. - Findings and purpose. (a)  The city council does hereby find: (1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major source of the contributor to indoor air pollution. (2)  Reliable studies, including those published by the Surgeon General of the United States, have shown that the inhalation of the smoke injected into the atmosphere by the use of tobacco products by others is a cause of and contributing factor of disease, including, without limitation, lung cancer in healthy nonsmokers. (3)  It is the obligation of all employers to use their best efforts in furnishing a safe workplace for their employees. (b)  The purpose of this article is to protect the health of nonsmokers in public city-owned buildings. (Code 1986, § 12-70; Ord. No. O-92-10-105, 10-26-1992) 
Sec. 42-20. - Smoking prohibited in certain buildings.     No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or match, or use any spark, flame, or fire-producing device for the purpose of smoking in any building owned or operated by the city. (Code 1986, § 12-71; Ord. No. O-92-10-105, 10-26-1992) 
Sec. 42-21. - Posting of signs required.     There shall be conspicuously posted, in every building owned or operated by the city, signs notifying all persons that no smoking is allowed in the building. Such signs shall contain letters of not less than two inches in height indicating "No Smoking" in the premises or, in the alternative, shall contain the international symbol for "No Smoking," which consists of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle, with a red bar bisecting the circle. (Code 1986, § 12-72; Ord. No. O-92-10-105, 10-26-1992) 
Sec. 42-22. - Violation of article.     No person shall smoke in any properly placarded place, nor shall any person remove any placard or sign required to be erected by or under the authority of this article. (Code 1986, § 12-73; Ord. No. O-92-10-105, 10-26-1992) 
Chapter 46 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 46-1. - Levy on companies and agents; filing return. (a)  Insurers' license fees. There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount as established by ordinance. For each separate business location in excess of one, not covered by subsection (b) of this section, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount as established by ordinance. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. (b)  License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee as established by ordinance, per location for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. (c)  Insurers' agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) of this section, in the amount as established by ordinance, for each such location within the city. (d)  Gross premiums tax—Imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. (e)  Same—All other insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. (f)  Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first date of each subsequent year. Those not paid by March 15 will be considered delinquent and will be collected by such action as provided for hereinafter. (g)  Filing and reporting requirements. Every insurance company doing business in the city and subject to the fees and taxes herein imposed shall file with the finance director, on forms prescribed by the finance director, a report showing the names and addresses of its agents representing such company in the city; the location and person in charge of each business location within the city operated and maintained by such company; the classes of insurance written; and such other reasonable information as may be required, and, in addition, shall furnish complete information regarding the premium received, by class, from policies written on risks residing or located within the city. Such report shall be made over affidavit of an officer of such company. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this section for any person, or the agent of any person to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any such report. Said report shall be filed at the time of paying the license fee and premium tax. (h)  Confidentiality of information. All reports required to be filed under this section shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be solely for the use of the officers of the city responsible for administering this section. (i)  Penalties. The fees and taxes levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. A violation of this section shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license, and the person responsible may be punished as for violations of other city ordinances. (j)  Administrative provisions. The finance director is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this section to the insurance commissioner of the state within 45 days of its enactment. (Code 1986, § 14-40; Ord. No. O-94-12-41, 12-22-1994; Ord. No. O-97-12-39, 12-18-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) State Law reference— Insurance license fees and taxes, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
Sec. 46-2. - Junk dealers.     All houses or places of business where a junk shop is conducted shall at all times be subject to visitation and inspection by the police of the city; shall keep books showing daily transactions, giving the name and address of all persons making sales to such place of business, and shall describe the articles of merchandise purchased, together with the date of purchase, which books shall be subject to inspection by the police at any time a police officer desires the same. If any person who conducts such a business shall, at any time, refuse to submit to such visitation or inspection, or fails or refuses to keep such books, or fails or refuses to permit the police to make inspection of the same, the mayor shall immediately close the place of business of such person so refusing. In case any machinery or any part thereof or any appliance of any railroad shop or gas company, or waterworks, or sample waste or loose cotton, grates or any part thereof, or gas or waterworks fixtures shall be found in any junk shop, without a sufficient explanation of the same, or anyone who violates any of the terms of this section, it shall subject the owner or person conducting such shop, upon conviction, to punishment prescribed in section 1-8, and conviction of a second offense shall be a just and conclusive cause for the revocation of the license of such business. (Code 1962, § 15-17; Code 1986, § 14-70) 
Sec. 46-3. - Yard sales. (a)  For the purpose of this Code, a "yard sale," which may also be known as a "garage sale" or a "rummage sale," is defined as an informal, irregularly scheduled marketplace of used and/or new household goods. Typically, the items for sale are unwanted items from the household conducting the sale, but a yard sale may include items purchased for resale. The seller displays the items for sale to the public, usually in a garage, in a yard, in a driveway, or within the living area of the household. The duration of a yard sale is one calendar day. (b)  Yard sales are permitted to be held on private property within the corporate limits of the city. No permit or business license shall be required from the city in order to conduct a yard sale; provided, however, that one individual or family shall not conduct more than five yard sales during each calendar year. Any individual or family conducting more than five yard sales in a single calendar year period shall be considered to be in the "yard sale" business and shall obtain a business license from the city. (Ord. No. O-07-10-36, § 14-71, 10-18-2007) 
Secs. 46-4—46-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 46-23. - Date due and payable; collection and payment; execution; levy. (a)  All ad valorem taxes on tangible property other than motor vehicles shall be payable in two installments. Such taxes due the city and the independent school system of the city, which are levied upon tangible property other than motor vehicles, shall become due and payable on September 1 and December 20 of each year. Notice of the amount due for such respective due dates shall be mailed to each taxpayer on or about July 1 of each year for the September 1 installment and on or about October 20 of each year for the December 20 payment, shall be the equivalent of at least one-half of such taxes due upon such property for the immediately preceding year. The amount of such tax due on December 20 shall be the difference between the amount due and payable on September 1 and the total amount of such tax as levied upon said property for the then-current tax year. (b)  Every taxpayer who shall neglect or refuse to pay such taxes by the dates upon which they are due and payable as herein provided shall be placed upon the digest as a defaulter, and the finance director shall forthwith as early as practicable issue an execution against such taxpayer for unpaid taxes, which execution shall bear teste in the name of the city council and be directed to the finance director. (c)  Upon the issuance of the execution authorized in subsection (b) of this section, the finance director shall be authorized to add thereto the cost for recording the execution on the general execution docket of the clerk of superior court of the county and also the cost of satisfying said execution on said general execution docket, said authorized costs to be in the same amount as is charged by the clerk of superior court of the county for recording and satisfying such executions as authorized by law. (d)  Nothing herein shall relieve any property owner who is required to make a return to the commissioner of the state department of revenue from that responsibility; nor shall anything herein abrogate or lessen the authority of said commissioner or his agent to issue execution for taxes due as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-512. (Code 1962, § 22-13; Code 1986, § 10-23; Ord. No. O-88-11-38, 11-28-1988; Ord. No. O-96-11-49, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-24. - Insolvent tax docket; responsibility of finance committee, finance director.     It shall be the duty of the finance committee on or about April 1 of each year to thoroughly examine the tax digest and tax executions that have not been paid, with a view of ascertaining the solvency of said executions and the amount of said uncollected taxes, and to submit, in writing, a report showing the result of said examination and inquiry, together with such recommendations to the city council as to the disposition of such as may be insolvent as said committee may deem advisable. After the making of said report as herein provided, unless specific action is taken by the city council as to said insolvent executions of taxes, it shall be the duty of the finance committee to charge off said insolvent tax executions on what is known as the "insolvent tax docket," which shall be kept by the finance director. (Code 1962, § 22-5; Code 1986, § 10-25; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-25. - Judicial in rem tax foreclosure for delinquent real property taxes. (a)  The city shall be authorized, from and after December 1, 1995, the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, to utilize the procedures provided for judicial in rem tax foreclosure as contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-81, said state statutes being incorporated into this section by specific reference thereto. (b)  Such procedures may be used for the collection of any and all ad valorem taxes assessed against real property within the city that remain unpaid for a period of 12 months following the date that the taxes initially become delinquent. (c)  Any proceedings filed in accordance with this section shall be designed solely to enforce the lien for ad valorem taxes against the property subject to taxation, and such proceedings shall not constitute an action for personal liability for such taxes against the owner of the subject property. (d)  For the purposes of proceedings filed in superior court pursuant to this section, the city tax collector shall be defined as the finance director. (e)  Prior to any proceeding being filed in the superior court pursuant to this section, the tax collector shall cause the city attorney to check the title to the property which is subject to the ad valorem tax levy and report to the tax collector the name of the owner of the subject property and any other interested parties as defined by state law. The city attorney shall also provide to the tax collector a legal description of the subject property. (f)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city from proceeding to collect delinquent ad valorem taxes in another manner or pursuant to another city ordinance or state statute as the methods for collection of such ad valorem taxes provided in this section are not exclusive, but are merely cumulative of the methods by which the city may collect such taxes pursuant to state law. (Code 1986, § 10-28; Ord. No. O-95-11-37, 11-30-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 46-26—46-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. O-12-03-06, §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 22, 2012, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 46-54—46-65, was entitled "Hotel-Motel Occupancy Tax", and derived from: Code 1986, §§ 10-30—10-41; Ord. No. O-01-04-17, adopted Apr. 19, 2001; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, adopted Dec. 16, 2004; and Ord. No. O-05-07-16, adopted July 21, 2005. State Law reference— Local hotel-motel occupancy taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
Sec. 46-54. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows:     City. The City of Americus and, variously, the incorporated territory of Americus, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.     City finance director. The duly appointed city finance director of the city or his designee.     Due date. The 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed.     Estimated tax liability. The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel.     Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment.     Guest room. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use.     Hotel. Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truckstop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint.     Lodging provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations.     Monthly period. The calendar months of any year.     Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room.     Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise.     Permanent resident. Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date.     Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax.     Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.     Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq., specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a). (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-55. - Tax rate.     There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of seven percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 46-57. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) State Law reference— Hotel-motel tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 46-56. - Collection of tax by lodging provider.     Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of seven percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 46-57. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. (1)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. (2)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-57. - Exemptions.     No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) State Law reference— Exemptions generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51 et seq. 
Sec. 46-58. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority.     Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city finance director on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that the ordinance codified herein becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city finance director. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city finance director shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-59. - Determination generally; returns; payments. (a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the City of Americus monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. (b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. (c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. (d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. (e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent of any tax due and unpaid tax shall be assessed. (f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city finance director. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city finance director. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. (g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for a period longer than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. (h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-60. - Deficiency determinations. (a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. (b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 46-59. (c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city finance director shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. (d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. (e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-61. - Determination if no return made. (a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 46-60(c). (b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 46-59. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-62. - Collection of tax by city. (a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city finance director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. (b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. (c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city finance director either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. (e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city finance director, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-63. - Administration of ordinance; record keeping. (a)  Authority of city finance director. The city finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. (b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city finance director may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. (c)  Examination of records; audits. The city finance director or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city finance director shall stipulate another place within the city. (d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city finance director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city finance director when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city finance director may prescribe. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-64. - Violations.     Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 46-56 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 46-59, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-65. - Effective date.     This article and the tax levied hereby shall become effective upon its adoption. (Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Secs. 46-66—46-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPATION AND PROFESSIONS TAX; REGULATORY FEES[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Local occupation taxes on businesses and professions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 
Sec. 46-89. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax.     Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from.     Gross receipts. (1)  The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. (2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: a.  Sales, use, or excise tax; b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among a parent corporation, wholly owned subsidiaries of such parent corporation, and any corporation in which such parent corporation or one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries owns stock possessing at least 30 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such partially owned corporation, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent that contributed to the gross receipts in issue; e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services that are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt.     Location of office shall include any structure or vehicle where business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renters or lessees location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site.     Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes.     Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 80 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes.     Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who, by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation.     Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax.     Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8), or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. (Code 1986, § 14-8; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-90. - Administration.     The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy, assessment and collection of license taxes, fees and penalties imposed herein. (Code 1962, § 13-29; Code 1986, § 14-1; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-91. - Rules and regulations.     The finance director shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of this state or of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupational license taxes, fees and penalties hereunder. (Code 1962, § 13-30; Code 1986, § 14-2; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-92. - Responsible person.     Whenever in this article the term "dealer" or "person" is used, the principal, but in such principal's absence, any agent, clerk, or employee, shall be subject to the penalties herein imposed should the business be carried on without registering and paying the required occupational license tax in the same manner as if such agents, clerks and employees were the proprietors of said business. (Code 1962, § 13-25; Code 1986, § 14-3) 
Sec. 46-93. - Registration.     Any person for such person's self or as an officer of a firm or corporation exercising or carrying on any business or operating any establishment for which a license or payment of occupational taxes is required by this article, without first having registered as provided herein, shall be liable to punishment as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1962, §§ 13-6, 13-16; Code 1986, § 14-4) 
Sec. 46-94. - Levy.     The specific and general occupational license taxes provided in this article are hereby levied and shall be collected in the amounts hereinafter specified upon each person engaged in the business, trade, profession or occupation or doing acts named or described herein within the city during each calendar year. All such activities may be hereinafter referred to as "business." (Code 1962, § 13-1; Code 1986, § 14-5) State Law reference— Levy of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 46-95. - Payment of tax prerequisite to engaging in business. (a)  No person shall be engaged in, prosecute or carry on any business, trade or profession, either in whole or in part, within the city by maintaining an office within the city or by soliciting orders through said office or engage in any business in any manner without having paid a license tax as hereinafter provided. (b)  No business license shall be issued by the finance director to any person or entity which is delinquent as to any ad valorem taxes, fees, assessments, charges, including charges for utilities provided by the city, and other indebtedness or fees owed to the city. (Code 1962, § 13-2; Code 1986, § 14-6; Ord. No. O-97-07-25, 7-24-1997) State Law reference— Levy of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 46-96. - Occupation tax required.     Each person upon whom an occupational license tax is levied shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the finance director or designees, or to any police officer of said city, upon request. (Code 1986, § 14-7; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) State Law reference— Levy of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 46-97. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. (a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount fixed by ordinance shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. (b)  A regulatory fee in the amount fixed by ordinance is hereby imposed as authorized under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. Such regulatory fee shall not include an administrative fee. Such regulatory fee applies to each business more particularly set out in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b), such section being incorporated into and being made a part of this section by specific reference thereto. (Code 1986, § 14-9; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-98. - Occupation tax—Levied; restrictions. (a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: (1)  Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. (2)  The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as established by ordinance. (b)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business' gross receipts. (c)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. (d)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. (e)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. (f)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the taxing jurisdiction or in the state. (g)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7, which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. (h)  The occupation tax payable pursuant to this section shall be as established by ordinance per business, trade, profession, or occupation required to pay the occupation tax. (i)  An alphabetical business classification (SIC) index is added to Ordinance No. O-95-12-41 as appendix A thereof, and the same is incorporated into this section by specific reference thereto. (j)  A tax class designation by SIC code and business description for tax classes 1 through 6 is added to Ordinance No. O-95-12-41 as appendix B, and the same is incorporated herein by specific reference thereto. (Code 1986, § 14-10; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-99. - Same—Paid by business with no location in the state.     Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: (1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or (2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. (Code 1986, § 14-11; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-100. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration.     The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. (Code 1986, § 14-12; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-101. - Professionals.     Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(c)(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: (1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as referenced in section 46-98(a)(2). (2)  A fee as established by ordinance per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this section shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. (3)  Such election shall be made on or before February 1, 1995. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by written request filed by the professional on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. (4)  Examples of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations, which are subject to this section include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: a.  Lawyers; b.  Physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.); c.  Osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.); d.  Chiropractors; e.  Podiatrists; f.  Dentists; g.  Optometrists; h.  Psychologists; i.  Veterinarians; j.  Landscape architects; k.  Land surveyors; l.  Practitioners of physiotherapy; m.  Public accountants; n.  Embalmers; o.  Funeral directors; p.  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineers; q.  Architects; r.  Marriage and family therapists; s.  Social workers and professional counselors; t.  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622(1); u.  Owners or operators of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9; v.  Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354, as to their deliveries to businesses, and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and w.  Any other business, profession or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. (Code 1986, § 14-13; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) State Law reference— Taxation of professionals, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9(c), 48-13-10(g). 
Sec. 46-102. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government.     Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax. (Code 1986, § 14-14; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) State Law reference— Exemptions generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13. 
Sec. 46-103. - Purpose and scope of tax.     The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. (Code 1986, § 14-15; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-104. - Tax due, payable; transacting business when tax delinquent; penalty. (a)  Each administrative fee, regulatory fee, and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be for the calendar year. Any administrative fee, regulatory fee, or occupation tax shall be payable March 15 of each year. For any new profession, occupation, or business begun in the city after March 15 of any year, the administrative fee, regulatory fee, and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be obtained immediately upon beginning business, and if not so obtained, shall be considered delinquent. Any amounts owed which remain due and unpaid for a period of 90 days shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as provided in this article. A regulatory fee certificate and an occupation tax certificate indicating that the profession, occupation, or business has paid the fees and taxes owed shall be issued by the finance director. Any person practicing a profession, occupation, or business without having a valid certificate issued to him or her shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day that such fees and taxes remain unpaid shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (b)  In addition to the remedies specified in subsection (a) of this section, the finance director may proceed to collect the delinquencies in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. (Code 1986, § 14-16; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-105. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. (a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: (1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and (2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. (b)  Where the business has locations outside the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. (Code 1986, § 14-17; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-106. - Exemption for businesses operated for charitable purposes.     No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. (Code 1986, § 14-18; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-107. - Evidence of state registration; conspicuously displayed; evidence of state sales tax registration. (a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 48 (O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.) shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. (b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. (c)  Each person who is required by the state to have a state sales tax registration number assigned by the state department of revenue shall provide evidence of proper state registration before the city registration is issued. (Code 1986, § 14-19; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-99-10-41, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 46-108. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable.     Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. (Code 1986, § 14-20; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-109. - Subpoena powers.     The city clerk shall have full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. (Code 1986, § 14-21; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-110. - Businesses not covered by this article. (a)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: (1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. (2)  Those electric service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). (3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. (4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. (5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. (6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. (7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). (8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. (9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. (10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. (11)  Any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. (b)  The city shall not be authorized to require the payment of a fee in any amount by a business or practitioner for the cost of ascertaining whether such a business or practitioner has paid occupation tax to another local government. (Code 1986, § 14-22; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-111. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law.     An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. (Code 1986, § 14-23; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-112. - Profitability class based upon dominant line of business.     A business shall be placed in the profitability class based upon the dominant line of business or service of the business. (Code 1986, § 14-24; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-113. - Occupation tax limitations. (a)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a person if: (1)  A person with no location or office in the city provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state, which purports to tax the person's gross receipts in this state, then the person shall be exempt from the occupation tax levied by this article. (2)  A person who has locations or offices elsewhere in the state who is subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall be subject to occupation tax by the city, unless the person provides documentation to the city of current payment of an occupation tax, measured by the gross receipts of the person, to other state and local governments. (b)  If a person commences business in the city on or after July 1 of any year, the city shall be authorized to levy the customary rate on the gross receipts of the business or practitioner from the date of commencement of the business. The administrative fee authorized by this article shall not be reduced for any such business commencing on or after July 1 of any year. (Code 1986, § 14-25; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-114. - Businesses at more than one location.     Wherever a business or occupation is conducted at more than one location or place within the city, each such location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax imposed by this article. (Code 1986, § 14-26; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-115. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain.     All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and, in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same. (Code 1986, § 14-27; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-116. - Registration, tax due and payable; transaction of business when tax delinquent. (a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all taxes and fees as provided herein within 90 days of the due date thereof. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration, shall be subject to the penalties provided in sections 46-104 and 46-117. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. (b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the finance director, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. (Code 1986, § 14-28; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-117. - Due date; late fee penalty.     A late fee penalty is imposed on each business and practitioner of an occupation or profession which fails to apply for and obtain appropriate registration and to pay any and all regulatory and administrative fees and occupation taxes required by this article in a timely manner. Such late fee penalties shall be as established in section 46-401 of the City Code. Such late fee penalties shall be in addition to any other penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable. Such late fee penalties shall become due and payable when such regulatory and administrative fees and occupation taxes remain due and unpaid for 90 calendar days from the due date of the tax or fee. (Code 1986, § 14-29; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-2012-26, 10-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-118. - Penalty for violation of this article.     Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense; provided, however, practitioners of professions and any other persons whose qualification to practice their profession is determined by the general laws of the state and who fail to pay an occupation tax as provided in this article shall be subject only to the civil penalty and interest provisions as provided in section 46-117. (Code 1986, § 14-30; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-119. - Inspection of records.     The city, through its employees, officers, or agents, may inspect the books of any person subject to an occupation tax to determine the accuracy of the documents and information submitted by a business or practitioner to the city. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the regulatory fee certificate and right to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city or made available in the city for examination by the designated city agents. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of improper designation of a dominant line of business, profession, or occupation, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and additional interest of 1.5 percent per month of the amount of the deficiency shall be assessed. (Code 1986, § 14-31; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-120. - Confidentiality.     Information provided by a person to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and the amount of the occupation tax or the levy or collection of occupational tax levied pursuant to this article is confidential and exempt from disclosure. Such information may be provided by the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay an occupation tax. (Code 1986, § 14-32; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-121. - Revocation.     Failure of any person to pay an applicable administrative fee, regulatory fee, or occupation tax, or any part thereof, before it becomes delinquent, or upon the failure to permit inspection of books as required, shall result in any business tax certificates or regulatory fee certificates granted by the city under this article permitting such person to do business in the city for the current year being automatically revoked without any further action required of the city. No new occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax or fees herein required are unpaid, nor shall such certificates be issued to a person who has failed to submit adequate records for inspection as required by section 46-119. (Code 1986, § 14-33; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-122. - Execution; liens. (a)  The finance director or designee, upon any tax or installment of any tax that becomes delinquent and remains unpaid, shall issue an execution for the amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, including interest at the rate of one percent per month accruing thereon. The lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax as provided by this Code, the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien for said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time that such tax or installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the appropriate city agent upon the person liable for said tax and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and cost allowed by law. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code, the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. (b)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon execution issued by the city against any person defaulting on an occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the entry of the nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution pays the tax in full, together with all interest penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges for services and goods due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. (Code 1986, § 14-34; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-123. - Application to prior delinquencies.     This article does not repeal or affect the enforcement of any ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore passed for fees and taxes levied when such fees and taxes have not been paid in full. Such ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore passed providing for the issuing and enforcing execution for taxes or assessments required by such ordinances or that imposed fines or penalties for nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees pursuant to such ordinances, or failure to comply with the other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. (Code 1986, § 14-35; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-124. - Public hearing before future tax increases.     In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year for the city, the city shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue derived from such occupation taxes. This hearing shall be held pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-28. (Code 1986, § 14-36; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-125. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance.     This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. (Code 1986, § 14-37; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-126. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed.     This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. (Code 1986, § 14-38; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-127. - Exemption or reduction in occupation tax.     The city council, may by subsequent ordinance or resolution, provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation taxes to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation taxes shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. Such exemptions, reductions, or credits may include, but shall not be limited to, those exemptions, reductions, or credits more particularly set out in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(f)(2). (Code 1986, § 14-39; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-128. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions.     Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. (Code 1986, § 14-39.1; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Secs. 46-129—46-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS LICENSE TAX 
Sec. 46-155. - Business license tax levied.     In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon the depository financial institutions located within the city at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institution. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations and federal savings and loan associations. (Code 1986, § 14-91; Ord. of 12-28-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 46-156. - Minimum due.     The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 46-155 shall be established by ordinance. (Code 1986, § 14-92; Ord. of 12-28-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 46-157. - Form for filing of return.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the finance director of the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The city council shall assess and collect the tax levy pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in such return. (Code 1986, § 14-93; Ord. of 12-28-1983, § 3; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-158. - Due date.     Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 46-157 unless extended by the city council. (Code 1986, § 14-94; Ord. of 12-28-1983, § 4; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-159. - Administrative provisions.     The finance director of the city is hereby directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution in the city and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside the city. (Code 1986, § 14-95; Ord. of 12-28-1983, § 5; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 46-160—46-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
Sec. 46-187. - Purpose.     The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot be a de facto approach to prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests; reduced criminal activity and protection of the city's neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. (Code 1986, § 2.5-1; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-188. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult business means any business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult dancing establishment means any restaurant, lounge, private club, nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult entertainment establishment means a business which consists of one or more of the following: an adult bookstore, an adult business, an adult dancing establishment, an adult motion picture theater, an adult minimotion picture theater, an adult hotel or motel, an adult motion picture arcade, an adult video store, or an escort bureau.     Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities of specified anatomical areas.     Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used primarily for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projections or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used primarily for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.     Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in videotapes, movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section thereof, comprising 20 percent of its total floorspace, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than 20 percent of its net sales from videotapes, movies or other reproductions which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.     Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order, united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies.     Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas.     Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names or persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters.     Good moral character means a person, according to this article, that has not been convicted of a drug-related crime, an alcohol-related felony, a sex-related crime, or a crime of moral turpitude in the past five years.     Minor means, for the purpose of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 21 years.     Partial nude dancing means appearing or dancing at an adult entertainment establishment, as defined herein, partially nude, but at a minimum with the human male or female genitals, pubic area and buttocks and all of the nipples of the breasts of a female being at least shielded and covered by a fully opaque covering.     Public indecency means as it relates to adult dancing establishment: (1)  Engaging in sexual intercourse; (2)  Engaging in deviate sexual conduct; (3)  Engaging in a state of total nudity as opposed to partial nudity; (4)  Fondling the genitals of oneself or another person; or (5)  Dancing with the male genitals covered, but in a discernible turgid state. Such activities shall be deemed to be acts of public indecency under the terms of this article.     Specified anatomical areas means and shall include any of the following: (1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2)  Human male genitalia in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.     Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: (1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; (2)  Clearly depicting human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; (3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; (4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; (5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; (6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or (7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. Such activities shall be deemed to be acts of public indecency under the terms of this article.     Total nude dancing means appearing or dancing at an adult dancing establishment, as herein defined, without the protection or benefit of the minimal coverings required for partial nude dancing. (Code 1986, § 2.5-2; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-189. - General regulations. (a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall operate, attempt to operate, advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, without a valid adult entertainment permit issued pursuant to this article. (b)  No later than March 1 of each year an adult entertainment establishment permittee shall file a verified report with the finance director showing the permittee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. (c)  An adult entertainment establishment permittee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed therein. (d)  No adult entertainment establishment permittee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 21 years or a person not permitted pursuant to this article. (e)  No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. (f)  An adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this article, shall be closed between 12:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. each day, every Sunday, and on Christmas Day. (g)  No adult entertainment establishment permitted employee shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any adult entertainment establishment employee on the licensed premises. (h)  An adult entertainment establishment permittee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. (i)  All dancing by an employee at an adult dancing establishment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. (j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. (k)  No adult entertainment establishment permittee shall allow or permit an employee or any other person on the premises to engage in any of the following sexual activities: (1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; (2)  Clearly depicting human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; (3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; (4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; (5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; (6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or (7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. (l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. (m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. (n)  All areas of an establishment permitted hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. (o)  No adult entertainment establishment shall serve, sell, distribute or allow the consumption or possession or any intoxicating liquor or controlled substances upon the premises of the permittee. (p)  Total nude dancing, appearing nude or dancing involving acts of public indecency as defined by this article are hereby prohibited in any adult dancing establishment. Any other dancing or acts of public indecency prohibited by other applicable laws of the state or ordinances of the city as now or hereinafter enacted, or the violation of any of the other criminal laws of the state or of the city, are likewise prohibited. (Code 1986, § 2.5-3; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-190. - Permit required.     It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, or operate in or upon any premises within the city, an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article, without a permit to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or authorize, or be deemed to condone or authorize, any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the statutes or ordinances of the United States, the state, or the city. (Code 1986, § 2.5-4; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-191. - Operation of unpermitted premises unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau, adult business, or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid permit or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required therefor under this article. (Code 1986, § 2.5-5; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-192. - Admission of minors unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for a permittee to admit or permit the admission of minors into a permitted premises. (Code 1986, § 2.5-6; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-193. - Sales to minors unlawful.     It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale from an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment enterprise. (Code 1986, § 2.5-7; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-194. - Location.     No adult entertainment establishment business shall be located: (1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family uses or purposes; (2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building owned or occupied by such government, library, civic center, public park or neighborhood playground is located; (3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; (4)  Within any zoning category other than the following three categories: a.  Roadside business (C-1) as defined in section 94-155; b.  General business (C-2) as defined in section 94-156; c.  Industrial (I) as defined in section 94-159; or (5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. For the purpose of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line to property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. (Code 1986, § 2.5-8; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-195. - Adult entertainment establishment employees.     It shall be the responsibility of the finance director to enforce the permit provisions of this article. It shall be the chief of police or the chief's designee's responsibility to enforce the operating regulations of this article. (1)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be at least 21 years of age. Any applicant for employment who has been previously convicted within the preceding five years of a sex-related crime, a drug-related crime, or an alcohol-related felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude shall not be eligible for employment as an adult entertainment establishment employee, and any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, drug-related crime, or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work at any premises requiring permits under this article for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered as part of a court-ordered sentence. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere. The terms "employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee" and "work at any permitted premises" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the permitted premises or elsewhere. (2)  Approval for employment. Before any person may be employed at a permitted premises by a permittee hereunder, he shall file a notice with the police chief of the city of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in subsection (1) of this section. The city shall have 45 days to review and investigate the application submitted by the employee. If the employee is found to be qualified for such employment by the terms of this article, the police chief shall grant approval of the employment. Upon approval, the employee may be employed by the permittee. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the city manager of the city for a hearing. The decision of the city manager after hearing the appeal shall be final. (3)  Investigation fee . An investigation fee in the amount established by ordinance, or a receipt from the finance director evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed, shall accompany the notice of intended employment submitted to the police chief. (4)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees regardless of the type of business relationship with the owner or permittee of the adult entertainment establishment. (Code 1986, § 2.5-9; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 46-196. - Permit application. (a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment business shall make application to the finance director. Prior to submitting such application, the nonrefundable fee established by ordinance, shall be paid to the finance director to defray, in part, the cost of the investigations and reports required by this article. Upon payment thereof, the finance director shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. (b)  The application for such a permit shall not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment. (Code 1986, § 2.5-10; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 46-197. - Application information. (a)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: (1)  The applicant's full name, social security number, and date of birth. (2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. (3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. (4)  The business, occupation and employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. (5)  The business permit history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous businesses in this or any other city, state or territory, has had any license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation of the applicant subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. (6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation and charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, all states or other jurisdictions in which the applicant is authorized to do business (including written evidence of such authorizations), and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. (7)  If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. (8)  If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership. (9)  If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply to the corporate partner. (10)  The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one or more of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person or persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. (11)  Whether or not the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime evidencing a lack of good moral character, as defined in this article, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction where the crime or act occurred, and any disposition thereof, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of any court-imposed sentence have been fully completed. (12)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of all trade name documents properly recorded as required by law. (13)  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report to the Georgia Secretary of State. (14)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not and will not benefit financially in any way from the operation of the business if the permit is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude. The police chief shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this section for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. (15)  The address of the premises to be permitted. (16)  Whether the premises are owned or rented by the applicant. (17)  A plat by a registered surveyor, licensed by the state, showing that the location of the proposed premises is in accord with the provisions contained in section 46-194 and the zoning chapter. In addition to the information required herein, the application shall disclose the name, address, social security number and date of birth of all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the business that is applying for the permit, and any other matter reasonably required by the chief of police. (b)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: (1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; (2)  If a partnership, the manager or general partner; (3)  If a corporation, the president of the corporation; (4)  If any other organization or association, the chief administrative official of such organization or association. (Code 1986, § 2.5-11; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-198. - Applicant to appear.     The applicant, if an individual, or the designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership, corporation, or other entity, shall personally appear at the finance department before the finance director, or his designee, and produce proof that the nonrefundable application fee, established by ordinance, has been paid, and shall also present the completed permit application containing the required information to the police chief or his designee. (Code 1986, § 2.5-12; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 46-199. - Application investigation and recommendations. (a)  The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the police chief shall report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall consider the application within 30 days of receipt of the report from the police chief. After a hearing on the application, at which any interested persons present may be heard, the planning commission shall recommend to the city council the grant or denial of the permit at its next regular meeting; but the commission may only recommend the granting of such permit if it finds: (1)  The required application fee has been paid. (2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. (3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. (4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in connection with the investigation of his application. (5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors of the applicant, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, in a court of competent jurisdiction to an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or have been convicted, enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere in any other state as to an offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been the same or substantially the same offense as one or more of the above-stated offenses. (6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause in this city or in any other local government jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to either the date of the application or the date of the granting of the application. (7)  The building, structure, equipment, and location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy under the law of this state and the ordinances of this city. (8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. (9)  That neither the applicant, nor any of the applicant's employees, agents, partners, directors, officers, or managers, has within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities defined herein to occur in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, nor has such applicant or other persons knowingly allowed or permitted the proposed permitted premises to be used as a place in which solicitations for any of the specified sexual activities occurred within said time period. (10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person actually on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. (11)  That the proposed premises shall not be located at any location not authorized by this article or by the zoning chapter. (12)  That the grant of such permit will not result in a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, or of any laws, rules or regulations of the state, or the United States. (13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. (b)  The planning commission shall forward its recommendation to the city council which shall have the final authority to grant or deny the permit, but such permit shall not be granted unless the city council finds that all of the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, this section and section 46-200, have been met by the applicant. (c)  All hearings regarding such application shall be open to the public and advertised in the legal organ of the city as required by state law and this section. (Code 1986, § 2.5-13; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 46-200. - Additional permit requirements. (a)  The permittee shall maintain with the finance director and the police department, at all times, a written statement of the name, address, and phone number of the manager or assistant manager in charge of the permitted premises, and there shall, at all times, be a manager in charge and on the premises during operating hours. (b)  Each permittee shall have a continuing obligation to comply with all provisions of this Code relating to the operation of the permittee's business. (c)  The applicant may be required to appear at any hearing on the issue of the grant, denial, suspension, or revocation of the required permit governed by this article. (Code 1986, § 2.5-14; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 46-201. - Persons prohibited as permittees. (a)  Subject to the other requirements of this article, no permit authorized by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: (1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes, including ad valorem taxes, for a business at that location; (2)  Any person who is not of good moral character as defined in this article; (3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors, or shareholders is not of good moral character as defined in this article; (4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose partners or members is not of good moral character as defined in this article; (5)  Any person employing or assisted financially, in whole or in part, by any person who is not of good moral character as defined in this article; or (6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. (b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current permits to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new permits shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. (427 US 50, 81). (Code 1986, § 2.5-15; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-202. - Permit—Renewal.     Permits for adult entertainment establishments shall be renewed on a calendar-year basis provided that the permittee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments permits shall be as established by this article. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 1 of each year prior to the year for which such permit is requested. (Code 1986, § 2.5-16; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-203. - Same—Nontransferable.     No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permittee and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, that if the permit is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this article. (Code 1986, § 2.5-17; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-204. - Change of name. (a)  No permittee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment business under any name other than the name of the business as specified on the permit. (b)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article, and all other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. (Code 1986, § 2.5-18; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-205. - Penalty for violation.     Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any permit granted hereunder. (Code 1986, § 2.5-19; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-206. - Unlawful operation declared a nuisance.     Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoining thereof, in the manner provided by law. The city shall further be authorized to take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate such nuisance and retrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of any permit granted hereunder. (Code 1986, § 2.5-20; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-207. - Revocation and appeal. (a)  After notice and hearing, the police chief shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a permit previously granted hereunder. In the event the police chief seeks to suspend or to revoke a permit the police chief shall give written notification to the permittee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations upon which such suspension or revocation is based and shall be served upon the permittee, by registered mail, return receipt requested, at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. The permittee shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. (b)  The police chief shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a permit in the event of the occurrence of any one or more of the following: (1)  A permittee provided false or misleading information in the original or subsequent application process; (2)  A permittee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; (3)  A permittee has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state or of the United States to occur on the premises; (4)  A permittee has violated any provision of this article; (5)  A permittee has been convicted, during the license period, of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state, the city, or the United States regarding an offense which was committed on the premises, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article when such offense would serve to prohibit the permittee from obtaining a permit under this article; or (6)  A permittee fails to pay any fee, fine or other amount of money due the city under this article or any other license or occupational taxation ordinance of the city. (c)  In the event the police chief shall suspend or revoke any permit hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the sound discretion of the police chief; provided, however, that the permittee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of any hearing scheduled in accordance with subsections (a) or (d) of this section. No permittee or other applicant may apply for a permit during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing or investigation conducted by the police chief in connection with a possible suspension or revocation of a permit issued hereunder, the police chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension, revocation and the duration of any suspension or revocation. (d)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the police chief, the permittee may appeal the decision of the police chief to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date that the permittee receives written notification of the decision of the police chief. Such written notification shall be mailed to the permittee by certified mail, return receipt requested. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the city council within 45 days after the filing of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After hearing by the city council, the city council may take such action as it finds warranted from the evidence submitted to it, including, but not limited to, the affirming of the action of the police chief, the reversal of such action, or the imposition of modified sanctions upon the permittee. (Code 1986, § 2.5-21; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 46-208. - Permit and annual renewal fees. (a)  There is hereby established a nonrefundable fee in the amount established by ordinance to be paid to the finance director with each application to operate an adult entertainment establishment pursuant to this article. The annual renewal fee for any such permit shall be as established by ordinance. (b)  Any permittee shall also be subject to all business license fees and occupational taxes imposed by the city pursuant to this chapter. (Code 1986, § 2.5-22; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-209. - Advertising and posting.     The premises for which the permit herein is sought either as an initial permit or a renewal thereof, shall be posted with a notice in a form prescribed by the city manager for at least 21 days prior to any hearing on such application. In addition, a newspaper advertisement shall be published in the city's legal organ in a form prescribed by the city manager at least two times during the ten days prior to any hearing on such permit application or renewal. Such posted notice and newspaper advertisements shall notify all interested persons of the date, time, location and purpose of the hearing on such application. (Code 1986, § 2.5-23; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 46-2010. - Premises open for inspection.     The permitted premises shall be open at any and all reasonable times for inspection by the city to establish and ensure compliance with this article. (Code 1986, § 2.5-24; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-211. - Compliance in newly annexed areas.     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any adult entertainment establishments are not permitted pursuant to this article that are located in newly annexed areas shall have 90 days from the effective date of the annexation to obtain a license hereunder and otherwise comply with all the terms, requirements and standards hereof. Any such adult entertainment establishments that is not in full compliance with said terms, requirements and standards at the end of said 90-day period shall cease operation no later than six calendar months following the end of said 90-day period. (Code 1986, § 2.5-25; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Secs. 46-212—46-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWNSHOPS[4] Footnotes: --- (4) --- State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 
Sec. 46-229. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Month means that period of time from one date in a calendar month to the corresponding date in the following calendar month, but if there is no such corresponding date, then the last day of such following month.     Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledger or seller for a fixed price during a fixed period of time.     Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller during a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition.     Pawnshop means any business, a substantial portion of which is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatsoever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. (Code 1986, § 14-202; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-230. - Purpose.     This article is enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purpose of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to provide, establish, and ascertain standards for the regulation and control of pawnshops or similar places where money is advanced on goods and other effects, merchandise, or personal property. (Code 1986, § 14-200; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-231. - Compliance required.     All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop, shall first file an application with the city and receive a business license for the operation of a pawnshop in order to conduct such business from the finance director. The application for such business license shall be made upon such forms and in such manner as the finance director may establish from time to time. Such business license shall be obtained in accordance with regular business license application procedure, which is required under article IV of this chapter. (Code 1986, § 14-201; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-232. - General qualifications for business license. (a)  No license shall be issued if the application or other evidence available to the city reveals that any one or more of the following conditions to exist: (1)  The applicant is of bad moral character or does not have the mental capacity to conduct the business for which the application is made. (2)  The applicant has had any business license or permit issued under the police powers of this or any other city or other governmental subdivision previously suspended or revoked. (3)  The applicant, while a holder of a license to operate a pawnshop has been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, a violation of any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to the pawnshop business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. (4)  The applicant has failed to produce any paper or document necessary in the operation of its business as may be required by any officer, agency, or department of a municipality, county, state, or the United States under authority of any law, ordinance, or resolution of such municipality, county, state, or the United States. (5)  The applicant has provided false information either upon his application or in any communication with any official of the city relative to his application. (6)  The applicant has failed to pay any fee required under this article or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this article. (b)  In addition to the criteria in subsection (a) of this section, in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be issued, the following criteria shall be considered as being relevant to the city's obligation to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and in such connection, a negative finding by the city as to one or more of the following criteria shall authorize the denial of a licensure application: (1)  Whether the applicant is a previous holder of a pawnshop business license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual or enhanced police effort, observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; (2)  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses operating in the same general vicinity or neighborhood. (Code 1986, § 14-203; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-233. - Nontransferable.     No business license granted under this article shall be transferable. (Code 1986, § 14-204; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-234. - Revocations and suspensions of licenses. (a)  In the event that the owner of the pawnshop business or any employee of such owner fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, the finance director shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the pawnshop business license previously issued to such owner. In the event of such a suspension or revocation, notice of such decision shall be communicated to the owner in writing by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice is deemed to be effective upon personal service or upon mailing; provided, however, that such suspension or revocation shall be effective no sooner than ten calendar days from the effective date of such service or mailing. Any suspension hereunder shall be for such duration as the finance director deems appropriate, but any such suspension shall not exceed 30 calendar days. Violation of a written notice of suspension by the owner or any employee of the owner shall be grounds for revocation of the owner's pawnshop business license. (b)  Any person whose pawnshop business license is suspended or revoked has the right to appeal such suspension or revocation to the city council within ten calendar days of the effective date of such suspension or revocation. Such appeal must be in writing, must be filed with the finance director, and must set out the grounds upon which the appellant contends that the suspension or revocation was erroneously issued. The filing of such an appeal shall constitute an automatic stay of the suspension or revocation, and such automatic stay shall continue in effect until such time as the appeal is finally adjudicated by the city council. The city manager of the city shall be notified of the filing of such an appeal and shall schedule a hearing thereon by the city council within 30 calendar days from the date of filing such appeal. In considering such appeal, the city council shall affirm the action or decision of the finance director if the city council finds that such decision was supported by any evidence. (Code 1986, § 14-205; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 46-235. - Daily report to police required. (a)  Every licensee shall prepare a daily report for the city police department, in such form as may be prescribed by the police department, of all property pledged to or bought by the licensee during the preceding 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the effective date of the report. In addition to any other information required by the police department, the report shall disclose: (1)  The name and address of the licensee; (2)  Time of transaction; (3)  Serial numbers of pawn tickets; (4)  Full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry, and all identifying names, marks, and numbers; (5)  A description of persons pledging, selling, or pawning; including name, address, information from such person's driver's license or government-issued identification, including weight, height, and eye color; and (6)  Serial numbers on items must be included in the report. Insufficient or incomplete reports shall be rejected. (b)  Any licensee or employee who fails or refuses to prepare and keep reports as provided in this section or makes false entries concerning a transaction or who fails or refuses to permit an inspection or examination of the report by any police officer, designated by the chief of police to conduct such inspections, shall constitute a violation of this Code, which shall be punishable as provided in this article. (c)  Each licensee shall require any person pawning, pledging, or selling an article or articles to display government-issued identification which at a minimum contains a photograph of the person, the person's date of birth, race, and sex as well as the identification number, drivers license number and/or social security number of the person, the type of identification and the name of the city council issuing such identification. The licensee shall record all of the above information from such identification. (d)  The failure of any licensee or employee to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this Code, which shall be punishable as provided in this article. (Code 1986, § 14-206; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-236. - Violations; penalties. (a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction or entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the city municipal court, be subject to: (1)  First offense: by a fine of not more than $600.00 or by confinement in the common jail of the county for a period of not more than 60 days or by both fine and confinement. (2)  Second offense: by a fine of not more than $900.00 or by confinement in the common jail of the county for a period of not more than 90 days or by both fine and confinement. (b)  Each violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. (c)  Any violation of the provisions of this article may also be enjoined by the Superior Court of Sumter County in an action filed for such purpose by the city. Such injunction may be granted by said court notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law may exist. Remedies contained in this article shall be cumulative in nature. (d)  Any violation of the provisions of this article by a licensee hereunder, and any failure to pay any taxes or fees owed to the city by a licensee hereunder, shall also subject the business owner of the pawnshop to suspension or revocation of such owner's business license under section 46-234. (Code 1986, § 14-207; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-237. - Disposal period for pawned, purchased articles.     Any licensee who takes goods on pawn or buys goods in its capacity as a pawnshop, taking full title thereto, shall hold such goods for at least 40 calendar days in the case of pawned goods and 15 calendar days in the case of purchased goods before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise unless such goods are redeemed by the owner thereof. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as provided in this article. (Code 1986, § 14-208; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-238. - Dealing with minors prohibited.     It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agents or employees, to receive in pawn, pledge, or sale goods of any character or description from a minor. For the purpose of this article, a minor is any person who is 17 years of age or younger. Any licensee or employee thereof violating this section shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as provided in this article. (Code 1986, § 14-209; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-239. - Sale of prohibited weapons.     It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, or expose for sale any weapons, the sale of which are prohibited by city ordinance, state law, or federal law or regulation. Any licensee or employee thereof violating this section shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as provided in this article. (Code 1986, § 14-210; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-240. - Security cameras required. (a)  Any establishment which is licensed by the city to engage in the business of operating as a pawnshop and which is open to the public for business any day of the week is required to install security cameras and recording mechanisms of a type and number capable of recording evidentiary quality images for the prosecution of criminal cases, or for such other uses as may be deemed authorized by law. (b)  Cameras and recording mechanisms meeting the requirements of this section must be capable of producing a retrievable image on video tape or other medium that can be made a permanent record and can be enlarged through projection or other means. Cameras and recording mechanisms meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to inspection by the city police department. (c)  Security videos must have a shelf life of 15 calendar days from time of daily taping. The security video must be maintained at the licensee's place of business in an unaltered state and be available for inspection by the city police department. (d)  In the event that the security cameras and recording mechanisms become inoperative, any licensee or employee thereof shall not be in violation of this section for conducting business if the licensee is diligently pursuing repairs of such system; provided that such repairs must be completed within ten days after such system becomes inoperative. (e)  Any licensee or employee thereof violating this section shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as provided in this article. (Code 1986, § 14-211; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-241. - Licenses constitute grant of privilege; fees; duration of licenses. (a)  All licenses issued hereunder shall be a mere grant of a privilege to carry on a pawnshop business during the term authorized in the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and by any other ordinance, resolution, or law of the county, state, or United States relating to such business. (b)  The cost of such pawnshop business license shall be as established from time to time by the city council and shall be paid as a regulatory fee under article IV of this chapter. (c)  Each pawnshop business license issued pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in which such pawnshop license was issued. Applications for renewal of such pawnshop business license shall be accepted by the finance director between January 1 and March 15 of each calendar year, but no person shall be authorized to engage in the pawnshop business beyond March 15 of any calendar year until such person's application for a new pawnshop business license and city business license is approved in accord with this article. (Code 1986, § 14-212; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 46-242—46-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRANSIENT SALES, TEMPORARY SALES, PEDDLING, CANVASSING, AND SOLICITING[5] Footnotes: --- (5) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2012-19, adopted July 19, 2012, amended art. VIII in its entirety, inasmuch adding div. 1 and div. 2, subdivs. I, II, to read as herein set out. Former art. VIII, §§ 46-261—46-269, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1986, §§ 14-50—14-59; Ord. No. O-03-11-37, adopted Nov. 20, 2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, adopted Dec. 16, 2004; and Ord. No. O-07-11-39, §§ 14-300—14-308, adopted Nov. 15, 2007. 
DIVISION 1. - SALES FROM PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY LOCATIONS 
Sec. 46-261. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     City. The City of Americus, a Georgia municipal corporation.     Goods. For the purposes of this division, "goods" is defined as merchandise, wares, fabric, material, furniture, clothing, shoes, and other articles of commerce; provided, however, that "goods" shall not include the sale of motorized vehicles or boats.     Governing body. The mayor and city council of the City of Americus. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-262. - Enforcement and penalty for violation. (a)  The finance director shall be the enforcement officer and shall insure that the provisions are complied with prior to the issuing of any license. (b)  Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation that violates the terms of this division shall upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-263. - Location requirements.     Except as otherwise provided in this Code: (1)  No merchant, trader, manufacturer, dealer, salesperson, or other person, either in person or by or through agents, servants, or employees, shall offer for sale any kind or character of goods except from established places of business. (2)  No article of any kind or nature whatsoever shall be sold or offered for sale from vehicles, stands, or containers while standing or located in the streets, parks, or other property of the city. (3)  No display shall be erected or installed, nor shall any sales of goods or merchandise outside of a permanent place of business, take place within 50 feet of the curb or paved edge of a public street or roadway. (4)  Sales shall be permitted only on property where controlled vehicular ingress and egress or adequate off-street parking is provided. (5)  No portable structure shall be erected in connection with the sale of goods within the city. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-264. - Sales from private property. (a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division to the contrary, goods may be sold from vehicles, stands, or containers, while located on private premises, but not until and unless the persons offering the same for sale have secured the written consent of the owner of such premises to sell the same thereon, and have paid for and obtained from the finance director a regular license to conduct such business within the city. (b)  In order to obtain such license, the seller shall have filed an application with the finance director for such license, which application shall contain, at a minimum the following information: (1)  Name of applicant; (2)  A copy of picture identification; (3)  Permanent address and telephone number of applicant; (4)  Local address and telephone number of the applicant; (5)  Applicant's date of birth and age, if an individual; (6)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal employer identification number; (7)  If applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name and home address of each partner, principal, or corporation officer; (8)  If applicant is a corporation, the day, date, and state of incorporation; (9)  If applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name, home address, date of birth, age, and Social Security number of the principal representative in the city; (10)  Name and home address of all employees to work in the city; (11)  Name of business represented by applicant, if different from applicant; (12)  Permanent address of the business represented by the applicant; (13)  Name of agent conducting the sale, if any; (14)  Local address and telephone number of sales agent, if any; (15)  Type of merchandise or service offered for sale; (16)  A brief statement of the nature and character of advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers; (17)  Place where business is to be conducted and written approval from the property owner of such location; (18)  Fingerprints of the person or persons having the management of supervision of the applicant's business; (19)  Dates to be in business and total number of days to be in business; (20)  Hours in which the business will be conducted; (21)  Manner in which business is to be conducted; (22)  State sales tax number or authorization; (23)  State business license, if required; (24)  State license tag number of each vehicle to be used; and (25)  List of cities where business has been conducted by the applicant within the past 12 months. (c)  The license application shall be signed under oath by the applicant. (d)  In the event that the applicant provides all required information to the finance director and the applicant has not been previously convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude as evidenced by the fingerprint records submitted in accordance with section 46-69 hereof, and the applicant otherwise qualifies for the license, then such license shall be issued by the clerk upon payment of the appropriate fees therefor. (e)  A separate application, license, and fee shall be required for each separate location from which such applicant proposes to do business. (f)  In the event that a licensee violates any of the provisions of this division, then the license may be revoked by the finance director, and the justification of each revocation may be considered by the clerk in the event that such licensee applies for a license under this article at a future date. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-265. - Applicability to residents and nonresidents.     The prohibitions provided in this division shall apply to all persons, whether residents of the city, nonresidents of the city, residents of the state or nonresidents of the state. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-266. - Agricultural products exemption.     The provisions of this division shall not apply to the sale by the producers of agricultural products within the state; provided, however, such producers shall fully comply with all regulations heretofore and hereafter prescribed by the governing body and by any federal or state agency or department relative to the inspection and the sale of such products. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-267. - Exceptions. (a)  This division shall not apply to sales made to or by dealers, traders, manufacturers, merchants, or businesses at their established places of business within the incorporated limits of the city. (b)  This division shall not apply to any sidewalk sale, flea market, art show, or arts and crafts show or other merchandise on the public sidewalks, walkways, or other open areas at the invitation of or as a part of the downtown promotional activities of the downtown development authority or an organization licensed to do business as a charity under Georgia law. (c)  This division shall not apply to yard sales conducted in accord with the provisions of section 46-3 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-268. - Fees.     Licensees under this division shall pay a daily license fee of $100.00 per day for each day and for each location from which the licensee proposes to do business within the city. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-269. - Fingerprints to accompany application.     Any applicant for license to be issued pursuant to this division shall accompany the application with one complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the applicant's manager or agent, if the operation of the business will be conducted by one other than the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, of all partners of said partnership; if the applicant is a corporation, of all officers and directors of said corporation. The fingerprints shall be taken by the city's police department on forms to be provided by said department, and the applicant shall pay a fee of $15.00 for each individual fingerprinted. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
DIVISION 2. - SALES BY SOLICITORS 
Subdivision I. - Generally 
Sec. 46-270. - Definitions.     The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     City means the City of Americus.     Goods means, for the purposes of this division, merchandise, wares, fabric, material, furniture, clothing, shoes, and other articles of commerce.     Governing body means the Mayor and City Council of Americus.     Solicitor means any person who solicits orders for the sale of goods or services on behalf of a business, individual, vocation, or occupation by means of door-to-door or house-to-house solicitation. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-271. - Exemptions.     The following shall be exempt from compliance with the requirements of division 2 of this article: (1)  Representatives or agents of charitable or nonprofit organizations or corporations registered with the Georgia Secretary of State, or tax-exempt organizations which have been recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Treasury Department, shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of this division. (2)  Any sales representative who calls upon prospective customers at their prior invitation shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of this division of this article. (3)  Any sales representative who does not demand, accept, or receive payments in advance of final delivery and who has had, for the previous six months, a regularly established place of business or permanent residence in the city shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of this division. Any person who is exempt under this subsection must be soliciting orders only for goods capable of being delivered at one time and must have on such person proper identification which substantiates the claim to an exemption.     This division shall not apply to any individual or individuals engaged in door-to-door canvassing activities solely for the purpose of dispensing public information, engaging in religious activities, or engaging in political campaign activities. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-272. - Violation of other ordinances and laws.     It is unlawful for any person while engaging in any activity for which a permit is required by this division to violate any city ordinance, criminal law of this state, or any state or federal consumer protection law. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-273. - Hours of operation.     It is unlawful for any person to engage in any of the conduct for which a permit is required by this division between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., according to the standard time in effect. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-274. - Restriction on number of persons soliciting.     It is unlawful for more than two individuals to engage in solicitation upon any premises at the same time for the same goods or services. Each individual member of a group engaged in solicitation in violation of this provision shall be deemed to have violated this section. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-275. - Persons with criminal records.     It is unlawful for any person with a criminal record as described in section 46-525, whether or not otherwise eligible for an exemption under section 46-502, to engage in any of the activities for which a permit is required by this division. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-276. - Frequency of solicitation of same premises.     It is unlawful for any person to make more than one solicitation call at the same premises for identical goods or services within any consecutive two-week period, without receiving a prior invitation therefor from the occupant of any such premises. This section includes solicitation upon the same premises by employees, agents, or representatives of any person, organization, or corporation more than once during such period without a prior invitation. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-277. - Solicitation to be at main entrances.     It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit at a place of residence at any entrance or part of the building other than the main entrance to the residence. A solicitor shall honor any sign or notice located at the premises, or any verbal direction from the owner or occupant of the premises, that states or advises persons that no solicitation is authorized upon the premises. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-278. - Identification and announced purpose of call.     At each dwelling, whether it is an apartment unit or private residence, the solicitor shall, at the time of initial contact with a prospective customer, identify himself or herself, identify his or her organization or corporation, and inform the occupant in unambiguous terms of the purpose of the solicitation. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-279. - Fraud, etc.     It is unlawful for any person engaged in solicitation to misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation or use any false or deceptive statements or any misrepresentation to induce a sale or contribution, or use any plan, scheme, or ruse which misrepresents the status or purpose of the person making the call. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Subdivision II. - Permit 
Sec. 46-280. - Required.     Except as otherwise provided in this Code, any person engaged in or desiring to engage in any type of selling, soliciting, or any other business, occupation, or vocation, which by its nature requires going from door-to-door or house-to-house in the city, whether on a temporary or a permanent basis shall obtain a solicitor's permit from the city finance director. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-281. - Application. (a)  Questionnaire. The finance director shall prepare a questionnaire requiring pertinent information regarding the physical description, identity, and background of each applicant for a permit, to include the following: (1)  Name, local address, and telephone number. (2)  Date and place of birth. (3)  Driver's license number and issuing state. (4)  Social Security number. (5)  Race and sex. (6)  Height and weight. (7)  Eye color and hair color. (8)  Name, address and telephone number of the organization represented. (9)  Name and telephone number of immediate supervisor. (10)  Product or service. (11)  A list of all arrests, convictions, and the disposition of each charge, other than minor traffic violations. (b)  The questionnaire form shall also bear the following statement: "Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-10-71, provides that a person to whom a lawful oath or affirmation has been administered or who executes a document knowing that it purports to be an acknowledgment of a lawful oath or affirmation commits the offense of false swearing when, in any matter or thing other than a judicial proceeding, he knowingly and willfully makes a false statement." (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-282. - Investigation and issuance. (a)  Upon filing of an application for a solicitor's permit, the police department shall review the application for the purpose of ascertaining whether the applicant has plead to, or has been convicted of, a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. After ascertaining that the application has been properly completed, and that the applicant has not been disqualified by virtue of prior pleas or conviction, the finance director shall approve the application. (b)  The finance director shall charge a fee of $100.00 for each permit issued. (c)  In any case in which it appears to the finance director that a solicitor's permit should not be issued to an applicant, the finance director shall so inform the applicant of such decision in writing, and shall include in such writing a written statement of the reasons why the permit cannot be issued. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-283. - Expiration and renewal.     Each solicitor's permit shall indicate thereon an expiration date which is one year from the date of issue. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-284. - Denial; suspension or revocation. (a)  No solicitor's permit shall be issued to any person who has been found guilty of any misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude any time within five years prior to the date of application, nor shall a permit be issued to any person convicted of a felony. (b)  The permit of any solicitor charged with a felony or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude shall be deemed suspended from the time of lawful arrest, formal accusation, or indictment, whichever shall first occur. Such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is convicted or acquitted. (c)  The permit of any solicitor who is convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or violence, shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. The permit of any solicitor convicted of having violated any provision of this article after issuance of the permit shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. (d)  Any suspension or revocation occurring pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be effective by operation of law, whether or not any formal notification to the solicitor is given or received. (e)  It is unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor while such person's permit has been suspended or after it has been revoked. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-285. - Appeals.     A person to whom the finance director refuses to issue a solicitor's permit or whose solicitor's permit is suspended or revoked may appeal to the mayor and city council. Such appeal shall be submitted to the city clerk in writing within 15 calendar days of the date of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation of a solicitor's permit. The legal and factual basis for such appeal shall be stated in the written notice of appeal. Such appeal shall be heard and determined by the city council within 45 days of the date of filing of the notice of appeal. (Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Secs. 46-286—46-329. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TRAVELING AND ITINERANT DEALERS OF GOLD AND SILVER[6] Footnotes: --- (6) --- State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 47-37-1 et seq. 
Sec. 46-330. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Itinerant or traveling dealer, salesperson or buyer means a person who does not have a business license in the city or shall enter the city for any period of time and advertise by any form of media communication to the public that such person will buy, sell, trade, or otherwise trade in and receive precious metals, gold, silver, coins and jewelry. (Code 1962, § 13-72; Code 1986, § 14-60) 
Sec. 46-331. - Applicability.     This article shall be applicable to all traveling and itinerant dealers, salespersons, and buyers of gold, silver, jewelry, coins and other precious metals, whether said sales, trades and purchases are retail, wholesale, or by any form of pawn. Specifically excluded are wholesalers; buyers and sellers, who sell, trade and deal only with mercantile establishments and buyers; and sellers who have permanent mercantile establishments. (Code 1962, § 13-71; Code 1986, § 14-61) 
Sec. 46-332. - Notice of intent; required information. (a)  Prior to advertising any buying, selling, trading, or otherwise dealing in precious metals, gold, silver, coins, or jewelry, the person shall, at least 72 hours prior to the initial advertising, file with the chief of police a written notice of intent to conduct business in the city. (b)  Such notice shall include the following: (1)  Full name of the person and such person's address. (2)  The name of the person who will be in the city and such person's address. (3)  The length of the stay in the city, including the dates of opening and closing. (4)  Where business will be conducted and during what hours. (Code 1962, § 13-73; Code 1986, § 14-62) 
Sec. 46-333. - Records and information to be maintained.     All traveling and itinerant dealers, salespersons, and buyers of gold, silver, coins, jewelry, and other precious metals shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged, traded, or sold by them. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the name or the make of the article, any identifying mark or number and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. In such books there shall be entered also the full name and address of the person by whom same was deposited or sold, and the time this was done. Such entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible, and in no event more than four hours thereafter. (Code 1962, § 13-74; Code 1986, § 14-63) 
Sec. 46-334. - Report to police; contents, submission. (a)  Every traveling and itinerant dealer, salesperson, or buyer shall make a written report to the police department no less than 24 hours after completion of its business in the city. The report shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, and of all property pledged, traded, bought, or sold during the period of operation in the city. In addition to any other information required by the chief of police, they shall show: (1)  The name and address of any person who bought, sold, traded, or otherwise disposed of or received any item; (2)  The date and time of the transaction; (3)  The amount paid or advanced, or the item traded; (4)  The full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry, and all identifying names, ranks, and numbers; and (5)  A description of persons trading, buying, selling or pawning, including the name, address, race, weight and height. (b)  Such report shall be delivered to the police department no less than 24 hours after completion of business. It shall be neat and legible. (Code 1962, § 13-75; Code 1986, § 14-64) 
Sec. 46-335. - Dealing with minors.     It shall be unlawful for any traveling or itinerant dealer, salesperson, or buyer to receive in pawn, trade, or to buy from minors or to sell to minors, goods of any character or description. A minor, for the purposes of this section, is an individual 17 years of age or under. (Code 1962, § 13-77; Code 1986, § 14-65) 
Sec. 46-336. - Receiving or possessing prohibited items.     No traveling or itinerant dealer, salesperson, or buyer shall take in pawn, or receive, sell, trade, or exchange any of the following named articles: knucks, dirk, sword-cane, blackjack, bowie knife, spring-back knife, switchblade knife, or any knife with a blade exceeding four inches in length, but it is not the intention thereof to prohibit case knives, butcher knives or other knives customarily used for domestic or industrial purposes only; nor shall they own or keep on hand any of the weapons named or referred to in this section. (Code 1962, § 13-78; Code 1986, § 14-66) 
Sec. 46-337. - Articles not to be disposed of seven days after acquisition.     All traveling and itinerant dealers, salespersons, and buyers of gold, silver, jewelry, coins and other precious metals shall hold such goods so pledged, traded, or purchased by them for at least seven days before disposing of them in any way. (Code 1962, § 13-79; Code 1986, § 14-67) 
Sec. 46-338. - Surrender of stolen property.     In the event it is determined that any item bought, sold, or traded to, or received by the traveling or itinerant dealer, salesperson or buyer is the subject of any theft or crime, the dealer, salesperson, or itinerant buyer shall, upon demand of the chief of police, or the chief's designee, surrender the same to the police department. (Code 1962, § 13-76; Code 1986, § 14-68) 
Sec. 46-339. - Penalties; suspension or revocation of authority to do business.     Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article, or such other laws or ordinances as may be passed by the city council shall, by vote of the city council, be barred from conducting business in the city until such time as they fully comply with this article. (Code 1962, § 13-82; Code 1986, § 14-69) 
Secs. 46-340—46-366. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
Sec. 46-367. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Vehicle for hire means and shall refer to any vehicle utilized by a person has been issued a permit to transport persons for a fee by the chief of police consistent with the provisions of this article. Such a vehicle of hire shall be owned only by a person who has been issued a business license by the finance director for the operation of a vehicle for hire business within the corporate limits of the city. (Code 1986, § 22-1; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-368. - Business license required; cost.     In order to operate a vehicle for hire business within the corporate limits of the city, the owner of such business must obtain a business license from the finance director of the city for such business. The cost of such business license, which shall be paid at the time of application and which shall be nonrefundable, shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by the city council. The issuance of such business license for a vehicle for hire business shall not authorize the owner of the business, or any other person employed by such owner, to engage in the vehicle for hire business until such owner complies with all of the other provisions of this article. (Code 1986, § 22-2; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-369. - Documentation required; notification of changes.     The owner of such business shall keep on file with the chief of police documentation providing the name of the owner of the business, the owner's business address, all business telephone numbers listed in the owner's name, the names of all drivers of vehicles for hire employed by such owner, the permit number for each such driver, the home address of each such driver, and the total number of vehicles for hire that such owner operates as part of such business. Any changes in such information shall be reported by the owner in writing to the chief of police within 48 hours of such change. (Code 1986, § 22-3; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-370. - Regulations; compliance.     Every owner of a vehicle for hire business shall comply with the following regulations: (1)  Include in the application for such owner's business license the hours and service periods during which the vehicles for hire will be available to the public; (2)  Provide a telephone call system for vehicle for hire customers and sufficient vehicles to provide the public with the service as contemplated in the license application; (3)  Require vehicle for hire drivers to comply with all city, county, state, and federal statutes, laws, ordinances, and regulations; (4)  Submit all vehicles used as vehicle for hire to inspection when requested by the chief of police or his designee for the purpose of maintaining all such vehicles in a safe, sanitary, and clean condition at all times; (5)  Require that each vehicle for hire display the business name, the business telephone number or numbers, and the vehicle for hire permit number appropriately; (6)  Maintain a record of all telephone calls requesting vehicle for hire service for a minimum of 90 calendar days from the date of such call for use by the police department if necessary; and (7)  Require that each driver of a vehicle for hire maintain a daily written trip log or manifest. (Code 1986, § 22-4; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-371. - Serial numbers; locations; decals; size.     Upon the issuance of a business license by the finance director to the owner of the vehicle for hire business, the finance director shall also provide to such owner a distinct serial number that shall be painted or stenciled on each vehicle for hire. One distinct serial number shall be issued to each vehicle for hire, and no two vehicles shall be authorized to use the same serial number. Such number shall be at least six inches in height and shall be placed on a conspicuous part of the vehicle for hire so that it may be visible. In addition, the name and address of the vehicle for hire business shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on all of the vehicles for hire at all times. The name of the driver shall be prominently displayed within all vehicles for hire. No vehicle for hire shall be authorized to operate within the corporate limits of the city as a vehicle for hire until compliance with the provisions of this section is completed. (Code 1986, § 22-5; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-372. - Business location in city.     No vehicle for hire business shall operate in the city unless the owner thereof shall maintain a place of business within the corporate limits of the city. (Code 1986, § 22-6; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-373. - Drivers' permits—Required; applications. (a)  Any person, including any person who owns and operates a vehicle for hire business, who intends to drive a vehicle for hire within the corporate limits of the city, shall apply for a permit to do so from the police department. Such permit shall be applied for in writing upon such application forms as are deemed appropriate by the chief of police. Such application shall require such information as may be deemed necessary by the chief of police. Such permit shall be in addition to the vehicle for hire business license that the owner of such vehicle for hire business is required to obtain from the finance director as required by this chapter. (b)  Such permit application shall be signed by at least two individuals who are personally familiar with the applicant and can testify to the applicant's good character. No person may sign such application as a reference who either owns a vehicle for hire business or who has, or is in the process of applying for, a permit to operate a vehicle for hire as a driver. Such application shall also be signed by the applicant. (c)  No permit to operate a vehicle for hire shall be issued to any person who has not exhibited a familiarity with this article and the traffic laws, statutes, ordinances, and regulations of the state, who has been convicted by the state or any other state of a felony within the past five years, or who has been convicted of three or more moving traffic offenses during the five years immediately preceding the date of the application; provided, however, that any applicant who has been convicted of a felony within the prescribed time may be issued a permit if the chief of police has determined that the sentence imposed for such felony conviction has been served, that the service of such sentence has been completed for at least three calendar years from the date of the application, and the nature of the felony for which such applicant was convicted is determined by the chief of police not to be such an offense that would adversely impair the applicant's ability to operate a vehicle for hire and would not endanger or be reasonably likely to expose any vehicle for hire passengers to an unacceptable risk of bodily injury, property damage or loss. (Code 1986, § 22-7; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-374. - Same—Valid state driver's license.     In order for a person to receive a permit to operate a vehicle for hire within the city, such person must have attained the age of at least 18 years and must possess a valid state driver's license issued by the state department of motor vehicles of the appropriate class under O.C.G.A. title 40 (O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.) that would authorize the applicant to drive persons in a vehicle for hire. Any loss of the privilege to drive a motor vehicle arising out of or in connection with the permit holder's arrest for or violation of any of the traffic or drug statutes or ordinances of this state, any other state, or any county or municipality located in this or any other state, shall immediately invalidate any permit to operate a vehicle for hire issued under this article. (Code 1986, § 22-8; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-375. - Health certificate; vision certificate.     Each person applying for a permit to drive a vehicle for hire shall furnish a health certificate and a vision certificate to the chief of police with such permit application. The health certificate shall be signed by a practicing physician in good standing and the vision certificate shall be signed by a practicing ophthalmologist or optometrist in good standing. The form of the certificate must be approved by the chief of police. (Code 1986, § 22-9; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-376. - Drivers permit—Examination; familiarity with this article and traffic laws.     No person shall be authorized to drive a vehicle for hire carrying passengers until such person has exhibited, upon examination by the chief of police or his designee, a familiarity with the provisions of this article and the traffic statutes, laws, ordinances, and regulations in force in the city. The chief of police shall provide at least one copy of the vehicle for hire article to each vehicle for hire driver. (Code 1986, § 22-10; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-377. - Same—Expiration date.     Each permit issued to a driver of a vehicle for hire shall expire on December 31 of the year in which such permit was issued. Applications for renewal of such permit shall be accepted by the police department between December 1 and December 31 of each calendar year, but no person shall be authorized to operate a vehicle for hire beyond December 31 of any calendar year until such person's application for a new or renewal permit is approved in accord with this article. (Code 1986, § 22-11; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-378. - Same—Application fee; permit display. (a)  The application fee required to be paid at the time of the submission of the application for a permit as a driver of a vehicle for hire, shall not be prorated. (b)  The permit issued to a successful applicant shall be numbered, dated as of the date of issue, and shall have such other information displayed thereon as may be deemed appropriate by the chief of police. (c)  The permit shall, at all times when the permittee is engaged in driving a vehicle for hire within the city, be displayed in a conspicuous place by said permittee in the vehicle so that the permit can be easily seen by passengers riding in said vehicle for hire. (Code 1986, § 22-12; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-379. - Liability insurance. (a)  Each applicant for a vehicle for hire business license shall, before the license is granted, provide evidence of a policy or certificate of motor vehicle liability insurance, with respect to each vehicle to be operated as a vehicle for hire, with coverage in the following amounts: (1)  Ten thousand dollars for injury to one person; (2)  Twenty-five thousand dollars for injury to more than one person in any one accident; and (3)  Five thousand dollars for property loss or damage. (b)  Such insurance shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the state. The policy or certificate of insurance shall identify all vehicles insured under such policy and shall contain a provision obligating the insurance carrier to provide notice of cancellation or modification of the policy to the chief of police within 15 calendar days after such a cancellation or modification. In the event of lapse, cancellation, or termination of such policy or certificate of insurance, or in the event that such coverage as required above are no longer afforded under such policy or certificate of insurance, then the license for the vehicle for hire business shall be deemed to have immediately expired. (c)  In lieu of such liability insurance requirement, the licensee shall be authorized to operate as a "self-insurer" if such operation is otherwise authorized under O.C.G.A. § 33-34-5.1. (Code 1986, § 22-13; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-380. - Rates posted in vehicle, visible to passengers.     The rates charged by vehicles for hire must be posted in the vehicle, for inspection by passengers at all times. (Code 1986, § 22-14; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-381. - Inspection by police department; driver and vehicle.     Each person who drives a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city shall submit to inspection of both the vehicle and the driver by a certified police officer of the city police department whenever directed to do so. (Code 1986, § 22-15; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-382. - Suspension or revocation of license or permit. (a)  In the event that the owner of the vehicle for hire business fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, the finance director shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the business license previously issued to such owner. In the event of such a suspension or revocation, notice of such decision shall be communicated to the owner in writing by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice is deemed to be effective upon personal service or upon mailing. Any suspension hereunder shall be for such duration as the finance director deems appropriate, but any such suspension shall not exceed 30 calendar days. Violation of a written notice of suspension by the owner shall be grounds for revocation of the owner's license to operate such vehicle for hire business. (b)  In the event that a person issued a permit to drive a vehicle for hire violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, then the chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke such permit. In the event of such a suspension or revocation, notice of such decision shall be communicated to the permittee in writing by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice is deemed to be effective upon personal service or upon mailing. Any suspension hereunder shall be for such duration as the chief of police deems appropriate, but any such suspension shall not exceed 30 calendar days. Violation of a written notice of suspension by the permittee shall be grounds for revocation of the permittee's permit to drive a vehicle for hire. (c)  Any person whose business license to operate a vehicle for hire business, or whose permit to drive a vehicle for hire in the city has been suspended or revoked, has the right to appeal such suspension or revocation to the city council within ten calendar days of the effective date of such suspension or revocation. Such appeal must be in writing, must be submitted to the city official who ordered such suspension or revocation, and must set out the grounds upon which the appellant contends that the suspension or revocation was erroneously issued. The city manager of the city shall be notified of the filing of such an appeal and shall schedule a hearing thereon by the city council within 30 calendar days from the date of filing such appeal. In considering such appeal, the city council shall affirm the action or decision of the finance director or the chief of police, as the case may be, if the city council finds that such decision was supported by any evidence. (Code 1986, § 22-16; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 46-383—46-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FEES AND CHARGES 
Sec. 46-401. - Fee schedule.     The fees and charges to be charged by the city are more particularly established and adopted in accord with the following fee schedule attached to the ordinance from which this article derives and incorporated into this article as follows: Section Chapter Title Subsection Fee Description Amount Additional Amount (if applicable) 2-114 Administration c2 For filing and docketing executions in any case: 2-114 Administration c2  First Page $5.00 2-114 Administration c2  Each additional page $2.00 2-114 Administration c3 For canceling fi.fas.of record $7.00 2-114 Administration c4 For drawing recognizance: 2-114 Administration c4  First Page $5.00 2-114 Administration c4  Each additional page $2.00 2-113 Administration 4 For affixing the seal of the city any document $0.50 2-113 Administration 5 For furnishing certified copies of records of such officer's office except such as are needed or requested by the city council per 100 words $0.25 2-144 Administration 13 Nonrefundable handling fee for Economic Development loan application $50.00 Administration Franchise Fee - Telephone & Telegraph 3% Administration Franchise Fee - Cable Services 5% 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b Alcohol Beverage License by Type: 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b1  Wine - Wholesale $900.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b1  Wine - Retail $540.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b1  Wine Manufacturer (Vintner) $3,600.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b2  Beer - Wholesale $540.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b2  Beer - Retail $450.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b2  Beer Manufacturer (Brewery) $3,600.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b3  Distilled Spirits - Wholesale $4,500.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b3  Distilled Spirits - Retail $4,500.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b3  Distilled Spirits - Manufacturer $4,500.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b3  Maximum Alcohol License Fee $4,500.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages  Sunday Sales $0.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b3  Wine Tasting $75.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages  Caterer's License $450.00 6-42 Alcoholic Beverages f2a License Transfer Fee $100.00 6-42 Alcoholic Beverages f2b License Investigation Fee $50.00 10-5 Animals & Fowl c Fee for impounding livestock per head $5.00 10-5 Animals & Fowl c Fee for keeping livestock per head per day $5.00 10-67 Animals & Fowl k Fee for certificate of registration for a dangerous dog $50.00 14-4 Buildings and Building Regulations b3 Permit for construction of ponds $50.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations f Inspection fees by total valuation  Section Chapter Title From To Fee Description Amount Additional Amount (if applicable) 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $0 $1,000 $35 per thousand or fraction thereof $35.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $1,001 $2,000 $20 per thousand or fraction thereof $43.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $2,001 $3,000 $20 for the first $2,000 $51.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $3,001 $4,000 plus $8 for each additional thousand, or $59.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $4,001 $5,000 fraction thereof, to and including $15,000 $67.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $5,001 $6,000 $75.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $6,001 $7,000 $83.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $7,001 $8,000 $91.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $8,001 $9,000 $99.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $9,001 $10,000 $107.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $10,001 $11,000 $115.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $11,001 $12,000 $123.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $12,001 $13,000 $131.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $13,001 $14,000 $139.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $14,001 $15,000 $147.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $15,001 $16,000 $147 for the first $15,000 $155.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $16,001 $17,000 plus $8 for each additional thousand, or $163.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $17,001 $18,000 fraction thereof, to and including $50,000 $171.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $18,001 $19,000 $179.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $19,001 $20,000 $187.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $20,001 $21,000 $195.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $21,001 $22,000 $203.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $22,001 $23,000 $211.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $23,001 $24,000 $219.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $24,001 $25,000 $227.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $25,001 $26,000 $235.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $26,001 $27,000 $243.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $27,001 $28,000 $251.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $28,001 $29,000 $259.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $29,001 $30,000 $267.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $30,001 $31,000 Plan review fee is minimum of $50 up to $31,000 then 20% of permit fee $275.00 $50.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $31,001 $32,000 $283.00 $56.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $32,001 $33,000 $291.00 $58.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $33,001 $34,000 $299.00 $59.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $34,001 $35,000 $307.00 $61.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $35,001 $36,000 $315.00 $63.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $36,001 $37,000 $323.00 $64.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $37,001 $38,000 $331.00 $66.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $38,001 $39,000 $339.00 $67.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $39,001 $40,000 $347.00 $69.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $40,001 $41,000 $355.00 $71.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $41,001 $42,000 $363.00 $72.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $42,001 $43,000 $371.00 $74.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $43,001 $44,000 $379.00 $75.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $44,001 $45,000 $387.00 $77.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $45,001 $46,000 $395.00 $79.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $46,001 $47,000 $403.00 $80.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $47,001 $48,000 $411.00 $82.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $48,001 $49,000 $419.00 $83.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $49,001 $50,000 $427.00 $85.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $50,001 $51,000 $435.00 $87.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $51,001 $52,000 $443.00 $88.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $52,001 $53,000 $451.00 $90.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $53,001 $54,000 $459.00 $91.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $54,001 $55,000 $467.00 $93.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $55,001 $56,000 $475.00 $95.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $56,001 $57,000 $483.00 $96.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $57,001 $58,000 $491.00 $98.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $58,001 $59,000 $499.00 $99.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $59,001 $60,000 $507.00 $101.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $60,001 $61,000 $515.00 $103.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $61,001 $62,000 $523.00 $104.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $62,001 $63,000 $531.00 $106.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $63,001 $64,000 $539.00 $107.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $64,001 $65,000 $547.00 $109.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $65,001 $66,000 $555.00 $111.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $66,001 $67,000 $563.00 $112.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $67,001 $68,000 $571.00 $114.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $68,001 $69,000 $579.00 $115.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $69,001 $70,000 $587.00 $117.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $70,001 $71,000 $595.00 $119.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $71,001 $72,000 $603.00 $120.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $72,001 $73,000 $611.00 $122.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $73,001 $74,000 $619.00 $123.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $74,001 $75,000 $627.00 $125.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $75,001 $76,000 $635.00 $127.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $76,001 $77,000 $643.00 $128.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $77,001 $78,000 $651.00 $130.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $78,001 $79,000 $659.00 $131.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $79,001 $80,000 $667.00 $133.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $80,001 $81,000 $675.00 $135.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $81,001 $82,000 $683.00 $136.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $82,001 $83,000 $691.00 $138.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $83,001 $84,000 $699.00 $139.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $84,001 $85,000 $707.00 $141.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $85,001 $86,000 $715.00 $143.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $86,001 $87,000 $723.00 $144.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $87,001 $88,000 $731.00 $146.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $88,001 $89,000 $739.00 $147.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $89,001 $90,000 $747.00 $149.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $90,001 $91,000 $755.00 $151.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $91,001 $92,000 $763.00 $152.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $92,001 $93,000 $771.00 $154.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $93,001 $94,000 $779.00 $155.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $94,001 $95,000 $787.00 $157.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $95,001 $96,000 $795.00 $159.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $96,001 $97,000 $803.00 $160.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $97,001 $98,000 $811.00 $162.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $98,001 $99,000 $819.00 $163.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $99,001 $100,000 $827.00 $165.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $100,001 $500,000 $827 for the first $100,000 plus $8 for each additional fraction thereof, to and including $500,000 plus plan review fee of 20% of permit fee per calc per calc 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $500,001 -   $4,027 for the first $500,000 plus $7 for each additional fraction thereof, plus plan review fee of 20% of permit fee per calc per calc 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Development Permit per 1,000 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Building Sprinkler Systems per 1,000 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Certificate of Occupancy Fee $50.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Minimum Electrical, Plumbing & HVAC Fee $35.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Reinspection Fee: 1st $25.00, 2nd $50.00, 3rd $100.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Residential Assessment Report $50.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Commercial Assessment Report $100.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Board-Up Permit $150.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Grease Trap Permit: $50.00 up to $5,000.00 then per 1,000 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Land Development Burn Permit $250.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Fire Alarm Permit: $50.00 up to $5,000.00 then per 1,000 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Low Voltage Permit: $35.00 Res per 1,000 Com 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Tent or Temporary Structure Permit $60.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Power Approval Inspections $35.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Irrigation: $35.00 Res per 1,000 com 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Temporary Office $100.00  Section Chapter Title Subsection Fee Description Amount Additional Amount (if applicable) 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations e Fee for moving structure $50.00 14-108 Buildings and Building Regulations a Gas permit fee $2.50 14-234 Buildings and Building Regulations a2 Application fee for special exception for antennas and towers $100.00 $250.00 14-275 Buildings and Building Regulations Filing fee for certificate of appropriateness $100.00 14-275 Buildings and Building Regulations Additional fee for certificate of appropriateness $10.00 18-3 Cemeteries Cemetery lot sales: 18-3 Cemeteries  Oak Grove - Resident $525.00 18-3 Cemeteries  Oak Grove - Non-resident $3,300.00 18-3 Cemeteries  Eastview - Resident $475.00 18-3 Cemeteries  Eastview - Non-resident $3,300.00 34-72 Environment and Natural Resources b3 Permit fee for land disturbing activity per acre ($40 retained by City, $40 to GSWU) $80.00 34-133 Environment and Natural Resources h Wet-lands local development permit $150.00 $250.00 + $25.00 per lot 34-160 Environment and Natural Resources Appeals on permit applications $100.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection Fire calls outside the City - annual registration  Section Chapter Title From To Fee Description Amount Additional Amount (if applicable) 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection 0 $30,000 Residential Property Value - Building only $125.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $30,001 $60,000 $200.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $60,001 $120,000 $300.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $120,001 $240,000 $400.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $240,000 Over $500.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection 0 $5,000 Business or factory based on square footage $250.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $5,001 $25,000 $500.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $25,001 $50,000 $750.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $50,001 $150,000 $1,000.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $150,001 $350,000 $1,500.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $350,001 over $2,000.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection 0 $5,000 Hotel/Motel based on square footage $200.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $5,001 Over $400.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection Any barn greater than 999 square feet $125.00  Section Chapter Title Subsection Fee Description Amount Additional Amount (if applicable) 38-52 Fire Prevention and Protection Hourly Fee for Fire Calls requested by other governments (Other than Sumter County) $100.00 Business and Occupational Licensing a Business and Occupational Licensing Current 46-1 Business and Occupational Licensing a Insurer's license fee $75.00 46-1 Business and Occupational Licensing b Separate business location $26.25 46-1 Business and Occupational Licensing c Insurer's agency license fee $75.00 46-97 Business and Occupational Licensing a Administration fee for business accounts $50.00 46-97 Business and Occupational Licensing b Regulatory fee for business licenses $25.00 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing a2 Occupational license tax rates applied to gross receipts: 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 1 $0.000415 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 2 $0.000623 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 3 $0.000831 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 4 $0.001039 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 5 $0.001246 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 6 $0.001454 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing h Occupational tax maximum $2,000.00 46-101 Business and Occupational Licensing 2 Professional flat license fee $400.00 46-117 Business and Occupational Licensing Late fee penalty $50.00 46-156 Business and Occupational Licensing Minimum tax for Depository financial institutions $1,000.00 46-195 Business and Occupational Licensing 3 Investigation fee $50.00 46-208 Business and Occupational Licensing a Non-refundable annual permit fee for adult establishments $3,500.00 46-268 Business and Occupational Licensing Transient Sales/Temporary Sales/Vending - Fee per day per sale site $100.00 46-269 Business and Occupational Licensing Fingerprint fee $15.00 46-294 Business and Occupational Licensing a Annual registration for residential soliciting $100.00 46-294 Business and Occupational Licensing i Renewal of Soliciting certificate $25.00 54-2 Municipal Court a Technology add-on fee - per fine $10.00 74-30 Special Exception Sign Variance $100.00 74-54 Signs Permit fee for signs $60.00 78-55 Streets, Sidewalks, & other Public Places 5 Special Activity Fee $50.00 78-56 Streets, Sidewalks, & other Public Places Per day Electricity Charge for Rylander Park/Rees Park and its Gazebo (permitted) $25.00 78-56 Streets, Sidewalks, & other Public Places Per day Electricity Charge for Rylander Park/Rees Park and its Gazebo (without permit) $100.00 78-94 Streets, Sidewalks, & other Public Places Excavation fee - paved surface $20.00 78-94 Streets, Sidewalks, & other Public Places Excavation fee - unpaved surface $10.00 82-6 Subdivisions Subdivision plat filing fee $10.00 Subdivisions Subdivision plan review $200.00 + $25.00 per lot $200.00 90-162 Utilities a Water Tap Fees: 90-162 Utilities   5/8 inch meter or ¾ inch $600.00 90-162 Utilities  1 inch meter $656.39 90-162 Utilities  1½ inch $1,649.50 90-162 Utilities  2 inch meter (compound commercial variable) $2,575.00 90-162 Utilities  3 inch meter $3,653.00 90-162 Utilities  4 inch meter $4,729.00 90-162 Utilities  6 inch meter Special Order 90-162 Utilities b Fee to move a meter (less than 2 inches) $240.00 90-163 Utilities Minimum Commercial Water Service deposit $75.00 90-164 Utilities a Residential Water Service deposit  Excellent Credit/Low Risk connection fee deposit waived $25.00 90-164 Utilities a       Medium Risk $100.00 90-164 Utilities a       High Risk $125.00 90-165 Utilities a Water Utility Rates - Inside City Limits: 90-165 Utilities a  Residential Base fee per month $7.10 90-165 Utilities a  Residential Operating fee per 100 cubic feet $2.32 90-165 Utilities a  Industrial Base fee per month $7.10 90-165 Utilities a  Industrial Operating fee per 100 cubic feet $2.32 90-165 Utilities a  Senior Citizens Base fee per month $6.39 90-165 Utilities a  Senior Citizens Operating fee per 100 cubic feet $2.09 90-167 Utilities a Bulk Water Rate: 90-167 Utilities a  1 to 5,000 gallons $25.00 90-167 Utilities a  Over 5,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallon charge $5.00 90-167 Utilities a Hydrant Meter - Refundable Deposit $1,000.00 90-168 Utilities e Sprinkler system monthly charge $5.00 90-170 Utilities Reconnection charge - Water $50.00 90-171 Utilities After Hours Service Charge $50.00 90-199 Utilities Water restriction penalty $200.00 90-289 Utilities a Sewer Tap and Connection charges: 90-289 Utilities a   5/8 inch water meter $325.00 90-289 Utilities a  ¾ inch water meter $325.00 90-289 Utilities a  2 inch water meter (compound commercial) $1,090.00 90-289 Utilities a  4 inch water meter (compound commercial) $600.00 90-289 Utilities a  6 inch water meter (compound commercial) $800.00 90-289 Utilities a  8 inch water meter (compound commercial) $1,000.00 90-289 Utilities a Connection to City Sewer $400.00 90-290 Utilities b Sewer Service Charges and Rates: 90-290 Utilities a  Residential Base fee per month $12.50 90-290 Utilities a  Residential Operating fee per 100 cubic feet $2.95 90-290 Utilities a  Industrial Base fee per month (computed) $12.50 90-290 Utilities a  Industrial Operating fee per 100 cubic feet (computed) $2.95 90-290 Utilities a  Industrial Base fee per month (metered) $12.50 90-290 Utilities a  Industrial Operating fee per 100 cubic feet (metered) $2.95 90-292 Utilities Sewer deposit (non-users of water system) $100.00 90-297 Utilities Reconnection charge - Sewer $100.00 90-300 Utilities Bulk Sewage Rate:  1 to 1,250 gallons $25.00  Over 1,250 gallons - per 100 gallon charge $2.00 90-343 Utilities Gas Service Deposit:  Excellent Credit/Low Risk connection fee deposit waived $25.00 90-343 Utilities       Medium Risk $150.00 90-343 Utilities       High Risk $225.00 90-343 Utilities Reconnection charge - Gas $50.00 90-346 Utilities Residential Gas Rate Margin - per MCF $4.28 90-347 Utilities After Hours Service Charge $65.00 90-429 Utilities Monthly Sanitation Rates: New rates for 2018 90-429 Utilities  Residential Hobo $25.47 90-429 Utilities  Commercial Hobo $29.82 90-429 Utilities  Dumpster Rate, per cubic yard per pick-up $6.48 90-429 Utilities  Additional Hobo $11.55 90-507 Utilities Monthly Stormwater Rates:  Residential - Based on 3,000 sq ft (ERU) $4.00  All other properties to be based on # of ERU's 94-32 Zoning Special Exception application fee $250.00 94-53 Zoning Zoning Fee $250.00  (Ord. No. O-08-02-01, exh. A, 2-21-2008; Ord. No. O-08-12-42, exh. A, 12-18-2008; Ord. No. O-09-03-06, exh. A, 3-19-2009; Ord. No. O-09-04-12, exh. A, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. O-09-04-13, exh. A, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. O-09-05-16, exh. A, 5-21-2009; Ord. No. O-09-12-35, exh. A, 12-17-2009; Ord. No. O-10-04-09, exh. A, 4-22-2010; Ord. No. O-10-12-43, exh. A, 12-16-2010; Ord. No. O-11-12-34, exh. A, 12-15-2011; Ord. No. O-12-02-02, exh. A, 2-23-2012; Ord. No. O-12-04-11, exh. A, 4-19-2012; Ord. No. O-2012-26, 10-18-2012; Ord. No. O-2012-29, exh. A, 12-20-2012; Ord. No. O-2013-10, 4-18-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-21, 12-18-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-7, exh. A, 4-15-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-17, exh. A, 10-22-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-19, exh. A, 12-17-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-7, 12-22-2016; Ord. No. O-2017-6, Exh. A, 6-22-2017; Ord. No. O-2017-14, exh. A, 12-21-2017) 
Secs. 46-402—46-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - DUE COMPENSATION APPLICABLE TO ANY TELEGRAPH OR TELEPHONE COMPANY 
Sec. 46-451. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. (a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenue, as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 46-5-1(b)(8), (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement, shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement, or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement, shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. (b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. (Ord. No. O-09-08-29, 8-20-2009) 
Sec. 46-452. - Authorized designee.     The city manager of the city shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day to day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: (1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies; (2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the city council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application; (3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to insure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and the ordinance from which this article derives; (4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and the ordinance from which this article derives; (5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once per year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation; (6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way, written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. (Ord. No. O-09-08-29, 8-20-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Chapter 50 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 50-1. - Recreational vehicles at nursing homes or convalescent centers.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the parking of recreational vehicles on property owned and controlled by a nursing home or convalescent home where the following conditions are met: (1)  The area where such recreational vehicles are to be parked is paved with asphalt or other suitable paving material and is not larger than 15,000 square feet. (2)  The area where the recreational vehicles are to be parked is not located adjacent to a city street or state highway but is located at least 500 feet from the right-of-way of any city street or state highway. (3)  No occupant of any recreational vehicle may reside at such location for more than 30 consecutive days and that there are no more than ten recreational vehicles parked at such location at any one time. (4)  The owner of the nursing home or convalescent home shall be authorized to establish electrical connections and running water connections to the area set aside for the parking of such recreational vehicles, but such electrical connections and water connections shall, in all respects comply with the other provisions of this Code. (5)  Under no circumstances shall any sewage from such recreational vehicles be disposed of in the city's sewerage system, but the owner of the nursing home or convalescent home shall be responsible for ensuring that all such sewage is disposed of properly in appropriate locations. (6)  The owner or operator of any recreational vehicle parked in accord with the terms of this section shall not be required to pay any rent or lease for the space utilized by such vehicle; nor shall such owner or operator be charged for the use of any electricity or water at such location. (7)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall prohibit the owner of a recreational vehicle who resides at a nursing home or convalescent center from parking his recreational vehicle at such location during such times and for such lengths of time as he or she may deem appropriate, and the nursing home or convalescent center shall be authorized to permit the owners of such recreational vehicles to connect to the electrical and water connections at such parking area. (Code 1986, § 21-16; Ord. No. O-97-02-03, 2-20-1997) 
Secs. 50-2—50-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAILER CAMPS 
Sec. 50-21. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Automobile trailer, trailer coach, or trailer means any vehicle or structure so designed and constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, for the conduct of any business or profession, occupancy or tract, or use as a selling of advertising device, and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motor power, excepting a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.     Trailer camp means any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp, site, lot, parcel, or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purposes of supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach or trailer coaches and upon which any trailer coach or trailer coaches are parked and shall include all buildings used or intended for use a part of the equipment thereof whether a charge is made for the use of the trailer camp and its facilities or not. The term "trailer camp" shall not include automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.     Unit means a section of ground in a trailer camp of not less than 1,000 square feet of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for only one automobile and one trailer. (Code 1986, § 21-1; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-22. - License. (a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him, a trailer camp within the limits of the city without having first secured a license therefor. Such license shall expire one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed under the provisions of this chapter for additional periods of one year. (b)  Application. The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed with the finance director, there will be no such fee charged for this license, for each unit in the existing or proposed camp. The application for a license or renewal thereof shall be made on such printed forms or other documents as may be furnished by the finance director and shall include the name and address of the owner of the tract and such a legal description of the premises, upon which the trailer camp is or will be located as will readily identify and definitely locate the premises. The application shall be accompanied by four copies of the camp plan showing the following, either existing or as proposed: (1)  The extent and area to be used for camp purposes. (2)  Roadways and driveways. (3)  Location of sites or units for trailer coaches. (4)  Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets, washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of units. (5)  Method and plan for sewage disposal. (6)  Method and plan for garbage removal. (7)  Plan for water supply. (8)  Plan for electrical lighting of the units. (c)  Recommendation; procedure. Before such license may be issued, there must be a favorable recommendation by the majority of the planning commission and the plan and premises must be inspected and approved by the chief of the fire department and the county health department. Upon obtaining the recommendation of the planning commission, the chief of the fire department, and the county health department, the license application shall be transmitted to the city council for public hearing. Such public hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as public hearings are conducted for rezoning or amendments to the zoning chapter, with the additional requirement that the city council shall consider and determine whether or not the proposed camp complies with the requirements contained in this chapter. After initial approval of the application and the granting of the license by the city council, the city council shall not be required to have a public hearing on the renewal of such license in subsequent years unless so requested by the planning commission, the chief of the fire department, or the county health department, or where a license previously issued shall have expired prior to the renewal thereof. (d)  Determination. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall determine whether or not to grant the license to the applicant. (e)  Limitations. Licenses issued under the terms of this chapter convey no right to erect any building, to do any plumbing work or to do any electrical work. (Code 1986, § 21-2; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-23. - Zoning. (a)  No trailer camp shall be located in any zone within the city limits other than an R-4 MH residential district, as amended. (b)  No trailer or tourist camp shall be located within the limits of the city unless city water and sewer connections and fire protection facilities are available. (c)  No occupied trailer or any other building shall be located within the city limits within the recognized setback line for the zoning district in which such trailer is located nor less than ten feet from any other building or vehicle or the boundary line of the tract on which located. (d)  No trailer camp shall be licensed or operated in conjunction with or as part of a mobile home park or as a part of a mobile home subdivision. (Code 1986, § 21-3; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-24. - Plan for stormwater, driveways, electricity, etc., required. (a)  Every trailer camp shall be located on a well-drained area, and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of stormwater or other waters. (b)  Units shall be clearly designated and the camp so arranged so that all units shall face or abut on a driveway of not less than 16 feet in width, giving easy access from all units to a public street. Such driveway shall be maintained in good condition having natural drainage into a city street catchbasin, be well lighted at night, and shall not be obstructed. (c)  The camp shall be laid out so that no trailer shall be located farther than 200 feet from the toilets and service buildings provided for herein, and walkways to such buildings shall be well lighted at night. (d)  Every trailer unit shall be furnished with an electric service outlet. Such outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse of not less than 30 amperes capacity, and heavy duty outlet receptacle. (Code 1986, § 21-4; Ord. No. O-90-07-18, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-25. - City water required; adequate faucets and hot water. (a)  An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution system connected directly with the city water main, with supply faucets located not more than 200 feet from any trailer shall be furnished for drinking and domestic purposes. (b)  No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking water faucets be placed in any toilet room. (c)  An abundant supply of hot water shall be provided at all times for bathing, washing and laundry facilities. (Code 1986, § 21-5; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-26. - Service building requirements; accommodations based on plan. (a)  Every trailer camp shall have erected thereon, at a distance not greater than 200 feet from any unit it is designed to serve, a suitable building for housing toilets, showers, and laundry facilities as required by this article. (b)  There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex. Flush toilets provided with an adequate water supply shall be enclosed in separate compartments and shall be provided for each sex in the ratio of one toilet for each eight units. (c)  Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided with one shower for each eight units. (d)  Laundry facilities shall be provided. (e)  The accommodations, specified in this section, shall be based on the total camp capacity according to its accepted plans. (Code 1986, § 21-6; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-27. - Connection to city sewer system required; garbage collection by city services. (a)  All waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets and lavatories shall be wasted into a sewer system extended from and connected with the city sewer system. (b)  All sanitary facilities in any trailer that are not connected with the city sewer system by means of rigid pipe connections shall be sealed and their use is hereby declared unlawful. (c)  Each faucet site shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste and excess water into the sewer. In no case shall any wastewater be thrown or discharged upon the surface of the ground or disposed of by means other than is herein provided. (d)  Every unit shall be provided with a wheeled container supplied by the city for garbage depository from which the contents shall be removed by the city garbage collection services. (Code 1986, § 21-7; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-28. - Length of stay; number of occupants. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remain or live in any trailer or tourist camp for more than 90 days in each 12-month period, unless an exception to this requirement is approved by the city manager of the city, or his designee, and such exception may be approved for good cause only. (b)  No trailer may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed. (Code 1986, § 21-8; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 50-29. - Management.     At all times, the management (licensee) shall: (1)  Keep a register of all guests, showing for such guests: a.  Names and addresses. b.  Dates of entrance and departure. c.  License numbers of all trailers and towing or other automobiles. d.  States issuing such licenses. e.  Place of last location and length of stay. (2)  Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. (3)  See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of this chapter or any other violations of law which may come to their attention. (4)  Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats or other animals or pets. (5)  Maintain in convenient places, approved by the chief of the fire department, hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each eight units. (6)  Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises. (7)  Prohibit the use of any trailer by a greater number of occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate. (8)  Report to the county health department all cases of persons or animals infected or suspected of being infected with any communicable disease. (Code 1986, § 21-9; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-30. - Compliance with plumbing, electrical and building ordinances.     All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any camp licensed under this chapter shall be in accord with the ordinances of the city regulating such work unless such ordinances are specifically made inapplicable under the terms of this chapter. (Code 1986, § 21-10; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-31. - Parking restricted. (a)  It shall be unlawful within the city limits for any person to park any trailer on any street, alley or highway, or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, except as provided in this chapter. (b)  Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than one hour, subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances of that street, alley or highway. (c)  No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises or any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not part of the premises of any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside an approved trailer camp; except, the parking of only one unoccupied trailer in an accessory private garage building, or in a rear yard in any district, is permitted, provided no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in said trailer while such trailer is so parked or stored. (Code 1986, § 21-11; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-32. - Revocation.     The planning commission is hereby authorized to revoke any license issued pursuant to the terms of this article if after due investigation they determine that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this article or that any trailer or trailer camp is being maintained in an unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance. (Code 1986, § 21-12; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Chapter 54 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 
Sec. 54-1. - Bail bond or confinement in jail; failure to appear; forfeiture procedure; surrender of principal. (a)  The chief of police, any police officer or the judge of the municipal court may take bond with security or bond without security or a cash bond at their discretion, payable to the city, in a sum not exceeding $1,200.00 for the appearance of any person accused or suspected of being guilty of a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city to stand to and abide trial in the municipal court of the city, and also as a witness to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced in the municipal court. (b)  If any party or witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security, as required, such person so failing or refusing may be confined in the jail of the county, to be kept under a guard, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify, as the case may be. (c)  All bail taken under this chapter shall be special bail, and the power of the security over the principal, shall be the same as in special bail. Upon the failure to appear of any principal in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, or by witness to appear to testify, the recorder shall pass a rule requiring the principal and securities on such bond to show cause on any day therein named, not to be less than ten days from the passage of such rule why they should not be required to pay the amount of such bond. (d)  A copy of said rule shall be served upon the principal and security by the finance director or any officer or member of the police force, if the principal is to be found in the city or within the county, at least five days before the time therein set for hearing of the same. (e)  If no sufficient cause is shown, the municipal judge shall proceed to enter judgment against such principal and securities for the amount of said bond, and the finance director shall issue execution for the amount of such judgment and shall proceed to collect the same by levy and sale as in the case of tax executions. (f)  Any surety upon a bail bond of any person charged with a violation of this Code or any other city ordinance, may surrender the principal at any time, to any member of the police force, who shall confine such principal in the jail of the county until discharged by the order of the municipal court, or by giving other and good security. The delivery of the principal as aforesaid, shall discharge the surety of all further liability upon such bond; provided, that such delivery shall be before any judgment of forfeiture upon said bond shall have been entered. (Code 1962, §§ 19-2—19-5; Code 1986, §§ 8-3—8-6; Ord. No. O-03-09-23, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) State Law reference— Authority to provide for bond forfeitures, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-4. 
Sec. 54-2. - Additional penalties. (a)  In every case in which the municipal court shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state, or against an ordinance of this city, there shall be imposed by the judge of the municipal court at the time of sentencing an additional penalty in the amount set by ordinance. (b)  The sums provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be assessed and collected by the officer or agent of the court charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from such fines, and such funds shall be paid over to the city treasury at such time as may be required by the finance director. (c)  An amount equal to all funds remitted to the city treasury as provided for in this section for the immediately preceding calendar year shall be appropriated to fund the acquisition, maintenance, and operation of information technology equipment and services to be used in the city police department. Such funds shall be exclusively expended for such purposes, and any funds not so expended in any calendar year shall not lapse, but shall be available for use for the same purposes in the next succeeding city fiscal year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such funds, and the information technology equipment and services for which such funds are to be expended, shall be included as items in the city police department section of the annual operating budget of the city as approved by the city council on an annual basis. (Code 1986, § 8-9; Ord. No. O-04-03-06, 3-18-2004) 
Chapter 58 - NUISANCES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 58-1. - Abatement of nuisances, officials designated to petition municipal court; authority of officials to inspect nuisance conditions. (a)  The chief of police, the chief of the fire and emergency services department, and the building official, or their respective designees, are each hereby authorized to petition the municipal court to abate any nuisance, as defined under the laws of this state or under the ordinances of this city, which is created or maintained within the city. (b)  The chief of police, the chief of the fire and emergency services department, and the building official, and their respective designees, are authorized and empowered to enter upon any real property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the real property and structure for existing or complained of nuisances thereon or therein. (c)  The authority granted in this section shall be applicable to nuisances which are violations of state law, nuisances which are violations of city ordinances, including, but not limited to, nuisances which arise in accord with the provisions of article II and article III of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances. (Code 1962, § 2-74; Code 1986, § 12-7; Ord. No. O-10-04-12, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 58-2. - Same—Penalties for having a nuisance or failure to abate a nuisance. (a)  Any person who is found guilty of violating the nuisance ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to, the nuisance ordinances referenced in article II and the nuisance ordinances referenced in article III of this chapter, shall, upon conviction of a first offense thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code; provided, however, that the minimum fine upon such first conviction shall be $100.00. Upon a second conviction of maintaining a nuisance, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code; provided, however, that the minimum fine for such conviction shall be $300.00. Upon a third or subsequent conviction of maintaining a nuisance, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code; provided, however, that the minimum fine for such conviction shall be $500.00. (b)  Each day in which the court finds that the nuisance has existed shall constitute a separate offense, and each such offense shall subject the violator, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in subsection (a) hereof for each such offense. (c)  Any person who fails to abate a nuisance within a time period as ordered by the judge of the municipal court may be subject to punishment for contempt by the judge pursuant to the provisions of subsection 4-104(b) of the City Charter. Any penalty for contempt shall be in addition to the penalties that may be imposed in accord with subsections (a) and (b) hereof. (Code 1962, § 2-75; Code 1986, § 12-8; Ord. No. O-10-04-12, 4-22-2010) 
Secs. 58-3—58-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOT CLEARING 
Sec. 58-23. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Ashes means and includes the waste product from coal, wood, or other fuels used for cooking and heating from private residences.     Building refuse means solid waste generated from construction or demolition activities undertaken on property located within the corporate limits of the city.     Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes.     Common continuing nuisance means a wrong that arises from unreasonable, unhealthful, unwarranted, or unlawful use by a person of his property, either real or personal, or from his improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct, working an obstruction or an injury to the rights of the public, and producing material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt to the public continuously or at frequent intervals.     Contractor means any person, and the agents and employees thereof, engaged in construction, electrical, mechanical, air conditioning, heating, plumbing, roofing, demolition, landscaping, masonry, allied work, nurserymen, and grounds keepers.     Debris means residue of any nature accumulating from the activities enumerated in the definition of contractor.     Garbage means all vegetable and animal matter, food, and other refuge from a kitchen, market, store, or elsewhere, including all matter that decays, attracts flies, and creates disagreeable odors.     Industrial refuse means waste materials from factories, processing plants, wholesale establishments, assembling plants, food processing wastes, cinders and ashes, lumber scraps, sawdust, shavings, and any other waste products from industrial and manufacturing processes.     Junk means old, scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, including tires, waste, junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles or parts thereof, iron, steel, used household appliances, bottles, containers, boxes, barrels, and plastic.     Nuisance means stagnant water on-premises, loud or unusual noises which are detrimental to the public, including without limiting the foregoing, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities; dead or decaying matter which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to others; obstruction of a public street, highway, sidewalk; unused refrigerators, washing machines and other similar unused or unusable appliances; an accumulation of debris, objects, materials, and other conditions which may constitute a health, accident, or fire hazard, or which creates a blighting or deteriorating effect; any weeds, grasses, or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, growing to a height of 12 inches anywhere in the city; any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate or vegetation, e.g., kudzu, is allowed to remain uncontrolled, in such a manner as to create a fire or other hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare; and any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law.     Rubbish means a variety of nonrecyclable household waste derived from places of residence and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, broken glass bottles and jars, crockery, rubber, discarded clothing, and similar materials.     Waste means unwanted or discarded material including, but not limited to, ashes, building refuse, garbage, hazardous waste, industrial refuse, recyclable waste, rubbish, solid waste, and yard debris.     Wrong means a violation of public rights and duties which affect the community.     Yard debris means tree limbs, branches, stumps and logs, twigs, grass and shrub trimmings and clippings, bushes, weeds, leaves, and general yard and garden waste materials, and includes stone and dirt rakings and similar waste materials resulting from landscaping activities.     Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. (Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-24. - Prohibited generally. (a)  Debris that hinders free use of right-of-way. Except for yard clippings and similar debris intended to be picked up by public waste disposal services, it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw, place, or cause to be deposited, thrown, or placed, into or upon any public square, street, alley, or sidewalk of the city, or on the property of another without such person's permission, any paper, rags, shavings, trash, rubbish, chips, ashes, oyster shells, cuttings of vines, shrubbery or trees, filth, offal, rotten fruit, vegetables, dead animals, liquids, or any other thing which is or may become offensive, or which may damage any of said public squares, streets, alleys or sidewalks, or interfere with the free use and enjoyment of the same. (b)  Property owners or lessees to maintain. Except for yard clippings and similar debris intended to be picked up by public waste disposal services, no person shall sweep any trash, dirt, filth, clay, manure, or other objectionable matter from the sidewalks into the streets, nor shall any property owners or lessees permit any such to remain on the sidewalk in front of such person's property or on the space between the property line and outer edge of the sidewalk. (c)  Injury to persons. It shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on, or maintain any nuisance, which hurts or inconveniences any person. (d)  Injury to health . It shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on or maintain any nuisance, which tends to injure or does injure or jeopardize the health of any person. (e)  Injury to property. It shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on or maintain any nuisance within the city, which causes damage or injury to any other person's property. (f)  Annoyance. No person shall keep or maintain on his premises any nuisance to the annoyance of his neighbor. (Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-25. - Storage of junked vehicles, garbage, trash, rubbish, scrap parts, household appliances, etc., on property. (a)  It shall be illegal to store scrap parts of cars, household appliances, and other similar items on residential lots within the city, unless such items are located within a building or garage upon the premises. (b)  It shall be illegal to use porches, decks, patios, or vacant lots for the storage of unused materials, construction materials, appliances, or other similar items that may cause injury to person or property. (Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-26. - Property owners required to keep premises in sanitary condition. (a)  All property owners within the city are required to keep their premises in a clean, sanitary, and healthful condition. (b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any parcel of ground within the city to keep every house, building, establishment, lot, yard, and ground owned by such person at all times free from filth, carrion, impure or unwholesome matter, and noxious odors of any nature whatsoever. (c)  No owner of any parcel of land within the city shall allow garbage, trash, junk, dirt, weeds, vines, grass, or other vegetation or trash or rubbish to grow, or accumulate thereon, which would likely become a breeding place for snakes, rats, flies, gnats, mosquitoes, or other harmful or dangerous creatures or insects, or is likely to cause personal injury or property damage by human illness or fire, or which may become a health hazard for any other reason, or which may become a hazard to traffic on the public streets in the city. Nothing herein shall be construed to require the removal of trees and other vegetation from any parcel of land that has never been developed for residential, commercial, or industrial uses. (d)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner or lessee to allow any weeds, grass, shrubbery or other rank vegetation of any character to grow between the property line and the outer edge of the street curb, and it shall be the duty of such owner or lessee to keep grass plots between the property line and the outer curb properly cut or mowed. (e)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner in the city to allow noxious weeds and grasses to grow upon such person's premises over 12 inches in height. (Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-27. - Contractor debris. (a)  It shall be the duty of every contractor in the city to use extra diligence in the work and conduct of such contractor's business, so that debris therefrom shall not be allowed to fall, be strewn upon, or accumulate upon the streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way of the city. (b)  In the event debris shall be allowed to fall, be strewn, or accumulate upon the streets or sidewalks, it shall be the duty of such contractor to remove such debris, within 12 hours of such debris being left upon the streets, leaving the street, sidewalks, and rights-of-way in a clean, clear, and uncluttered condition. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this Code. (Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-28. - Junked motor vehicles as nuisance.     In the event that a junked motor vehicle falls within the prohibitions provided in this article and article III they shall apply to such junked motor vehicles and to abatements of any nuisances created by such junked motor vehicles. (Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-29. - Nuisance abatement. (a)  Any owner of property who permits the same to become in a prohibited condition under this article shall be notified in writing by the code enforcement officer to remove the condition within 15 calendar days of the date of such notification. (b)  Unless the condition complained of is removed, the city, at the expiration of such 15-calendar-day period shall remove the condition or hire a private contractor to remove the condition. (c)  The cost thereof will be charged against the property and the property owner thereof, and it shall constitute a lien on the property. (d)  In the event the costs of abating the nuisance are not paid, the execution issuing hereunder shall be issued, enforced, and collected in the same manner as that provided by law for executions for ad valorem taxes due the city. (e)  In addition, the creation of a nuisance shall be deemed unlawful. (Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Secs. 58-30—58-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED VEHICLES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Authority as to junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 
Sec. 58-47. - Definitions.     For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases and words and their derivation shall have meanings respectfully given herein:     Inoperative means not capable of being moved under its own power without additional work or repairs being completed to the motor vehicle or without any additional components being added to or placed upon said motor vehicle.     Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in this article, which does not have, lawfully affixed thereto, both an unexpired license plate and a current license decal, or the condition of such motor vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded.     Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is or is intended to be self-propelled and designed to travel on the ground and shall include, but shall not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailer, as well as any part thereof.     Police chief means the police chief of the city or the chief's agents.     Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section.     Public property means any street or highway, which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly maintained way and dedicated to the purposes of vehicular traffic and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. (Code 1986, § 12-35; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 58-48. - Declared nuisance.     No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked motor vehicle of any kind upon any private property within the city for a period of time in excess of 30 days. The presence of a junked motor vehicle or parts thereof on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance, which may be abated as such in accord with the provisions of this article. (Code 1986, § 12-36; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995) 
Sec. 58-49. - Exemptions.     Those vehicles, which are exempted from the provisions of this article are as follows: (1)  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof, which are located on the premises of licensed automobile dealers; (2)  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof, which are located on the premises of any licensed junkyard operated in compliance with state and local laws relating to licensing, regulating and zoning of such junkyards; (3)  Any motor vehicle enclosed within a building on private property which is not a hazard to public health and which is not an attractive nuisance to children; or (4)  Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways. (Code 1986, § 12-37; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995) 
Sec. 58-50. - Notice of violation.     Whenever it comes to the attention of the code enforcement officer that any nuisance as defined in this chapter exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the real property where the nuisance exists, upon the owner of the property, and upon the owner of the junked motor vehicle or other property which constitutes such nuisance, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and directing its removal within 15 days. In the event that such owners cannot be located, or in the event that the address of such owners is unknown, then notice shall be made to the last known address of such owners, or in the event that the identity of such owners cannot be ascertained after due investigations, such notice shall be posted in a prominent location on the premises where the nuisance exists, and upon the junked motor vehicle itself. (Code 1986, § 12-38; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 58-51. - Responsibility for removal.     Upon such notice, the owner of the junked motor vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the private property upon which the same is located, either, or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event that such owners fail to remove such vehicle and thereby abate such nuisance within the 15-day time period provided in the notice, the police chief shall be authorized to institute proceedings against such owner or owners in the municipal court of the city pursuant to the ordinances and rules of said court, and such persons shall be notified of the date and time of the hearing scheduled no later than five days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be served upon such owner or owners in the same manner as provided in section 14-175. (Code 1986, § 12-39; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995; Ord. No. O-00-09-38, 9-21-2000; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 58-52. - Hearing. (a)  At the hearing, the court shall determine the owner of the vehicle and whether or not a nuisance exists and, if so, the court shall order abatement of such nuisance and shall impose such penalty or penalties as may be authorized by this section for failure to abate such nuisance. (b)  In the event that the court determines that a nuisance exists and abatement thereof is ordered, the court shall be authorized to grant the owner a period of time, not to exceed 15 days, to abate such nuisance. The court shall further include in its order provisions authorizing the city to abate such nuisance if such nuisance is not abated by the owner within the time period for such abatement as ordered by the court. Such order shall also include authority for the city to enter upon the premises upon which the nuisance exists and abate the same, and shall further provide that the cost of abatement of the nuisance incurred by the city shall be assessed against the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance existed. (Code 1986, § 12-40; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995) 
Sec. 58-53. - Abatement by the city.     In the event that the nuisance is abated by the city pursuant to the authority of the order of the court authorized by this article, the city shall abate the nuisance in the following manner: (1)  The city shall hire a wrecker service, or such other service as may be required, to remove the nuisance, and direct that the nuisance be removed to a local licensed junkyard or other similar facility. (2)  The wrecker service hired to remove the nuisance shall notify the owner of the property and the owner of the motor vehicle within ten days of removal of the property of the location of the junked motor vehicle and of the cost incurred by the owner in connection with the abatement service. Such cost may include the actual cost of removal of the motor vehicle and storage charges, if applicable, up to and including the date of payment by the owner. (3)  In the event that the owner does not pay the charges or otherwise recover the motor vehicle within such time as may be established by the wrecker service or by state law, the wrecker service may be authorized to recover its costs and expenses and dispose of the property in accord with general provisions of state law. (Code 1986, § 12-41; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995) 
Sec. 58-54. - Procedures for purchasing junked vehicles by city. (a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city shall be authorized to establish a procedure by which the city can acquire junked motor vehicles, as defined in section 58-47 of the Code, by issuing one-time credits on the city utility bill of the owner of the junked vehicle. Such provisions shall, at a minimum, provide as follows: (1)  That the city utilities director, or his designee, shall undertake, on a continuing basis, to locate, examine, and inventory all junked vehicles within the city. Such inventory shall be kept and maintained by the utilities director in his office and at such other location or locations as may be directed by the governing body of the city. (2)  With respect to any junked motor vehicle located upon the premises of a single-family or two-family residence, the utilities director shall determine the ownership of such motor vehicle, and such ownership shall be included in the inventory referred to above. (3)  The owner of the junked motor vehicle shall be contacted by the utilities director, or his designee, who shall be authorized to purchase the junked motor vehicle from the owner thereof in consideration of a $200.00 credit against the owner's city utility services bill. (4)  No such credit shall be provided until ownership of the junked motor vehicle is transferred to the city by certificate of title transfer or by bill of sale in the event that the junked motor vehicle is too old to require a certificate of title transfer. Any written transfer of a junked motor vehicle shall include, as part of the terms thereof, authority from the owner of the premises where the junked motor vehicle is located authorizing the city or its designee, to come upon the property where such junked motor vehicle is located and remove the junked motor vehicle by such means as may be deemed necessary by the city or its designee. (5)  Upon acquisition of the ownership of the junked motor vehicle, the utilities director shall be authorized to sell the junked motor vehicle to a recycling company determined by the utilities director to offer the most advantageous terms (financial and otherwise) to the city with respect to such purchase or purchases. Any sale to a recycling company may be made on a vehicle-by-vehicle basis or with respect to the sale of a group of vehicles. No public bidding shall be required for such sale. (6)  In the event that the utilities director is required to hire a tow truck company or companies to remove the junked motor vehicles from the premises where they are located, the utilities director shall be authorized to bid out such tow truck services on an annual basis, with the tow truck service being awarded to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as determined by the utilities director. The utilities director shall also have the authority to terminate any such agreement with a tow truck service at any time due to the failure of the tow truck service to provide such service in a manner acceptable to the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the utilities director from awarding such bid to more than one tow truck service at a time and to use such tow truck services on a rotating basis as established by the utilities director if such procedure is determined to be in the best interest of the city. (b)  The city manager of the city, or her designee, shall be authorized to adopt further rules and regulations to implement and carry out the purposes and intent of this section. (Ord. No. O-11-09-18, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 58-55—58-80. - Reserved. 