THE CODE OF THE CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA ____________ Published in 2007 by Order of the City Council ____________ OFFICIALS of the CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Barry Blount, Mayor Walton Grant Eloise Paschal Eddie Rhea Walker Lou Chase Steve Jones Lorenzo Johnson City Council ____________ Charlotte D. Cotton City Administrative Officer ____________ Paula Martin City Clerk ____________ James Skipper City Attorney PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Americus, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior Code, and any ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Charlotte Cotton, Chief Administrative Officer, Ms. Paula Martin, City Clerk, and Mr. James Skipper, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. © ;hg;Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. 2007. 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 10-1. - Bird sanctuary; constituted.     The city as now constituted or as may hereafter be constituted, together with all property belonging to it or under its jurisdiction, is hereby established as a bird sanctuary. (Code 1962, § 4-1; Code 1986, § 4-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Injuring, molesting or killing wild fowl and other birds.     It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to trap, hunt, kill, shoot, or attempt to shoot, wound, injure, abuse or molest any wild fowl or other bird or to rob bird nests; provided, however, if starlings, English sparrows or any other kind of bird are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to the health or property of the citizens of the city in the opinion of the public health authorities, it shall be so declared by such authorities. Then such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by said health authorities. (Code 1962, § 4-6; Code 1986, § 4-2) 
Sec. 10-3. - Cruelty to animals.     It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, cruelly treat, maim, bruise, abuse, mistreat, torture, deprive of necessary sustenance, ill use or otherwise wrongfully deal with any domestic animal or fowl or otherwise treat such domestic creatures in a harsh, inhumane or unreasonable manner. Shelter for horses, cattle or other domestic animals shall be provided to protect such creatures against inclement weather and extreme temperatures. (Code 1962, § 4-4; Code 1986, § 4-3) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 10-4. - Poisoning animals.     It shall be unlawful for any person to put out or cause to be put out any poison within the city for the killing of any domestic animal. (Code 1962, § 4-5; Code 1986, § 4-4) 
Sec. 10-5. - Livestock running at large; impounding; sale; redemption by owner; fees. (a)  No horse, mule, cow, hog, goat, or other animal used or fit either for food or labor, shall be permitted to run at large upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public grounds in the city. Any such animal found at large within the city shall be taken up and impounded by the impounding officer, or other officer of the city. (b)  Each animal so impounded shall be sold by the finance director or his designee, at public outcry, after an advertisement of at least five days in the newspaper in which the city printing is published, giving the time and place of sale. The proceeds of said sale, after paying all costs and expenses thereof, and of taking up and keeping such animal, shall be deposited in the city treasury for six months to await the claim of the owner; at the expiration of which time, if there is no claimant therefor, it shall be used for general city purposes. (c)  The owner of such animal may, at any time before the sale, reclaim such stock by paying all costs and expenses of impounding and keeping the same. The fee for taking up and impounding any such animal shall be as established by ordinance, and for keeping the same shall be as established by ordinance. (Code 1962, § 4-2; Code 1986, § 4-5) 
Sec. 10-6. - Swine prohibited.     No person shall keep any swine within the city. (Code 1962, § 4-3; Code 1986, § 4-6) 
Sec. 10-7. - Manner of keeping of animals and fowl—Sanitation of enclosures; nuisance. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or possess any animal or fowl in the city in such manner as to create an unsanitary or obnoxious condition, or to become noisy, offensive or a nuisance to the neighbors or citizens of the city, or to disturb the peace of the city. (b)  Should a complaint arise from the causes referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the person involved will be properly notified and given adequate time to either dispose of the animal or fowl or eliminate the cause of the complaint. (Code 1962, § 4-7; Code 1986, § 4-7) 
Sec. 10-8. - Same—Pens or enclosures within 300 feet of building.     It shall be unlawful for any person to build any pen, coop or enclosure for animals or fowl, or to permit any animal or fowl to be kept, maintained or grazed, within 300 feet of any house or other building where people reside or work. This section shall not apply to any house or other building on the same premises where such animal or fowl is kept or maintained, nor shall it apply to dogs or cats kept as household pets, but it shall apply to dog kennels, where more than one dog is kept. (Code 1962, § 4-11; Code 1986, § 4-8) 
Sec. 10-9. - Vicious animals.     It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to maintain or harbor within the city a manifestly vicious animal unless the same is securely, but humanely, confined or restrained in such manner as to prevent such animal from attacking or biting a person or another animal. It shall be prima facie evidence of viciousness if an animal, without provocation, fiercely attacks or bites a person or animal not on the owner's premises. (Code 1962, § 4-8; Code 1986, § 4-9) 
Sec. 10-10. - Dead animals—Duty of owner to remove from public ways.     The owner of dead animals upon the public streets and ways shall remove the same so as not to constitute a nuisance. If the owner fails to do so the city shall remove and dispose of such carcass, and charge the cost of such removal and disposition to the owner of the carcass, if known. (Code 1962, § 4-9; Code 1986, § 4-10) 
Sec. 10-11. - Same—Removal from private property.     When any dead animal is found on private property, the owner of the dead animal or the owner of the premises upon which such animal is located shall remove the same immediately at such owner's own cost. Upon failure to do so within a reasonable time the city shall remove same, the cost to be collected from the offending party. (Code 1962, § 4-10; Code 1986, § 4-11) 
Sec. 10-12. - Nuisances prohibited and defined. (a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "nuisance" means an act or situation caused by or contributed to by an animal with or without the permission of the animal's owner or keeper, which act or situation substantially interferes with the rights of citizens to enjoyment of life or property or unreasonably annoys humans or endangers the life or health of persons or other animals. Such a nuisance shall include, but shall not be limited to the following acts by an animal: (1)  Molesting or threatening to molest pedestrians; (2)  Chasing vehicles; (3)  Causing loss or damage to the person or property of someone other than the owner or keeper of the animal; or (4)  Continually and repeatedly howling, barking, whining or otherwise making noises which cause unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others. (b)  Where a nuisance is a public nuisance, an action or a proceeding to abate same, may be brought in the municipal court for the city by the appropriate city official or officials. (c)  Where such nuisance is a private nuisance, a proceeding to abate such nuisance may be brought in the municipal court for the city by the party or parties aggrieved thereby. Such court shall have all authority granted pursuant to city ordinances and state law to order abatement of such nuisance. (Code 1962, § 4-22; Code 1986, § 4-30; Ord. No. O-90-09-22, 9-24-1990) 
Sec. 10-13. - Control and removal of animal waste. (a)  The owner or custodian of any animal shall immediately remove any feces deposited by such animal upon the public sidewalks, public streets, public parks, or other public property in the City of Americus, or upon any private property within the City of Americus not under the use and control of said owner or custodian. The owner of any such animal, or the custodian of any such animal, shall be in possession of materials to remove feces left by such animal at any time during which the animal is not on property under the use and control of said owner or custodian. (b)  Violation of this section shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not less than $75.00, nor more than $500.00. Each act in violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. No. O-10-05-18, 5-20-2010) 
Secs. 10-14—10-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 10-43. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Animal control officer means an employee of the police department of the city whose duties specifically include enforcement of the provisions of this article.     Dangerous dog means any dog or breed of dog that, according to records of an appropriate authority: (1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation, on public or private property; or (2)  Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification; or (3)  Any dog breed which, notwithstanding the records of an appropriate authority with respect to any particular dog, has been determined, by proper resolution of the governing body of the city, to be a dangerous dog breed in accord with the provisions of section 10-67.1 of the City Code.     Dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breeds means a breed or breeds of dogs which the governing body of the City of Americus has determined, by resolution, to be a breed which consists primarily of dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs.     Dog control officer means the chief of police of the city, and such employees of the animal control division of the police department acting under his supervision and control.     Owner means any natural persons or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust, owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog or cat within the territorial boundaries of the city.     Potentially dangerous dog means either: (1) any dog that has, without provocation, bitten a human being while on public or private property; or (2) any dog that has been determined, by proper resolution of the governing body of the city, to be a member of a dangerous dog breed or a potentially dangerous dog breed in accord with the provisions of section 10-67.1 of the City Code.     Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog.     Rabies control officer means an employee of the county board of health whose specific duties include enforcement of the rabies control rules and regulations of the county.     Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; or records maintained by the dog control officer pursuant to this article.     Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. (Code 1986, § 4-20; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. O-09-07-22, 7-23-2009) 
Sec. 10-44. - Restraint of dogs and prohibition against nuisances. (a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to allow the same to run upon the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city, unless said dog is accompanied by its owner or other person having charge of said dog, in which event said dog must be tied with a cord or chain of sufficient strength to hold such dog. (b)  No person owning or having custody of any female dog shall permit such female dog off the premises of the owner or person having control of such dog when dog shall be in heat, unless the same is under control and attached to a leash, as herein provided. (c)  Whenever a dog is allowed to run free, in violation of this section, impoundment of the animal is authorized. Upon identification of the owner, citation shall be issued for violation of this section. (d)  The owner and keeper of each animal within the city shall keep it from becoming a nuisance and from endangering or injuring any person. As a consequence thereof, it shall be the duty of every owner or keeper of any animal to exercise reasonable care with respect to said animal, and to take all reasonable steps and precautions necessary to protect other persons, property and animals from injury, loss or damage which might be caused by or arise from such animal's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. If the owner or keeper of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this section. (e)  Whenever an animal is kept in such a manner as constitutes a nuisance as defined under either city ordinances or state law, a proceeding to abate the nuisance may be brought by the party aggrieved, pursuant to section 10-12. Such an action may also be brought by the city pursuant to said section. An animal found by the court to constitute a nuisance may be impounded by the city if the owner, after reasonable opportunity to do so, fails to abate the nuisance as ordered by the court. (Code 1986, § 4-21; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. O-90-09-22, 9-24-1990) 
Sec. 10-45. - Inoculation; registration; tagging of animals. (a)  All dogs and cats shall be inoculated against rabies in accordance with the procedures set forth in the rabies control rules and regulations of the county, as promulgated and from time to time amended by the county board of health, which by reference are expressly incorporated as part of this section as if fully set out herein. Violation of said rules and regulations may be enforced by the rabies control officer in the municipal court of the city, upon citation, as an offense against the city. (b)  The numbered vaccination tag, issued by a licensed veterinarian upon inoculation, shall be attached to a collar or harness and worn by the animal at all times. Every dog found roaming or running free, whether tagged or untagged, shall be impounded; every tagged or untagged cat found roaming or running free shall be impounded. If a tagged animal is impounded, and it is found not to be registered or its current registration has expired, the owner may be cited for violation of this section. (Code 1986, § 4-22; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-46. - Impoundment and actions related thereto.     All animals impounded by the city shall be held in a humane manner and in accord with an agreement between the city and the Sumter Humane Society, Inc., or some other entity as may from time to time be determined and established by action of the city council. (Code 1986, § 4-23; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. O-90-09-22, 9-24-1990) 
Secs. 10-47—10-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 10-66. - Penalties.     Violations of this division shall be punished by the issuance of a state warrant pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28. (Code 1986, § 4-26; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-67. - Dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs. (a)  Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the dog control officer's jurisdiction from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, the dog control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. Whenever the dog control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, notice shall be given the dog's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notices shall be deemed complete upon mailing. (b)  The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: (1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. (2)  The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's finding that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. (3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog before the governing authority. (4)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this section on the day after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. (c)  When the governing authority receives a request for a hearing it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The governing authority shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the governing authority shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the governing authority may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog. Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the governing authority shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify it is effective on the third day following the date of receipt by the owner. (d)  Issuance of a certificate of registration shall be made pursuant to the following: (1)  Subject to the requirements of this section, the dog control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer or if the dog control officer finds sufficient evidence of: a.  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. b.  The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the premises. The sign required to be posted must substantially conform to the design provided by the department of natural resources. c.  Payment to the city of a fee in the amount of $50.00, to defray the cost of administering and enforcing this section. (2)  In addition, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present evidence to the dog control officer of: a.  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00, issued by an insurer authorized to transact business within the state insuring the owner of the dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or b.  A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00, or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. (e)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of an annual renewal of a certificate of registration, a dog control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. (f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the local government does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in subsection (d) of this section are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. (g)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, if unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. (h)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving from the dog control officer's jurisdiction. (i)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog in the manner provided by this article within 30 days after becoming a resident. (j)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the manner provided by this article within 30 days after becoming a resident of the new jurisdiction. (k)  The fee to be paid to the city for a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25 shall be as established by ordinance. (Code 1986, § 4-24; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-67.1. - Determination by city council of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breeds. (a)  In making a determination that a particular dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed, the governing body shall undertake the following steps: (1)  In the event that the dog control officer receives a report or obtains other information which leads the dog control officer to believe that a particular dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed, such information shall be provided to the city manager of the city. (2)  The city manager shall review all evidence and other information submitted by the dog control officer regarding the particular dog breed involved and, in the event that the city manager determines that a particular dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed, the city manager shall report such fact, and the information and evidence supporting such fact, to the governing body of the city. (3)  Upon receipt of such report from the city manager, the governing body of the city shall, upon recommendation of the public safety committee, hold a public hearing on the issue of whether or not the particular dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed. Notice of such public hearing shall be published at least once per week for the two calendar weeks immediately prior to the date of the public hearing. Such published notice shall appear in the legal organ of the city, and the cost of such publication shall be paid by the city. (4)  At the public hearing, the findings and evidence that the dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed shall be presented to the governing body by the city manager or his or her designee. Upon presentation of such evidence, persons desiring to speak in favor of declaring the particular dog breed a dangerous or potentially dangerous breed shall have ten minutes to make their presentations to the governing body as to why such dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous breed. At the conclusion of such presentations, persons opposed to declaring the particular dog breed a dangerous or potentially dangerous breed shall have ten minutes to present evidence as to why such dog breed is not a dangerous or potentially dangerous breed. At the conclusion of the evidence, the governing body shall consider all evidence presented and shall determine whether the particular dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous breed based upon the evidence and argument presented at the public hearing. Such determination shall be made by the governing body in the form of a resolution declaring that such breed is either a dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog breed. (5)  For purposes of such a determination, the governing body of the city shall be required to establish that a particular breed is dangerous or potentially dangerous by reviewing evidence presented to the governing body regarding the dog breed in question, including the dog breed's propensity for inflicting severe injuries on humans without provocation or aggressively biting, attacking or endangering the safety of humans without provocation, or that the breed is likely, based upon the characteristics of the breed, to do so. The final determination as to whether a particular breed is a potentially dangerous dog breed or a dangerous dog breed shall be made by the governing body of the city based upon the evidence presented to the governing body at the public hearing required in accord with the Code section. (b)  In the event that the governing body of the city adopts a resolution declaring a particular dog breed as a dangerous dog breed, the provisions of section 10-67 and section 10-68 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Americus which are applicable to dangerous dogs shall be applicable to that particular dog breed. (c)  In the event that the governing body of the city adopts a resolution declaring a particular dog breed as a potentially dangerous dog breed, the provisions of section 10-67 and section 10-68 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Americus which are applicable to potentially dangerous dogs shall be applicable to that particular dog breed. (Ord. No. O-09-07-22, 7-23-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 10-68. - Possession without certification; keeping dog in violation of certification; failure to post clearly visible warning sign; confiscation and impoundment; destruction of animal. (a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with this article. (b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. (c)  It shall be unlawful for a potentially dangerous dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. (d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog to fail to post a warning sign on the premises where a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is housed or kept by its owner in accordance with this article. The warning sign shall give notice to the public of the housing or keeping of a dog or a breed of dog which has been declared to be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog. (e)  It shall be the duty of the dog control officer, and any person under his employ, to impound the dog if: (1)  The owner does not secure a certificate of registration in accordance with this article. (2)  The owner does not secure liability insurance or meet the bond requirement of this article. (3)  The owner does not keep the dog within a proper enclosure or permits the dog to roam or run free. (f)  Any dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to the owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon payment of reasonable impoundment costs, as fixed by a schedule approved by the governing authority, as from time to time amended. Notice of impoundment under this section shall be given the owner, in writing, by certified mail, at his last known address. This notice shall state that if the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days from receipt of such notice, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner; provided, however, no dog shall have been destroyed under this section unless it has been held a full 20 days, exclusive of the date of giving notice. (g)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused such dog. (h)  Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official of the city which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog: (1)  That has been identified as being a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog; (2)  Which the city has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; (3)  Which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this section; or (4)  Whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this section. (Code 1986, § 4-25; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. O-09-07-22, 7-23-2009) 
Sec. 10-69. - Penalty for violation of city ordinances related to dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breeds.     Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-66 of the City Code, any violation of the provisions of the City Code, related to dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breeds, shall be punished in accord with the provisions of section 1-8 of the City Code. In addition to the penalty provisions of section 1-8 of the City Code, any person owning a dog breed which has been declared as a dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog breed who violates the provisions of the City Code relative to dangerous dog breeds or potentially dangerous dog breeds shall have his or her dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the dog control officer and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the county board of health and, thereafter, the dog which is a member of the dangerous dog breed or a member of the potentially dangerous dog breed may be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. (Ord. No. O-09-07-22, 7-23-2009) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 14-1. - Advisory board for physically disabled access. (a)  There is hereby established an advisory board to review plans for major construction projects in the city in connection with access to such buildings by disabled individuals. Such advisory board shall consist of the following persons: (1)  Not less than three physically disabled residents of the city appointed by the city council who have an interest in providing information and in put regarding construction of buildings in such a manner so as to ensure, to the greatest extent reasonably possible, access to such buildings for physically disabled individuals; (2)  Two other persons appointed by the city council. (b)  The persons appointed to the board shall serve staggered term such that one person shall be appointed for an initial term of one year, two persons will be appointed for an initial term of two years, and two persons will be appointed for an initial term of three years. Thereafter, all persons shall be appointed for three-year terms. Persons appointed to the board may succeed themselves and shall serve until their successor is appointed and qualified. Each member of the board shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed at any time by the city council with or without cause. (c)  The members of the board shall elect one of their number as chairman and one of their number as vice-chairman. The board shall also elect a secretary of the board who may or may not be a member of the board. All meetings of the board shall be subject to the state's open meetings statutes. (d)  The board shall have the following duties and responsibilities: (1)  All major construction project plans within the city shall be referred to the board for review in connection with access for the disabled to the building or buildings that are the subject of such construction plans; (2)  The board shall make recommendations to the city building official 's office as to any suggested changes in major construction plans so as to increase or enhance disabled persons' access to and from such buildings; (3)  The board shall be authorized to make such other additional recommendations regarding disabled persons' access as it may deem appropriate. (e)  For the purpose of this section, the term "major construction" shall be deemed to include construction of commercial buildings to be undertaken within the limits of the city for which a certificate of occupancy is or will be acquired upon completion of such construction in accord with current ordinances. (f)  Nothing in this section shall require the building official nor any builder or owner of a building to comply with any recommendations made by the advisory board, but such recommendations of the advisory board should be taken into consideration by the city building official in connection with approval by the building official of major construction project plans in the city. All recommendations of the board shall be submitted to the city building official's office within five business days of the board's receipt of major construction project plans from the building official's office. (g)  Nothing herein shall be deemed to conflict with any provision of any code adopted within the city, as such codes may now exist or be hereafter amended. (Code 1986, § 5-8; Ord. No. O-97-11-38, 11-20-1997) 
Sec. 14-2. - Stormwater management. (a)  Plans required. Stormwater management plans shall be required for a development before any building permits may be issued. Those developments include: (1)  Any commercial, industrial, school, church or places of religious worship, recreational facilities, and private clubs and golf courses, where the development will disturb or alter more than 1.1 acres of land area. (2)  Any subdivision, multifamily, or group housing development where at least ten dwelling units are proposed. (3)  Any other development where the building official with consultation with the utilities director deems appropriate because of location, terrain, grade, or any other possible stormwater problem. (b)  Application procedure. Two copies of the stormwater management plans shall be submitted to the building risk management office. These plans shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The building official will forward one copy to the city utilities director for review and approval, and the other copy shall be retained in the project construction files within the building official's office. The utilities director will notify the building official of approval or disapproval of the stormwater management plans as designed within seven working days. (c)  Standards for stormwater management. (1)  A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required when the proposed development shall increase the peak rate of runoff by more than one percent for a 25-year frequency storm; (2)  Should the peak rate of stormwater runoff from the site exceed the permitted peak release rate, then on-site retention or detention shall be required. All retention or detention facilities shall be designed for all intensities up to and including 25-year frequency for all duration of rainfall. The peak runoff rate from the site after the development shall not be greater than the permitted peak release rate; and (3)  The retention or detention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 25-year frequency rainfall, as published by the National Weather Service for the affected site. The retention or detention volume required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of the 25-year rainfall for any and all durations from the proposed development, less than that volume discharged during the same duration at the approved release rate as specified in subsection (c)(1) of this section. (d)  Inspection. Inspection of the site for plan compliance shall be made periodically by the utilities director of the city. Any plan variation noted by the utilities director shall be addressed in writing to the developer of the site or contractor in charge and a copy sent to the city building official for filing with the project documents. (e)  Permit. A stormwater management plan approved by the city utilities director shall constitute a permit that will satisfy the requirements of this section. (Code 1986, § 5-79.1; Ord. No. O-97-03-06, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-99-03-11, 3-18-1999) 
Sec. 14-3. - Site plans applicable to more than one city ordinance.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, in the event that a site plan must be submitted to the city council in connection with, or in compliance with, the requirements of the city's wetland protection ordinance, the city's flood damage prevention ordinance, the city's soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance, or the city's groundwater recharge protection ordinance, and in the event that such site plan be deemed sufficient by the permitting officer to satisfy the requirements of more than one of said ordinances, then, at the request of the permit applicant, the permitting officer shall be authorized to waive the submission of additional site plans for such project and may use such site plan as submitted in connection with the granting or denying of permit applications as to any or all of such ordinances. (Code 1986, § 5-9; Ord. No. O-99-11-42, 11-18-1999) 
Sec. 14-4. - Permit for construction of ponds. (a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or pond, by the construction of any dam or otherwise, the waters of any branch, creek or stream, or any other waters within the city in any fish pond, mill pond, bathing pond, or for any other purpose, or cause the same to be so ponded and collected, or to maintain and keep any such pond after the same is constructed without first receiving a written permit for such construction and maintenance from the building official. (b)  Permit requests; procedure; fees. (1)  Filing with building official required. In order to acquire a permit for the construction and maintenance of a pond as aforesaid, the applicant must file a request in writing with the building official consisting of an original and four copies setting out in detail the location of the pond, the waters to be impounded, the purpose for which the impoundment is requested, the size of the pond, and the method of preparation to be used on the pond site before impoundment of waters. (2)  Engineer's plat of survey to be filed with request. There shall be attached to each copy of the request an engineer's plat of survey showing the height, length, and width of the proposed dam, its relative location to the nearest street or highway affected thereby, also a topographic survey of the area that is to be covered by the impoundment. (3)  Filing fee. There shall be filed with each request a fee in the amount established by ordinance by check made payable to the city. (4)  Building official to forward request to health department within certain time. The building official shall within five days submit the all three copies to the county health department, which shall in turn review the request and the attached plans and specifications, and enter a recommendation regarding construction of the proposed pond. (5)  Recommendation of health department to building official; time limit. The county health department shall within ten days from receiving the request, return two copy to the building official with the recommendation stamped on the face thereof, one copy of which will remain on file with the building official. (6)  Issuance by building official. Upon direction of the city council the requested permit shall be issued by the building official. (Code 1962, § 12-5; Code 1986, § 5-5) 
Sec. 14-5. - Permit for diverting natural flow of water.     It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction in any stream or drain in the city in such a manner as to divert the natural flow of the water therein, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city council. (Code 1962, § 12-4; Code 1986, § 5-6) 
Secs. 14-6—14-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— State building code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 14-29. - Codes adopted. (a)  (1)  In accord with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, all of the codes referenced in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)—(9)(B)(i)(VIII), as modified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(ii), or as amended or revised as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23, are hereby adopted by reference. The codes adopted pursuant to this subsection include the following: a.  International Building Code, with Georgia amendments; b.  National Electrical Code (NFPA), with Georgia amendments; c.  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments; d.  International Mechanical Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments; e.  International Plumbing Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments; f.  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC), with Georgia amendments; g.  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments; h.  International Fire Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments. (2)  In accord with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, the following codes are also adopted and shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the city: a.  International Property Maintenance Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments, and as amended; b.  International Existing Building Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments; c.  National Green Building Standard Code, with Georgia amendments. (b)  The building official of the city shall maintain current copies of such codes on file in his office and such codes shall be available for inspection and review by the public during regular business hours of the building official. Such codes are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions of such codes shall be controlling within the city. (c)  The following shall be applicable to such codes: (1)  Such codes shall be enforced by the building official and, where applicable, the chief of the fire department, or his designee. (2)  Any reference to the term "board of adjustments and appeals" in said codes shall mean the zoning board of appeals of the city as established by section 94-86, and such zoning board of appeals shall have the same powers, duties and authority given to the board of adjustments and appeals in such incorporated codes. (3)  In hearing and deciding appeals from decision of the building official or the chief of the fire department made pursuant to their authority under the state minimum codes, the rules of procedure of the adopted codes shall apply; provided, however, that the rules for appointment and terms of office for the appeals board in said adopted codes shall not be applicable to the zoning board of appeals. (4)  The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of the City's Code of Ordinances and the adopted state codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the applications of the provisions thereof. (d)  Any person charged with the violation of any provision of any of such codes, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (e)  Permit and inspection fees. There are hereby established certain permit and inspection fees to be charged by the city for building permits, electrical permits, plumbing permits, mechanical (heating and air conditioning) permits, for moving of buildings or structures within the city limits, and for demolition of buildings or structures within the city limits. Such permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the city in accord with the various provisions of this chapter and the various codes previously adopted by reference in accord with the provisions of this chapter. (f)  Building permit and inspection fees. (1)  A building permit and inspection fee shall be computed based upon the value of all structures and buildings being built, and such valuation shall be based upon the building valuation data as issued by the Southern Building Code Congress International as of the time of application for said permit. The valuation data actually used in computing the valuation of the structures and buildings shall be 75 percent of the total valuation computed using the building valuation data as issued by the Southern Building Code Congress International. Once the valuation of said structures and buildings is computed, such valuation shall be used in determining the actual building permit and inspection fees. (2)  The building permit and inspection fees for the city are as established by ordinance. (3)  The building permit and inspection fee for the moving of any building or structure into, out of or within the city shall be as established by ordinance. (4)  The building permit and inspection fee for the demolition of a building or structure within the city shall be as established by ordinance. (5)  The building permit and inspection fee for the installation of any tent for public gatherings within the city shall be as established by ordinance. (g)  Electrical permit fees and inspection fees. There are hereby established electrical permit fees and inspection fees to be paid for work done within the city pursuant to division 2 of this article, and the fees for such electrical permits and inspections are as established by ordinance. (h)  Plumbing permit and inspection fees. There are hereby established plumbing permit fees and inspection fees to be paid for work done within the city pursuant to division 3 of this article, and the fees for such plumbing permits and inspections are as established by ordinance. (i)  Mechanical permit and inspection fees. There are hereby established mechanical permit and inspection fees for permits and inspections in the amounts established by ordinance. (j)  The building official of the city shall be authorized to carry out such inspections and issue such permits as may be required by this Code, but he may only issue such permits upon the payment of the fees as herein provided. Such building official may make such inspections and investigations, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code providing for any other person or entity to make such inspections. Pursuant to the authority contained in 1996 Georgia Laws (Act No. 1046), page 1632, § 3, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. (k)  Permit and inspection fees required by this Code shall be paid for prior to obtaining the permits provided for in this Code. Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is begun or initiated prior to obtaining the required permit, the fees required by this Code shall be paid and, as a penalty for the failure to secure a permit, an additional amount equal to the original fee required shall be paid to the city; however, the payment of such penalty shall not relieve any person from otherwise complying with the requirements of this Code in carrying out the work for which the permit is required, nor shall the payment of any such penalty relieve such person from any other penalties prescribed in this Code relating to the work performed. (Code 1962, §§ 5-1—5-1.3, 8-1, 11-1, 11-6, 17-1; Code 1986, § 5-1; Ord. No. O-88-03-10, 3-28-1988; Ord. No. O-92-01-05, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. O-92-03-13, 3-23-1992; Ord. No. O-93-02-06, 2-22-1993; Ord. No. O-94-07-26, 7-21-1994; Ord. No. O-94-10-36, 10-27-1994; Ord. No. O-94-11-38, 11-28-1994; Ord. No. O-95-11-36, 11-30-1995; Ord. No. O-96-09-40, 9-19-1996; Ord. No. O-97-03-07, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-98-06-24, 6-18-1998; Ord. No. O-05-01-04, 1-20-2005; Ord. No. O-2013-31, 11-21-2013) 
Sec. 14-30. - Building permits. (a)  Work plan prerequisite to issuance. No building or other structure or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, enlarged or altered until a plan of the proposed work, together with a statement of the materials to be used, shall have been submitted to the building official and fire department representative. If in accordance with the provisions herein contained, the building official shall issue a permit for the proposed construction. (b)  Removal of nonpermitted, nonconforming structures. Structures hereafter erected without permit, or not in conformity with this chapter, shall be removed and the violator prosecuted. (c)  Permit to precede work; compliance with technical codes required. No building shall be constructed, enlarged, altered or moved until a building permit has been obtained from the building official, and such official shall not issue such permit if the proposed construction, enlargement, alteration or moving would in any manner violate the housing, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, heating and air conditioning, zoning, or subdivision codes or regulations or any other codes or ordinances now or hereafter adopted by the city. (d)  Application. All applications for building permits shall be made in duplicate upon forms provided for this purpose by the office of the building official with payment in the amount necessary to cover the cost of such building permit, together with all other exhibits and information as provided and set forth in section 94-28. (e)  Persons responsible. The persons responsible for obtaining permits called for herein shall be the person actually doing the construction work or the person in charge of the construction work regardless of whether such person doing the actual construction work or in charge of the actual construction work is the owner, lessee or contractor. (f)  Display. All building permits called for in this section shall be displayed in a manner on the property under construction or on which repairs are being made so as to be visible from the public street closest to such construction site. (g)  Penalty for violation. All persons violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1962, § 5-2; Code 1986, § 5-2; Ord. No. O-88-03-10, 3-28-1988) 
Sec. 14-31. - Water conservation restrictions. (a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Commercial means any type of building other than residential.     Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building.     Residential means any building or unit or a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling built shall not include a hotel or motel. (b)  Residential buildings. On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: (1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; (2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 psi of pressure; (3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; (4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or (5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. (c)  Commercial buildings. On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type that does not meet the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. (d)  Repair, renovation, addition to existing buildings. The requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. (e)  Exemptions. (1)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b)—(d) of this section when: a.  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; b.  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this section were installed; c.  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; d.  Units to be installed are: 1.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 2.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 3.  Toilets for juveniles. (2)  The owner or his agent of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (e)(1) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building official for the city. A fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. (f)  Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the office of the building official of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building official of the city. (Code 1986, § 5-7; Ord. No. O-91-02-04, 2-25-1991) 
Sec. 14-32. - State license required.     The building official shall be authorized to cause charges to be brought for violations of this chapter against any person found to be installing, or known to have installed, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, gas, or other facilities that require a person to have a State of Georgia license in order to undertake such installation. (Ord. No. O-2013-31, 11-21-2013) 
Secs. 14-33—14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICITY 
Sec. 14-51. - Electrical inspector—Generally. (a)  Position designated. The building official for the city shall perform the duties of electrical inspector. (b)  Authority. The electrical inspector shall be the enforcing officer, supervising the enforcement of the provisions of the electrical code. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obey any order of the electrical inspector issued under the provisions of this article and such person shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. (c)  Assistants. The electrical inspector, with the approval of the chief appointing authority of the city, may appoint such number of officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. (d)  Records. The electrical inspector shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the office. Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all times. (e)  Duty. The electrical inspector is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate the placing of electrical wiring and equipment for electric light, heat or power within the scope of the electrical code and to cause all such wiring and equipment to be so placed to accomplish the purpose of the electrical code. (f)  Right of entry. The electrical inspector shall have the right in the discharge of such inspector's duties to enter any building, manhole, or subway, or to climb any pole for the purpose of examining and testing the electrical wiring and equipment therein or thereon. For this purpose, such inspector shall be given prompt access to such places on application to the person owning or in charge of same. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entry to the electrical inspector when such inspector is performing the duties prescribed in this article. (g)  Permit application forms. The electrical inspector shall prescribe the manner and form of application for a permit for the installation and maintenance of electrical wiring and equipment subject to approval by the city council. Such inspector shall maintain or cause to be maintained, a supply of application forms, with all necessary instructions, available to the public during the normal business hours of such office. (h)  Receipt of and action on application. The electrical inspector shall receive and consider all applications for permits and shall request such additional information as may be required in connection with same. The electrical inspector shall act upon an application for a permit as filed or amended without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. (i)  Notice of fee. The electrical inspector shall determine the application fee as required by ordinance, and notify the applicant of said fee. (j)  Charge of violations. The electrical inspector shall bring charges against any person who, after due notice of violation of the electrical code, shall fail or refuse to make the necessary corrections as provided in this chapter. (k)  Warrant for violators. The electrical inspector shall cause charges to be brought for violation of this division against any person found to be installing, or known to have installed, electrical work or equipment when such person does not hold the certificate and permit required by this article. (l)  Other duties. The electrical inspector shall perform such other duties as may be specified or implied to such inspector in other sections of this Code. (m)  Liability. The electrical inspector, or any employee acting under such inspector's instructions and authority, in the discharge of such inspector's duties, as required by this article, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and such inspector and employees are hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. (Code 1962, §§ 8-4, 8-5, 8-7; Code 1986, § 5-23) 
Sec. 14-52. - Same—Conflict of interests of officers and employees.     No officer or employee connected with the electrical inspector's office shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances or the construction, alteration or maintenance of electrical installations or in the making of plans or specifications therefor, unless such person is the owner of such building. No employee shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with such employee's duties or with the interest of the inspector's office. (Code 1962, § 8-10; Code 1986, § 5-24) 
Sec. 14-53. - Permit. (a)  Required. No person shall install or repair any electrical wiring or equipment, except repairs that do not alter or change the original wiring or equipment, nor shall the load be increased, until a permit therefor has been secured from the electrical inspector. (b)  Application. It shall be the duty of master electricians to apply for permits to install or alter electrical wiring or equipment within the scope of this article and the electrical code. Before applying for said permit, such electrician shall determine that the work or equipment contemplated is in compliance with the provisions of this article and the electrical code and shall furnish with the application all information requested by the electrical inspector. All applications for permits shall be written on forms supplied by the electrical inspector's office and shall be dealt with as provided elsewhere in this chapter. (c)  Required to obtain before work commences. If any person commences any electrical installation or maintenance within the scope of this code before obtaining the necessary permit, such person shall be subject to the penalties prescribed herein. (d)  Penalty for failure to obtain permit. Any person who shall commence any work within the scope of this article or the electrical code without first having obtained a proper permit therefor shall pay a penalty in the amount established as a penalty pursuant to section 14-29 in addition to the regular inspection fee for said work. In the event of repair work requiring a permit, the party shall notify the inspector and get a permit by the end of the next working day. (e)  Issuance of permit. When and if satisfied that the application is in order and that the work described therein complies with this article and the electrical code, the inspector shall issue a permit to proceed with the work described in the application. (f)  Refusal to issue. The inspector shall refuse to issue a permit if such inspector's examination of the application and all information pertaining thereto indicate that the work or equipment described or contemplated therein does not conform to the requirements of this article or the electrical code. The inspector shall return the application to the applicant with the refusal to issue a permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons therefor. The inspector shall also refuse to issue a permit to any applicant who has failed or refused to comply with this article or the electrical code or any order of the city. (g)  Permit granted in violation. Except as provided in this article, the electrical inspector shall not grant a permit to any person unless such person has fully qualified under all the terms of this article. Any permit granted in violation of this article shall be null and void. (h)  Failure to correct defects within time limit. Any person certified as prescribed in this article, who fails to correct any defect in the work after having been duly notified for a period of ten days, shall receive no further permit until such defects have been corrected. (i)  Revocation of permit or approval. The electrical inspector shall revoke any permit or approval issued by such inspector's office when, in such inspector's opinion, said permit was obtained by misrepresentation of the material fact or by false statement in the application or the plans. (Code 1962, §§ 8-5—8-8; Code 1986, § 5-31; Ord. No. O-88-03-10, 3-28-1988) 
Sec. 14-54. - Inspections. (a)  Required. All new electrical work and equipment and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work, shall be inspected to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this article and the electrical code and to assure that the installation of the electrical system and equipment is in accordance with approved plans. It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector, either personally or by assistants, to inspect all electrical work and equipment within the scope of this article and the electrical code during the progress of such work, as well as when it is completed. Such inspection is to be made from time to time and must be thorough and complete. (b)  Fees. Inspection fees shall be on a cash basis. Said inspection fee shall include a second inspection where defects or a violation are noted in the first inspection. (c)  Notice of readiness. The master electrician shall determine when work, as required by the electrical inspector, is ready for inspection and shall notify the electrical inspector's office of same. The master electrician shall further notify the electrical inspector's office at the completion of any electrical installation within the scope of this article and the electrical code. Any person who shall fail to notify the inspector's office of readiness for inspection as required herein shall pay, in addition to the regular inspection fee, an additional fee in the amount established by ordinance. (d)  Roughing-in inspection and approval. The inspector shall make roughing-in inspection within 24 hours after notice by a permit holder that such work is ready for inspection. Upon satisfactory completion of the roughing-in inspection, approval shall be noted on a label or card of suitable design showing the date and name of the inspector. Said notice shall be displayed in a prominent place at the site of the work. (e)  Covering work. No part of the electrical system shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved as prescribed in this article. (f)  Uncovering required upon order. If any part of the electrical system has been covered in violation of this article, it shall be uncovered upon order from the electrical inspector at the expense of the party so violating this article. (g)  Final inspection. At the completion of any electrical installation of any work or equipment within the scope of this article or the electrical code, the electrical inspector shall make a final inspection to determine compliance. If such final inspection proves satisfactory to the electrical inspector, such inspector shall issue and attach inside the main electrical disconnecting means a suitable label of approval, showing the date, the inspector's name and the name of the person responsible for the work, and notify the electric distribution company. (h)  Reinspection. The inspector shall make reinspections when necessitated by unsatisfactory work or equipment and shall charge therefor the fees provided. (i)  Temporary installations. The inspector shall inspect temporary electrical installations and shall have authority to cause the same to be installed in accordance with this article and the electrical code. (j)  Damaging inspection notice. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or damage any inspection notice posted as required by this article. (Code 1962, §§ 8-5, 8-7; Code 1986, § 5-32) 
Sec. 14-55. - Defective work; dangerous condition; connection; disconnection. (a)  Notice, compliance. Upon notice from the electrical inspector to any owner, agent or person responsible for any wiring or equipment that is in violation of the provisions of this article or the electrical code, or has become unsafe, said owner, agent or person, shall cease to use the wiring or equipment until such person has completed such changes as may be ordered by the electrical inspector and same have been approved by the inspector. Upon notice from the electrical inspector that any part of the wiring or equipment inspected is not acceptable under the provision of this article or the electrical code, the master electrician in charge, or the owner or agent, shall make the necessary changes, and so notify the inspector. (b)  Stop work orders. The electrical inspector shall have the power to issue stop work orders on any work within the scope of this article or the electrical code when such work is being done contrary to the provisions thereof or in a dangerous or unsafe manner. Such order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of such property or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where any emergency exists, oral notice, given by the electrical inspector, shall be sufficient. (c)  Disconnect orders. The electrical inspector shall have the power to order disconnection of any electrical installation or equipment within the scope of this article or the electrical code when such installation of equipment has been installed, or through use has become contrary to the provision thereof or is dangerous or unsafe. Such order shall be given to the owner of such installation or the owner's agent and shall state the conditions under which connection may be resumed. Where any emergency exists, oral notice, given by the electrical inspector, shall be sufficient. In any case of failure to comply, the electrical inspector shall, after due notice, order discontinuance of electrical service to the locality or building concerned and shall enforce said discontinuance until compliance with the requirements. (d)  Notice of violation. In case of violations that, in the opinion of the electrical inspector do not require stop work or disconnect orders, such inspector shall notify the person responsible. Such notice shall state the violation and corrections required, and shall if required, be in writing. (e)  Temporary connection. The electrical inspector may permit temporary connection during the course of construction for temporary light, heat or power, when in such inspector's opinion, such connection is required. The inspector shall determine the period of such requirement and shall at the end of that period, cause the temporary connection to be discontinued. (f)  Refusal of connection. The electrical inspector may refuse to authorize a connection so long as, in such inspector's opinion, any violation of this article or the electrical code exists. (Code 1962, §§ 8-5—8-8; Code 1986, § 5-33) 
Sec. 14-56. - Ordering illegal work. (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to order any wiring or equipment installed which violates any provision of this article or the electrical code. (b)  In the event an owner, employer, or any person of authority over a master electrician shall order work done or equipment installed that violates the provisions of this article or the electrical code, it shall be the duty of the master electrician to immediately notify, in writing, the electrical inspector of all particulars concerning same. (Code 1962, §§ 8-7, 8-8; Code 1986, § 5-34) 
Sec. 14-57. - Maintenance of system, etc.     All electrical systems, both existing and new, and all devices, appliances and equipment attached therein shall be maintained in a safe manner. All devices and safeguards that are required by this article or the electrical code shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or owner's agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of such system, devices, appliances and equipment. (Code 1962, § 8-7; Code 1986, § 5-35) 
Sec. 14-58. - Maintaining clearance of service drops.     No person shall build, alter or erect any building or other structure that will affect the clearance required for service drops and point of attachment of same. Upon discovery of a violation of this provision, the person responsible shall be required to remove said building or other structure or to bear all expense involved in altering the service drop to obtain the necessary safe clearances. (Code 1962, § 8-7; Code 1986, § 5-36) 
Sec. 14-59. - Standards for materials.     All wires, devices, appliances and apparatus installed, used, sold or offered for sale within the city shall conform to the rules and regulations of this article and the electrical code, and, for the purpose hereof, they shall bear the label of Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., or shall be approved by the authority enforcing the code. Such label or listing shall be prima facie evidence that said item conforms to this article and the electrical code. (Code 1962, § 8-7; Code 1986, § 5-37) 
Secs. 14-60—14-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBING 
Sec. 14-77. - Inspector's right-of-entry.     The plumbing inspector shall have the authority to enter any building at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the plumbing. Any person attempting to prevent such inspection, whether owner, lessee, or agent, shall be in violation of this article. (Code 1962, § 17-18; Code 1986, § 5-106) 
Sec. 14-78. - Permit—Required.     No person shall install or repair any plumbing except repairs not involving the removing or alteration of soil, waste-vent pipes or traps, until a permit has been secured from the plumbing inspector. No less than four hours before any plumbing work is started, including drainage, sewage, extensions, or alterations, except as noted in this section, a permit must be secured from the plumbing inspector for such work to be done. (Code 1962, § 17-9; Code 1986, § 5-108) 
Sec. 14-79. - Same—Restriction.     No person engaged in the plumbing business shall allow such person's name to be used, directly or indirectly, by any other person for the purpose of securing a permit, sending in notices or returns or doing work under the license of any other person. (Code 1962, § 17-15; Code 1986, § 5-110) 
Sec. 14-80. - Inspections—Required.     It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector, either personally or by assistants, to inspect all plumbing work during the progress of the work and upon completion. (Code 1962, § 71-10; Code 1986, § 5-112) 
Sec. 14-81. - Same—Notices.     Inspection notices upon blanks furnished by the plumbing inspector shall be filed in the office of the plumbing inspector by each person doing plumbing work, giving notice of the location, kind of work and the time for inspection, and the work will be inspected as soon as possible thereafter. When the work has been completed, the plumber must immediately notify the inspector. At the time the final inspection is made, the plumber or the plumber's designated representative shall be present. No plumbing work may be covered until the inspection is made. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this procedure. Upon final inspection, if the inspector determines that the plumbing and material are in accordance with this article, a final inspection certificate shall be issued. If the inspector finds that any plumbing has not been properly installed or does not comply with this article, the inspector shall notify the owner of such property and, upon notice so to do, the owner shall make such changes and corrections in the plumbing as may be ordered by the inspector; failure to make such changes within five days after notice shall subject the owner, agent or lessee to punishment, as prescribed in section 1-8. Also, if the necessary correction is not made, the city may refuse to furnish water to the premises. (Code 1962, § 17-11; Code 1986, § 5-113) 
Secs. 14-82—14-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GAS 
Sec. 14-106. - Enforcement. (a)  The building official shall be charged with the responsibility of supervising and conducting all requirements of the gas code and this article, unless such responsibility is charged by the city to some other person or agency of the government. (b)  It is the intent of this article to promulgate such rules, regulations and requirements as may be necessary to protect the life, limb, safety and property of all users and citizens. It is also the intent of this article to vest in the building official the discretion of varying such rules, regulations or requirements provided such discretion shall not violate the intent and purpose of this article. (Code 1962, § 11-5; Code 1986, § 5-120) 
Sec. 14-107. - Bond of gasfitters.     No person shall act as a gasfitter in the city unless such person files a copy with the building official of the bond filed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-14-12. (Code 1962, § 11-2; Code 1986, § 5-123) 
Sec. 14-108. - Permit required, fee; meter required. (a)  It shall be unlawful to make any installation for service of any such gas until a permit is secured from the building official may appoint for such purposes. (b)  The applicant for any installation shall make a written request to the building official for a permit, which request shall state the proposed location of the installation, and shall be accompanied by a sketch of the proposed location and a fee in the amount established by ordinance to cover inspection costs. In the event the permit is not granted the fee shall not be returned to the applicant. (c)  Each installation shall be equipped with an accurate and appropriate measuring device, meter or gauge, depending upon the type of system, so as to enable the building official and the consumer to clearly determine the amount of pressure or quantity of material being received. (Code 1962, § 11-11; Code 1986, § 5-124) 
Sec. 14-109. - Meter installation.     One gas meter shall be installed for each dwelling unit, which shall specifically include but not be limited to one meter for each unit in an apartment-type building. (Code 1962, § 11-3; Code 1986, § 5-125) 
Sec. 14-110. - Gas not to be turned on unless owner or occupant is present.     The gas supply to any building using gas appliances or to which gas piping has been constructed or installed shall not be turned on unless the owner or occupant of said building or premises is physically present at the time. (Code 1962, § 11-4; Code 1986, § 5-126) 
Secs. 14-111—14-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDSCAPING 
Sec. 14-134. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Accessway means a way of approaching, entering, or leaving a property.     Board means the zoning board of appeals, as specified in section 94-86.     Crown means the main point of branching of foliage of a tree or plant, or the upper portion of a tree or plant.     Crown spread means the distance measured across the greatest diameter of a plant.     Development area means the portion of a plot or parcel of land, excluding public right-of-way, upon which a building, structure, pavement, landscape material, or other improvements have been placed.     Encroachment means the protrusion of a vehicle outside of a parking space, display area, storage area, accessway, or access aisle into a landscaped area.     Ground cover means natural mulch or low growing plants other than deciduous varieties installed to form a continuous cover over the ground.     Interior area means the entire parcel to be developed exclusive of the front, rear and side perimeter landscape area.     Outdoor storage areas means an area located on business premises within the city where there is located one or more trash dumpsters or dumpster-like containers used for the purpose of holding garbage, trash and refuse pending pickup by the city or other authorized entity.     Shade tree means any self-supporting woody plant of a species that is well shaped, well branched and well foliated which normally grows to an overall height of at least 35 feet and normally develops an average mature spread of crown greater than 30 feet in the city.     Shrubs means a woody plant normally characterized by persistent woody stems, low stature and branching near its base. For purpose of this article, the term "shrub" also includes all woody plants of all species which have developed or which, under normal conditions in the county, will develop trunks of a caliper diameter of less than two inches at a height of six inches above ground level.     Sight triangle means the area of property on both sides of an accessway formed by the intersection of each side of the accessway and public right-of-way with the two sides of each triangle being not less than ten feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a straight line connecting the ends of the two other sides.     Tree means any self-supporting, woody plant of a species, which normally grows to an overall height of at least 20 feet and normally develops an average mature spread of crown greater than 20 feet in the city and county. (A listing of suggested trees shall be maintained in the city building official's office.)     Utility service area means an area, which contains any surface-mounted HVAC equipment or freestanding aboveground devices, such as utility boxes, booster boxes, switchboxes, and transformers that are part of an underground utilities system.     Vehicular use area means any ground surfaces area, excepting public right-of-way, used by any type of vehicle whether moving or at rest for the purpose of, including but not limited to, driving, parking, loading, unloading, storage, or display, such as, but not limited to, new and used car lots; activities of a drive-in nature in connection with banks, restaurants, and other vehicular uses under, on, or within building.     Visual screen means a barrier of living or nonliving landscape material or other inert material established for the purpose of separating and obscuring from view those areas so screened. Noncreditable species for screening—No species of deciduous shrub shall be credited for purposes of the visual screening requirements. (Code 1986, § 5-190; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 1, 9-28-1992; Ord. No. O-93-06-20, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 14-135. - Applicability.     The requirements and standards for the installation and maintenance of the landscape planting areas for the following: off-street parking facilities and other vehicular use areas. This shall apply to all new development and all redevelopment in the city except single- and two-family dwelling units and agricultural uses. (Code 1986, § 5-191; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 2, 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 14-136. - Landscape development standards. (a)  Purpose . To ensure the attainment of the objectives of this article, the design and installation of required landscaping shall be consistent with the standards in this section, unless it can be demonstrated that alternative design and installation plans will meet the objectives of this article. The landscape development standards contained herein shall apply whenever a landscape permit and plan are required. (b)  Off-street parking; vehicle use areas. Off-street parking facilities and other ground level vehicle use areas over 2,000 square feet, excepting permitted accessways, shall meet the following requirements: (1)  Perimeter requirements. a.  Front perimeter landscape area. A five-foot strip from the property line to the vehicular use area shall be landscaped where an off-street parking facility and other ground level vehicular use areas are in excess of 2,000 square feet in size, but less than 12,000 square feet in size. Any off-street parking facility area or vehicular use area, which contains 12,000 square feet or more shall contain a ten-foot front perimeter landscape area. The width of sidewalks shall not be included within the five-foot or ten-foot wide front setback perimeter landscape areas required herein; provided, however, that if the landscaped area is located within the street right-of-way with the permission of the city, then such portion as is located within such right-of-way shall be included in calculating the five-foot or ten-foot landscaped areas. b.  Side and rear perimeter landscaped area. A three-foot-wide strip of land located between the side or rear property lines and the vehicular use area shall be landscaped, where the off-street parking facilities or other ground level vehicular use areas are in excess of 2,000 square feet in size. If the landscaped area is located within the street right-of-way with the permission of the city, then such portion as is located within such right-of-way shall be included in calculating the required landscaped width. c.  Other areas. Landscape requirements as to the front perimeter landscaped area shall be followed with respect to any off-street parking facility or ground level vehicular use area located on a corner lot as to the boundary of such property fronting each street bounding the corner lot. (2)  Material requirements in perimeter area. a.  Ground cover. Grass or other ground cover shall be placed on all areas within the front side and rear setback perimeter landscape area not occupied by other landscape material, or permitted accessways. A list of plant materials shall be maintained in the city building official's office. b.  Height of landscaping materials. The owner shall have the discretion to vary the height of landscaping materials used in perimeter setback landscaped areas from certain heights or to a densely planted barrier or hedge; however, within at least one year from the date of planting, a portion of the planted material used for landscaping, no less than 15 percent thereof, excluding trees, of the linear footage of the landscaped area shall be at least 24 inches in height. Such requirement shall not be applicable to permitted accessways. c.  Trees. Trees shall be placed in the off-street parking and vehicular use areas in accord with the provisions of this subsection. The total tree requirement within the perimeter landscape areas shall be determined by using a ratio of one tree for each 30 linear feet of required perimeter landscaped area, or any fraction thereof. In interior planting areas, one tree shall be planted for each 480 square feet of required interior landscaped area or any fraction thereof. This provision is not intended to require that trees be equally spaced 30 feet apart. Creative design and spacing shall be permitted. All trees planted pursuant to this subsection shall be at least five feet in height at the time of planting. (3)  Visual screen in perimeter area. a.  Perimeter setback landscape areas. A visual screen shall be placed within the perimeter setback landscaped area and shall run the entire length of such abutting property line, except at permitted accessways. b.  Light penetration and height. A visual screen shall be installed not lower than 30 inches except as permitted accessways. (4)  Use of perimeter landscape areas. Vehicles may overhang no more than two feet into perimeter landscape areas. (5)  Cross-visibility standards of setback areas. A sight triangle shall be provided at those points where an accessway intersects a public right-of-way. The area within the sight triangle shall be provided at those points where an accessway intersects a public right-of-way. The area within the sight triangle shall be maintained in accordance within this section. a.  Cross-visibility level. An unobstructed cross-visibility between two and ten feet above the level of the centerline of the public right-of-way shall be maintained in accordance within the sight triangle. b.  Trees. Trees having limbs and foliage trimmed so that the cross-visibility is not obscured, shall be allowed to overhang within the sight triangle, provided the location of the tree itself does not create a traffic hazard. (c)  Outdoor storage area screening standards. Any outdoor storage area which is not screened by a building or other approved structure shall be screened as required herein. Such screening, at a minimum, shall be as follows: (1)  A fence or wall of the minimum height of six feet, opaque and constructed of masonry, stone, wood or some other material approved in the permitting process provided under this article. (2)  Natural evergreen plant materials at a minimum height of six feet at planting spaced at least five feet apart and planted in staggered double rows. (3)  This subsection shall apply to all existing outdoor storage areas as herein defined and as existed on the official date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, which was September 28, 1992. In addition, any property owner where an outdoor storage area is located shall meet the requirements of this section no later than December 28, 1993. (4)  The dimensions for an outdoor storage area screen shall be not less than 12 feet long by 12 feet wide. Where more than one dumpster or dumpster-like container are to be located in the same outdoor storage area, there shall be a minimum three-foot separation between each dumpster or dumpster-like container. (5)  Nothing shall be installed or planted in connection with such outdoor storage areas so as to interfere with the removal of the contents of the dumpsters by the city or other authorized entity. (d)  Utility service areas. All utility service areas having vertical dimensions exceeding three feet or horizontal dimensions exceeding five feet and located within 100 yards of any street right-of-way shall be screened. Screening shall be done by planting of locally adapted evergreen species or constructed of an opaque fence or wall. (1)  Planting shall have a minimum installation height of 18 inches, spaced edge to edge and be expected to reach a mature height equal to or greater than the utility service structure to be screened. (2)  Fences or walls shall be constructed of opaque material of masonry, stone or wood and of a height and width equal to or greater than the utility service structure to be screened. (3)  No screening shall be installed which would impair the safe operation, maintenance or function of the utility equipment. (e)  Interior planting areas . (1)  Size. In vehicular use areas within the interior of a site, a planting area shall be required which will be equal to four percent of the paved area. Shade trees and other landscaping material shall be planted within such planting area. Interior planting areas shall be located to most effectively relieve the monotony of large expanses of paving and contribute to orderly circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. All development having paved areas of 12,000 square feet or less shall be exempt from the interior planting requirements. (2)  Overhang. Vehicles shall not overhang more than two feet into any interior planting area. (3)  Interior landscaping functional waiver. In vehicular use areas, when the city has determined that the strict application of this section will interfere with the function of the vehicle use area, the required interior landscaping may be located near the perimeter of the paved area, including such perimeters which may be adjacent to a building site. (Code 1986, § 5-192; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 3, 9-28-1992; Ord. No. O-92-12-109, 12-28-1992; Ord. No. O-93-06-20, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-93-11-36, 11-22-1993; Ord. No. O-95-12-45, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 14-137. - Maintenance, preservation and use standards. (a)  Maintenance. (1)  All required plant material shall be maintained in good condition at all times. (2)  Structural elements related to nonliving landscape material shall be maintained in good condition at all times. (b)  Replacement. Dead plant material shall be replaced in accordance with the provision of this article and within a time period appropriate to the growing season of the species in question, not exceeding 90 days. (c)  Protection of landscape material. All required landscape areas shall be protected from unpermitted vehicular encroachment by the use of wheel stops, curbing or other suitable methods. (d)  Use of landscape area. No required landscape area shall be used for parking except encroachment as provided in this article, or for accessway structures, garbage or trash collection or any functional uses contrary to the intent and purposes of this article. (Code 1986, § 5-193; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 4, 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 14-138. - Permit procedure.     Whenever the provisions of this article are applicable, a landscape permit shall be required. (1)  Plan required. A landscape plan shall be submitted upon application for a landscape permit. The landscape plan shall include sufficient information for the city building official to determine whether the proposed landscape improvements are in conformance with the landscape standards and other requirements of this article. (2)  Contents. The landscape plan shall be submitted to the city and shall include at a minimum a description of the species, size, quantity and location of all trees, shrubs and landscape material and a depiction of the site including proposed structures, vehicle use areas and relationships of the site to adjacent public or private streets and properties. (3)  Application procedure. The following procedures and requirements, shall be adhered to by the applicant and the city: a.  Applications for approval of landscape plans shall be made to the city. Upon approval of an application, the city shall issue a landscape permit. b.  The city shall have 15 working days after receipt of a completed application filed pursuant to this section in which to approve or deny the application. If the city disapproves the application, the city shall specify to the applicant in writing, the reason for the city's action. If no final action with regard to a completed application is taken within the required 15 working days, the application for approval of a landscape plan, shall be deemed to be approved. c.  No building permit, if required, shall be issued unless and until the city has approved the application for a landscape plan. d.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the city has determined after final inspection that required site improvements have been installed according to the approved application and plan. The city may require a performance bond or other security in the amount of no more than 110 percent of the cost of the required improvements in lieu of withholding a certificate of occupancy, and may further require that improvements be satisfactorily installed within a specified length of time. e.  Any applicant aggrieved by the action of any official charged with the enforcement of this article shall have the right to appeal the action to the zoning board of appeals. The appeal shall be filed with the city building official, in writing, and be heard at the next scheduled meeting of the board. A meeting of the board will be scheduled no later than 15 days from the date when the appeal is filed with the building official. It will not be necessary to place a notice in the local newspaper for an appeal made concerning this section. The decision by the board will be final. f.  A copy of the approved permit and plan shall be available on site during installation of landscape improvements. (Code 1986, § 5-194; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 5, 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 14-139. - Variances. (a)  The zoning board of appeals upon written application by the developer, may grant a written variance from any requirement of this article using the following criteria: (1)  Where granting of the variance will not impair the attainment of the objectives of this article; or (2)  Where literal enforcement of this article would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. (b)  Applications for variances shall be filed with the city building official and heard at the next scheduled meeting of the board. (c)  A meeting of the board will be scheduled no later than 15 days from the date the application for a variance is received by the city building official. It will not be necessary to place a notice in the local newspaper for an application for a variance to this section. (d)  The decision by the board will be final. (Code 1986, § 5-195; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 6, 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 14-140. - Enforcement. (a)  Written notice required . Whenever the city determines that a violation of this article exists, the city shall give written notice of the violation to the occupant, applicant and the owner shown on the most recent tax roll of the city. A copy of such written notice shall be transmitted to the city attorney. (b)  Content. The notice shall include but not be limited to: (1)  A description of the location of the property involved, either by street address or by legal description. (2)  A statement indicating the nature of the violation. (3)  A statement showing the time within which all necessary remedial action must be accomplished which time may not be less than ten days nor more than 90 days from the date of such written notice. (4)  The name of the person upon whom the notice of violation is served. (5)  A statement advising that upon the failure to comply with the requirements of the notice, the city shall take such enforcement procedures as may be required under this article. (c)  Service. The written notice required in subsection (a) of this section shall be served upon the person violating this article and the person owning the land by either personal delivery or certified mail. (d)  Compliance. If such notice is not complied with within the time specified in the notice, then the city shall use all available means of enforcement in order to secure compliance with the provisions of this article. (Code 1986, § 5-196; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 7, 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 14-141. - Applicability of existing areas. (a)  In accord with section 14-135, the provisions of this article are applicable to all off-street parking areas and all vehicular use areas constructed within the city after the date of approval by the city council of Ord. No. O-95-12-45. With respect to such areas existing within the city as of the effective date of Ord. No. O-95-12-45, the following provisions shall apply: (1)  This article shall apply only to those off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas which have in excess of 150 existing parking spaces, where the major paved parking surface and vehicular use area is situated in one contiguous area, is not separated by medians, existing nonconforming landscaping, buildings, walls or fences, and which area exceeds 50,000 square feet in size. (2)  This article shall apply only to those off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas located in an industrial "I" district of the city where the off-street parking areas or vehicular use areas are adjacent to a major street as defined in section 94-214 and, in such event, landscaping as required hereunder would only be required in the front perimeter landscape area. (3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)(1) and (2) of this section, no landowner shall be required to reduce the number of parking spaces located in such off-street parking area or vehicular use area existing on such effective date, by more than seven percent, in order to comply with the provisions of this article. (4)  As to those off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas existing within the city on such effective date that are subject to Ord. No. 95-12-45, pursuant to this section, the owners of such off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas shall have until January 1, 1999, to comply with the requirements of this article; provided, however, that unless a variance is granted by the city's zoning board of appeals in accord with section 94-88(3), at least one-third of the off-street parking area and vehicular use area must be landscaped in accord with this article on or before January 1, 1997, and at least two-thirds shall be landscaped in accord with this on or before January 1, 1998. (b)  As to the business locations where compliance with the landscape ordinance is required, the finance director shall not be authorized to issue a city business license to any occupant or tenant of such business location until proof of compliance with the landscape requirements applicable to such business location has been submitted to the finance director. (c)  All costs of compliance with this article shall be the responsibility of the owner of the area to be landscaped, but nothing herein shall prohibit such owner from sharing such costs of compliance with such owner's tenants or others. (d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas of churches, and synagogues, public, private and parochial schools, and federal, state or other governmental entities shall not be required to comply with the terms of this article. (e)  All off-street parking areas and all vehicular use areas, which are associated with real property annexed into the city shall only be required to comply with the landscape ordinance if such property is annexed into the city with an effective date for ad valorem tax purposes on or after December 31, 1997. The owner of such property shall have a period of six months after the effective date of such annexation for ad valorem tax purposes to fully comply with the terms of this subsection, unless a variance with respect to such time limitation is granted by the city zoning board of appeals in accord with section 94-88(3), before the expiration of such six-month period. (Code 1986, § 5-197; Ord. No. O-95-12-45, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-97-08-30, 8-21-1997; Ord. No. O-97-08-31, 8-21-1997) 
Secs. 14-142—14-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY DERELICT PROPERTY ORDINANCE[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 2014, repealed the former art. IV, §§ 14-166—14-180, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV was entitled "Unfit Buildings and Structures" and derived from Code 1986, §§ 5-80—5-94; Ord. No. O-02-04-14, adopted Apr. 18, 2002; and Ord. No. O-10-04-11, Apr. 22, 2010. State Law reference— Dangerous buildings, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 
Sec. 14-166. - Short title.     This article shall be known as the "City Derelict Property Ordinance." (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-167. - Definitions.     As used in this article, the term: (a)  Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code, as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. (b)  Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. (c)  Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-2-13, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act". (d)  Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. (e)  Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface without prior authorization from the owner or occupant of the property. (f)  Governing authority means the City Council of the City of Americus, Georgia. (g)  Interested party means: (1)  The "owner;" (2)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; (3)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; (4)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; and (5)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, interested party shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. (h)  Municipality means the City of Americus, Georgia. (i)  Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. (j)  Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. (k)  Public officer means the planning and inspection director, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he delegates such authority. (l)  Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. (m)  Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-168. - Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon.     It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on private property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use private property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-169. - Declaration of public nuisance.     Every dwelling, building or structure within the city which: (1)  Is constructed or maintained in violation of applicable codes in force within the city; (2)  Is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; (3)  Poses an imminent harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; (4)  Is vacant and used in the commission of drug crimes; (5)  Is occupied and used repeatedly for the commission of illegal activities, including facilitating organized crime or criminal enterprises, after written notice to the owner of such activities conducted therein; (6)  Is abandoned; or (7)  Otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, is hereby declared a public nuisance. Every private property within the city on which is being regularly conducted any activity or land use in violation of applicable laws and ordinances, including the zoning ordinance of this city, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Property which may be deemed esthetically substandard or deteriorating shall not meet the definition of a public nuisance unless the overall condition or use of the property results in impaired health, safety, transmission of disease, infant mortality or crime. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-170. - Powers of planning and inspection director or his designee. (a)  In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, the planning and inspection director or his designee to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: (1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists; (2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants and attorneys; (3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and (4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. (b)  In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, the planning and inspection director or his designee(s) may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions declared to constitute a public health or safety hazard or general nuisance, and to seek enforcement of such citations before the municipal court prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by other summary proceedings. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-171. - Defects constitution an unfit dwelling, building or structure. (a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents in the city. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: (1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; (2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; (3)  Dilapidation; (4)  Disrepair; (5)  Structural defects; (6)  Uncleanliness; (7)  Exclusive of the foundation, if 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting members or 50 percent of the damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or coverings is present; (8)  Improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe; (9)  Previous damage by fire, wind, vandalism, or other cause; (10)  Decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or other such conditions likely to cause sickness or disease to occupants of such dwelling, building or structure, or to the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; (11)  Inadequate means of ingress and egress, such as insufficient stairways, elevators, or fire escapes, so as to cause a danger to occupants or residents; (12)  Conditions that are otherwise unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the occupants or occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures, or other residents of the city; (13)  Dilapidation or disrepair to such an extent that portions of the dwelling, building or structure may fall or cave in; (14)  Buildings existing in violation of any provision of any code previously adopted by the city, including but not limited to, any building code and any fire prevention code, previously adopted; (15)  The presence of graffiti which is visible from adjoining public or private property. (b)  The public officer shall also be authorized to determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation by the public officer or upon the report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed at the location of such dwelling, building or structure. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-172. - Procedures and requirements to secure structures for up to two years.     The following procedures and requirements must be met in order to secure structures pending repairs: (1)  It shall be unlawful for a building owner to secure, or cause to be secured, a building without first obtaining a secured structure permit from the public officer. The owner must apply for and be approved for a secured structure permit and pay the required fees in the amount established by the governing body of the city, and the public officer and/or building official shall then inspect such structure. (2)  To qualify for secured status, the building must be structurally sound (walls and roof); otherwise, the secured structure permit shall be denied. (3)  The repairs needed to bring the structure to compliance with city ordinances must not represent a cost that exceeds one-half of the fair market value of the structure as determined in the manner provided in section 14-175. The property owner must provide, along with the application for a secured structure permit, a cost estimate for repair of the structure to the public officer for review and approval. (4)  The property owner shall provide, along with the application for a secured structure permit, a schedule of repairs subject to the review and approval of the public officer. (5)  If a building is structurally sound, nonstructural interior portions (electrical wiring, plumbing, and similar systems) need not be brought into compliance with applicable building codes while in secured status. (6)  The building or structure must remain vacant while in secured status. (7)  The secured structure permit shall be posted on the front of the building in a clearly visible location while the structure remains in secured status. (8)  All utilities must remain turned off while in secured status unless otherwise approved by the public officer. (9)  The building must be secured, and the windows and doors of the building must be covered and secured. (10)  The public officer shall notify the chief of police and the chief of fire and emergency services as to any building that has been approved for secured status by the issuance of a secured structure permit, and the public officer shall also provide notification when the secured structure permit has expired or has otherwise been revoked. (11)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be inside a secured building or structure, except for the owner, a duly authorized agent of the owner, or the public officer once a secured structure permit has been issued. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (12)  All secured structures shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the appearance of vacancy, including the prompt removal of graffiti. (13)  All secured structures shall be maintained in a manner which does not create an unreasonable risk of fire, including the removal of weeds and the proper maintenance of grass areas which may constitute a fire hazard. No secure structure, or any portion thereof, may be used for the storage of flammable liquids or other materials which would constitute a safety or fire hazard. (14)  All secured structures, including all adjoining yard areas, shall be maintained free of debris, combustible materials, litter and garbage. (15)  All exterior surfaces shall be applied with sufficient paint, stucco, or other finishes in the same or a similar color as the adjoining areas, in order to weatherproof the vacant structure and to create a sufficient appearance of repair to deter unauthorized occupation. (16)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove securing material on a secured building or structure. Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (17)  The secured structure permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. The owner may make application for a secured structure permit for an additional 12 months. However, the owner must provide the documentation listed in subsections (3) and (4) of this section, along with the application and fee, with the application for renewal. The application for renewal shall be made no later than 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of the current secured structure permit. Renewal of the permit is subject to the approval of the public officer and, upon denial of the application to renew, the property will be subject to immediate abatement action. The secured structure permit may only be renewed once for a total of 24 months subject to the approval of the public officer. (18)  Periodic inspections of the structure and property shall be performed by the public officer and/or a building official. A report detailing the inspector's findings shall be included in the case file. If compliance with all the requirements of this chapter is not evident at the time of the inspection, enforcement action may be taken. In addition, the secured structure permit may be revoked by the public officer and abatement action initiated. (19)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a secured structure permit during the term of the permit to violate any of the provisions of subsections (1) through (18) above. Any person violating any provisions of these subsections shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-173. - Procedures and requirements for temporarily securing structures for up to 60 calendar days pending compliance by demolition or repair.     The following procedures and requirements must be met in order to temporarily secure structures or temporarily restrict access to a property prior to demolition of a structure or obtaining a building permit for the reconstruction of the structure: (1)  The public officer or the owner must have determined that the structure represents a hazard to life or a hazard to the safety of the public and that such risk cannot be eliminated by affordable repairs as provided in section 14-175. (2)  It shall be unlawful for a building owner to secure or cause to be secured such a building without first obtaining a temporary secured structure permit from the public officer. (3)  A temporary secured structure permit may be issued by the public officer for a maximum period of 60 calendar days prior to the repair or demolition of a structure which has been identified by the public officer as violating the city's unsafe building abatement code or as a nuisance. This temporary, short-term permit is for the purpose of restricting access to a structure or site that poses or may pose an immediate hazard to life, safety or health. (4)  The owner must obtain a temporary secured structure permit from the public officer for any structure that has been identified as a nuisance by the public officer so that the structure will remain secure until a building permit or demolition permit is issued and work has commenced on the repairs or demolition. Along with an application for a temporary secured structure permit pending demolition or repair, the owner must provide to the public officer a schedule for repair or demolition and payment of the required fees as established by the governing body of the city. (5)  The building must be secured, with windows and doors covered and secured. If the condition of the building prevents securing of the windows and doors, the site must be fenced in order to deter unauthorized entry to the property. (6)  All secured structures, including all adjoining yard areas shall be maintained free of debris, combustible materials, litter and garbage. (7)  A temporary secured structure permit must be posted on the front of the building in a clearly visible location while the structure remains in a temporary secured status. (8)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a temporary secured structure permit issued by the public officer, pending compliance by demolition or repair, to violate any of the provisions of subsections (1) through (7) above. Any person violating any provisions of these subsections shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-174. - Reoccupying a secured building or structure.     Before a secured building or structure can be reoccupied, the following conditions must be met: (1)  The building or structure must be fully returned to compliance with all building, fire, and other applicable codes. (2)  The building or structure must be reinspected by the public officer and/or building official. (3)  The following approvals must be obtained: a.  Approval of required plans, if applicable; b.  Approval by the historic preservation commission, if applicable; and c.  Request and purchase of all required building permits must be completed. (4)  No utilities shall be turned on until full compliance with construction codes; provided, however, that temporary utility service shall be permitted if necessary for construction work in order to bring the building back into compliance with all applicable codes. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-175. - Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. (a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions as more particularly established in section 14-171. (b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may file a complaint in rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. (c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: (1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or (2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter or improve a structure may be considered; and, provided further, that if the unsatisfactory condition is limited solely to the presence of graffiti, the dwelling, building or structure shall not be ordered demolished or closed, but its owner may be ordered to repair the same by cleaning or removal of the graffiti. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. (d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished within 270 days of the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section or any equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action shall commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." (e)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. (f)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. (g)  The lien provided for in subsection (e) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court in Sumter County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall, within 90 days of the completion of repairs, demolition or closure, forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the city finance director. (h)  It shall be the duty of the city finance director to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-5; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply; provided, further, that redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. The city finance director may initiate enforcement of liens imposed under this section at any time following receipt of the final determination of costs from the public officer, and such enforcement shall be undertaken by the city finance director in any such manner as may be authorized by Georgia law for the collection of city ad valorem taxes. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. In the event that the Sumter County Tax Commissioner shall have a contract with the city to collect ad valorem taxes for the city, such tax commissioner shall collect and enforce city liens imposed pursuant to this article in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The amount collected shall be remitted to the general fund of the city. (i)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. (j)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-176. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. (a)  Summons and copies of the complaint shall be served in the following manner: (1)  In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. (2)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint and summons by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are readily ascertainable. Copies of the complaint and summons shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any; (3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriffs advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing; and (4)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in which the dwelling, building, structure or property is located at the time of filing the complaint in municipal court. (b)  The public officer shall cause an affidavit of service to be filed of record in the municipal court prior to the hearing showing compliance with the service requirements of this section. Such affidavit shall constitute a prima facie showing of minimum procedural due process and shall constitute sufficient proof that service was perfected. (c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on every interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-177. - Temporary injunction restraining public officer from carrying out provisions.     As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 31-2-13, any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court of the county for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the superior court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer, pending the final disposition of the matter; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be conducted by the superior court on petitions within 20 days of the filing thereof, the superior court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction pursuant to this section. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-178. - Eminent domain.     Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state, nor is permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-14. 
Sec. 14-179. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created.     It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-180. - General cleanliness of premises.     The owner and occupant of property within the city shall each be independently responsible for keeping the premises, including all buildings thereon and the full yard thereof, clean and free from all garbage, refuse, filth, dirt, ashes, trash, rubbish and other offensive materials. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-181. - Disorderly house. (a)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, illicit drug activity, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct proscribed thereby. (b)  Any person who shall allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous persons to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant to depart. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-182. - Violations; enforcement penalties.     Any person who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $200.00; each day of continued violation, after citation, shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines, upon conviction, the director shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary, by-pass, or inter-connection has been discontinued. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-183. - Property subject to article located in historic district.     The provisions of this article shall also apply to all properties located within the historic district established by ordinance of the city council; provided, however, that as to any properties located within the historic district as established by the city, no certificate of appropriateness which might otherwise be required in article VII, chapter 14, shall be required for repair, alteration, improvement, removal or demolition of such property. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-184. - Applicability of article.     The powers and authority granted hereunder shall be in addition to and supplemental of any other powers and authority granted to the city council of the city and its agents by any state statute or city ordinance; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between this article and the International Property Maintenance Code, the provisions of this article shall apply. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) State Law reference— Ordinance supplemental, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-16. 
Secs. 14-185—14-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BED AND BREAKFAST INNS 
Sec. 14-199. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Bed and breakfast inn means a residential dwelling containing not more than eight guestrooms or suites, designed and operated to provide for overnight accommodations of guests who limit their stay to not more than seven consecutive nights, with adequate off-street parking of one off-street parking place for each guestroom, and adequate off-street parking for the owner, operator and staff of the inn.     Building permits means all permits required to be obtained from the city in accord with the provisions of this Code or other relevant ordinance or statute.     Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of the building or other structure including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the building structure.     License means all licenses, whether business license, building license or other documents, which must be obtained by the owner or operator of a business as required by the various provisions of this Code. (Code 1986, § 5-151; Ord. No. O-87-10-19, § 1, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 14-200. - Establishment, maintenance and operation of bed and breakfast inn.     Any bed and breakfast inn established, maintained or operated within the city shall at all times comply with the following requirements: (1)  The building in which the bed and breakfast inn is located shall comply with all requirements for residential buildings contained in the city building code as it now exists or as it is hereafter amended. (2)  There shall be no building or buildings located upon the lot where the bed and breakfast inn is located, except the principal building and any accessory building or buildings as may be required; provided that such accessory building or buildings shall comply with the other requirements contained in this Code regarding such accessory buildings. (3)  The owner or operator of the bed and breakfast inn shall maintain a current guest register, which shall include the names, addresses and dates of occupancy of all guests at the inn. (4)  The inn may serve its guests only breakfast (morning meal) and dinner (evening meal) at the inn, and no other meal shall be served, except that the owner/occupant of the inn shall not be subject to this requirement for their own meals. (5)  The owner or operator of the bed and breakfast inn shall comply with all business license, building permit requirements and revenue collection ordinances of the city and the state. (Code 1986, § 5-152; Ord. No. O-87-10-19, § 2, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 14-201. - Architectural design.     The exterior architectural features and architectural design of the building used as a bed and breakfast inn must be maintained and must be in keeping with the general architectural design and general appearance of the neighborhood. No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to ensure the safety of the structure, shall be made to the dwelling for the purpose of providing a bed and breakfast inn. (Code 1986, § 5-153; Ord. No. O-87-10-19, § 3, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 14-202. - Planning commission approval of plans.     As a condition precedent to any building permit being issued under this article, or before any building under this article is used for a bed and breakfast inn, the city planning commission shall approve any plans, specifications or other building itself to see that the architectural design, the exterior architectural features, and the general appearance of the building is in keeping with the architectural design and general appearance of the neighborhood. (Code 1986, § 5-154; Ord. No. O-87-10-19, § 4, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 14-203. - Violation of article.     Any violation of the provisions of this article regarding bed and breakfast inns, or any other violation of any ordinance contained in this Code relating to bed and breakfast inns shall be a misdemeanor and shall subject the offender to punishment as provided in section 1-8. In addition thereto, any such violation shall be cause for revocation or nonrenewal of the city business license of the owner or operator of the bed and breakfast inn by the finance director. (Code 1986, § 5-156; Ord. No. O-87-10-19, 10-19-1987) 
Secs. 14-204—14-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 
Sec. 14-230. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.     Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communication through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.     FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration.     FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.     Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna.     Planning commission means the City of Americus Planning Commission as set forth in section 70-21.     Preexisting towers and antennas shall have the meaning set forth in section 14-231(d).     Public officer, as used in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17, means the community development department of the city.     Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. (Code 1986, § 5-251; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 1, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-231. - Applicability. (a)  District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this article shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to towers and antennas. (b)  Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city shall be exempt from the requirements of this article, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the city. (c)  Amateur radio receive-only antennas. This article shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. (d)  Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article, other than the requirements of section 14-232(e) and (f). Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this article as "preexisting towers" or "preexisting antennas." (Code 1986, § 5-252; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 2, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-232. - General guidelines and requirements. (a)  Purpose; goals. The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this article are to: (1)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; (2)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; (3)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; (4)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and (5)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently. (b)  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. (c)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and or tower shall provide to the community development department an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one-quarter mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The community development department may share such information with other applicants applying for special exception approval under this article or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the city, provided, however, that the community development department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. (d)  Aesthetics; lighting. The guidelines set forth in this subsection (d) shall govern the location of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this article; provided, however, that the planning commission may waive these requirements if it determines that the goals of this article are better served thereby. (1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, are painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. (2)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. (3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. (4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the planning commission may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. (e)  Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the city shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17. (f)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the planning commission concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such codes and standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days, the city may remove such tower at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the city shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17. (Code 1986, § 5-253; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 3, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-233. - Permitted uses. (a)  Generally. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require a special exception permit. Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with section 14-232(d), (e), and (f) and all other applicable ordinances. (b)  Specific permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted in any industrial and agricultural zoning district: (1)  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna provided, however, that such tower shall be set back from any existing off-site residence a distance of not less than 500 feet; (2)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower, such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure, that is 50 feet in height or greater, so long as said additional antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure; and (3)  Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower and said existing tower is not a preexisting tower; provided, however, that such specific permitted use shall not include the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna. (Code 1986, § 5-254; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 4, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-234. - Special exception approvals as specified in section 94-32. (a)  Generally. (1)  The planning commission may approve the locations of antennas and towers in any other zoning district of the city. (2)  Each applicant for special exception approval shall apply to the planning commission, providing the information set forth in section 14-235(b) and (d). Application shall be received at least 20 days prior to the planning commission meeting. The hearing notice shall be advertised in the approved legal gazette and posted on the property 15 days prior to the planning commission meeting. A fee in the amount established by ordinance is to accompany the application. (3)  The planning commission shall respond to each such application within 45 days after receiving it by either approving or denying the application. If the planning commission fails to respond to the applicant within said 45 days, then the application, shall be deemed to be approved. (4)  If special exception approval is denied the applicant may appeal said denial to the city council upon written notice. Notice of appeal must be made within ten days of denial of the request. (b)  Special exception approved uses. The following uses, may be approved by the planning commission after conducting a public hearing: (1)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower, such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure, that is less than 50 in height, so long as such addition does not add more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure; (2)  Installing an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a preexisting tower and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower; (3)  Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other than industrial or agricultural that in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 14-232(a); (4)  Locating any tower in a zoning district other than industrial or agricultural, provided a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the planning commission concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 14-232(a) and the requirements of section 14-232(d), (e), and (f); the tower is to be set back from any existing off-site residence a distance equal to the height of the tower; and the tower meets the following height and usage criteria: a.  For a single user, up to 90 feet in height; b.  For two users, up to 120 feet in height; and c.  For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height. (Code 1986, § 5-255; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 4, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-235. - Special exception permits. (a)  Generally. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special exception permits: (1)  If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section 14-233, then a special exception permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. (2)  In granting a special exception permit, the planning commission may impose conditions to the extent that they conclude such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. (3)  Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. (b)  Information required. Each applicant requesting a special exception permit under this article shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professional engineers, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the planning commission to be necessary to assess compliance with this article. (c)  Factors considered in granting special exception permits. The planning commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special exception permit, although they may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria, if they conclude that the goals of this article are better served thereby: (1)  Height of the proposed tower; (2)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; (3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; (4)  Surrounding topography; (5)  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; (6)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; (7)  Proposed ingress and egress; and (8)  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in subsection (d) of this section. (d)  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning commission that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: (1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. (2)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. (3)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. (4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. (5)  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. (6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. (e)  Setback and separation requirements. The following setback and separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special exception permit is required; provided, however, that the planning commission may reduce the standard setback and separation requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby: (1)  Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. (2)  Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. (3)  In zoning districts other than industrial or agricultural zoning districts, towers over 90 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter of a mile from any existing tower that is over 90 feet in height. (f)  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the city may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate. (g)  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special exception permit is required; provided, however, that the planning commission may waive such requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby: (1)  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall comply with buffer requirements as noted in section 94-194(a)(2). (2)  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether. (3)  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. (Code 1986, § 5-256; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 6, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-236. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.     Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said 90 days, the city may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8—41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. (Code 1986, § 5-257; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 5, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-237. - Variances. (a)  Where a person or entity which desires to construct a telecommunications antenna or tower pursuant to this article can show that a provision of this article would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, or where, because of conditions peculiar to the site, or other unusual circumstances beyond the control of such person or entity, in the opinion of the planning commission, a departure from strict adherence to this article may be made without violating the intent of this article, the planning commission may, in its sole discretion, authorize a variance. Any such variance request shall be submitted in writing to the planning commission, and the minutes of the planning commission shall reflect the action taken by the planning commission as to such variance request, and such minutes shall also include the reason or reasons for granting such variance request. (b)  With respect to the variance request authorized in subsection (a) of this section, the right to submit such a variance request shall be waived unless the request is submitted to the planning commission at the time the antenna permit is requested, or at the time the request for a special exception pursuant to section 14-234 is submitted. (c)  The decision of the planning commission as to the approval or disapproval of variances requested under this article shall be final and not subject to appeal. (Code 1986, § 5-258; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 8, 8-19-1999) 
Secs. 14-238—14-267. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[3] Footnotes: --- (3) --- State Law reference— Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. 
Sec. 14-268. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property within a designated historic district.     Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the building or structure.     Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site that affect the historical character of the property.     Historic district means a geographically defined area designated by the city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 14-271(b).     Historic property or landmark means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property or landmark pursuant to the criteria established in section 14-271(c).     Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as: (1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; (2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; (3)  Commencement of excavation or a change in advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or (4)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district; including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. (Code 1986, § 5-130; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 2) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22. 
Sec. 14-269. - Purpose.     In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal and state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal and state law; and in order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation, and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts, and to participate in federal and state programs to do the same; the city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Code 1986, § 5-131; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 1) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-21. 
Sec. 14-270. - Historic preservation commission. (a)  Creation. There is hereby created a commission, the title of which shall be the "City of Americus Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter called the "commission"). (b)  Position within city. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. (c)  Members, appointment, terms, compensation. (1)  The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. (2)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related disciplines. (3)  Members shall serve three-year terms or until their successors are appointed by the mayor and such appointments are ratified as herein provided. Members shall be allowed to succeed themselves. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: two members for one year; two members for two years; and three members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. (d)  Powers generally. The commission shall be authorized to: (1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as a historic property or landmark; (2)  Recommend to the city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; (3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; (4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects, or work of art as a historic property or landmark or as a historic district be revoked or removed; (5)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Facade and Conservation Easements Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.); (6)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties or landmarks located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; (7)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, as the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; (8)  Seek out local, state, federal, and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; (9)  Consult with historic preservation experts in the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources or its successor and the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc.; (10)  Submit to the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties or landmarks or historic districts designated; (11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; (12)  Review and make comments to the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and (13)  Participate in private, state, and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council to enter into agreement to do the same. (e)  Power to adopt rules and standards, setting meeting times, selecting officers. The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for a time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers, as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. (f)  Conflict of interest. At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. (g)  Records of meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. (Code 1986, § 5-132; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 3; Ord. No. O-88-08-30, 8-22-1988) State Law reference— Historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-24, 44-10-26. 
Sec. 14-271. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts, properties and landmarks. (a)  Preliminary research by commission. (1)  Survey of local historical resources . The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. (2)  Recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation . The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts, properties, and local landmarks. (3)  Documentation of proposed designation . Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property or landmark to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report consisting of: a.  A physical description; b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; c.  A map showing district boundaries and classifications, i.e. historic, nonhistoric or intrusive, of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties or landmarks; d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and e.  Representative photographs. (b)  Designation of a historic district. (1)  Criteria for selection. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof, which: a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; b.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, county, state or region; and c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city or county. (2)  Boundaries. The boundaries of the historic district for the city are on file in the city clerk's office. (3)  Evaluation of properties within boundaries . Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: a.  Historic, contributes to the district. b.  Nonhistoric, does not contribute but does not detract from the district as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section. c.  Intrusive, detracts from the district as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section. (c)  Designation of a historic property or landmark. (1)  Criteria for selection . A historic property or landmark is a building, structure, site, object, work of art, tree; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, state, or local region, for one of the following reasons: a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or d.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, county, state or region. (2)  Boundary description . Boundaries shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. (d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties and landmarks. (1)  Application. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: a.  For historic districts, by a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; b.  For historic properties and landmarks, by a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. (2)  Required components . Any ordinance designating any property, landmark or district as historic shall: a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property or landmark; b.  Set forth the names of the owners of the designated property or properties or landmarks; c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property or landmark; and d.  Require that the property or landmark or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city. (3)  Required public hearings . The commission and the city shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property or landmark. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten, nor more than 20 days, prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. (4)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. (5)  City council action on commission recommendation . Following receipt of the commission's recommendation the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. (6)  Report submission. Not less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or landmark or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection (a)(3) of this section to the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources. (7)  Adoption of ordinance for designation . Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property or landmark, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. (8)  Other agencies regarding designation . The commission shall notify all appropriate local governmental agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation, including the local historical organization. (9)  Moratorium on alteration or demolition while pending . If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. (Code 1986, § 5-133; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 4; Ord. No. O-05-11-39, 11-17-2005) State Law reference— Designation of historic properties or historic districts, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26. 
Sec. 14-272. - Certificate of appropriateness. (a)  Approval of alterations or new construction in historic districts or involving historic properties or landmarks. After designation by ordinance of a historic property or landmark or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property or landmark, or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. In the event that a material change in the appearance of such historic property or landmark, or a material change in the appearance of as structure, site, object, or work of art within such historic district is undertaken without obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the commission, the commission may direct the city building inspector, or his designee, to issue a stop work order, and all such work shall cease. No person, firm or corporation shall undertake any work on such project so along as such stop work order shall continue in effect. The owner of the subject property shall submit an application for a certificate of appropriateness within seven days of the issuance of a stop work order. At the next regular meeting of the commission, the commission shall review such application without prejudice as if no work had been undertaken or completed. (b)  Approval of new construction within designated districts. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the commission. (c)  Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings. The secretary of the interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects" including the secretary's "Standards for Rehabilitation" shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the commission. (d)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. (e)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications. (1)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or landmark or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. (2)  The commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. (f)  Public hearings, notices and right to be heard. At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. (g)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. (h)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. (i)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application. (1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant on an historic property, or landmark, or of a structure, site, object, or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. (2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. (j)  Necessary actions to be taken by commission upon rejection. (1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternate courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if the applicant so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. (2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building official or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such cases, no building permit shall be issued. (k)  Undue hardship. Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property or landmark, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. (l)  Requirement of conformance. (1)  A certificate of appropriateness shall be limited to those elements presented to and approved by the commission. Approval of other elements, whether related or unrelated to the project presented shall not be implied by the issuance of the certificate of appropriateness. All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. (2)  The city council or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or landmark or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provision of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or landmark or historic district. (3)  After issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, changes in the work or changes to approve a plan must be submitted to and approved by the commission prior to beginning work on any aspect of such changes. Any such amendment or modification to the original plan must be submitted to the commission and approved by the commission in the same manner as an original certificate of appropriateness application is considered. (m)  Certificate to become void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. A renewal for a period of up to six months may be obtained upon submission of a written request by the applicant and issuance of a written approval of such renewal by the commission. (n)  Recording of applications. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. (o)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property or landmark, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. (p)  Appeals. Any person who has submitted an application for a certificate of appropriateness that has been denied by the commission may appeal such denial to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city council within 15 days after the notice of denial of the application for the certificate of appropriateness is mailed to the applicant. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, but may only modify or reject the determination if the city council finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision denying the application. Appeals from the decision of the city council on the appeal may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from convictions for violations of the ordinances of the city. (Code 1986, § 5-134; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 5; Ord. No. O-95-09-31, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. O-06-09-35, 9-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-273. - Demolition or relocation of a historic property or landmark or properties within a historic district. (a)  Applications for certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. The commission shall have the authority to deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. (b)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. (c)  Consideration of post-demolition or post-relocation plans. The commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for site. (d)  Demolition or relocation criteria. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the commission shall use the criteria described in section 14-272(e) to determine whether to deny the application or issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. (Code 1986, § 5-135; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 6) State Law reference— Certificate of appropriateness, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-27 et seq. 
Sec. 14-274. - Maintenance of historic properties; building and zoning code provisions. (a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property or landmark to correct deterioration, decay, or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or other appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. (b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance and repair. Property owners of historic properties or landmarks or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: (1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties, landmarks, and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings that allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. (2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps that need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. (3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform or cause to be performed such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. (c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. (1)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of such owner's property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. (2)  Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to prevent any utility company from trimming trees or keeping the rights-of-way in accordance with existing franchise agreements between the utilities and the city. (Code 1986, § 5-136; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 7) State Law reference— Maintenance allowed, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-29. 
Sec. 14-275. - Filing fees for certificates of appropriateness.     At the time of filing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, which requires a public hearing pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the finance director a filing fee in the amount established by ordinance. Said fee is to be used to defray the cost to the city of processing the application and providing the required notices to the public and other interested parties of hearings and other matters with respect to the application. Said funds may be deposited into the city general fund for such purposes. A fee in the amount established by ordinance will be charged each applicant filing an application for a certificate of appropriateness that does not have the necessary photographs for processing attached. (Code 1986, § 5-137; Ord. No. O-94-05-15, 5-19-1994; Ord. No. O-01-12-40, 12-20-2001) 
Sec. 14-276. - Violations.     In addition to the authority provided to the city council and the historic preservation commission in subsection 14-272(l)(2), a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day that the work does not comply with an issued certificate of appropriateness, or each day that work is not initiated to remedy a lack of minimum maintenance and repair, shall constitute a separate offense and is subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. (Ord. No. O-06-09-35, § 5-138, 9-21-2006) 
Secs. 14-277—14-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY BLIGHTED PROPERTY ORDINANCE 
Sec. 14-300. - Short title.     This article shall be known as the "City Blighted Property Ordinance." (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-301. - Purpose. (a)  The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to, social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. (b)  In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, this mayor and council, in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations at Chapter 61, Urban Redevelopment, of O.C.G.A. title 36, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. (c)  In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-302. - Definitions. (a)  "Blighted property," "blighted," or "blight" means any urbanized or developed property which: (1)  Presents two or more of the following conditions: a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe or abandoned structure; b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air or sanitation; c.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; d.  A site identified by the federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; e.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner. (2)  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of esthetic conditions. (b)  "Building inspector" means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. (c)  "Community redevelopment" means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or thorough local ordinances relating to the repair, closing and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. (d)  "Governing authority" means the City Council of the City of Americus, a Georgia municipal corporation. (e)  "Millage" or "millage rate" means the levy, in mills, which is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. (f)  "Person" means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. (g)  "Public officer" means the city administrator or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city administrator to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-303. - Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property. (a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven (7.0) to the city ad valorem tax millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. (b)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. (c)  Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city administrator and used only for defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-304. - Identification of blighted property. (a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: (1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed: a.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in ordinance; or b.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. (2)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. (3)  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation. (4)  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of Sumter County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. (b)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. (c)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the municipal court shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days' notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the Americus Times Recorder, or other designated legal organ in Sumter County, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, for good cause. (d)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the judge of municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. If the court's determination is that the designation of the property as blighted property should be affirmed, then the court shall include in its order a provision granting the public official the authority to lift the blighted property designation in accord with the procedures established in section 14-305 of this article. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the finance director, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. (e)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Sumter County for a writ of certiorari within 30 days of issuance of the municipal court's written determination. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-305. - Remediation or redevelopment. (a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: (1)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or (2)  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to article IV, City Derelict Property Ordinance, of this chapter 14 of the Code of Americus, Georgia. (b)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the finance director. Upon receipt of such notice, the finance director shall provide notice to the appropriate taxing authority that the additional ad valorem tax imposed in accord with subsection 14-303(a) has been terminated. Thereafter, the property shall be taxed for ad valorem taxes as if such property had never been determined to be blighted as defined herein, except with respect to any ad valorem tax reductions that may be applied in accord with section 14-306. (c)  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and inspection department, and contain the following: (1)  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; (2)  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal state-wide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; (3)  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; (4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; (5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and (6)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-306. - Decrease of tax rate. (a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in section 14-305, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $25,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four successive years. (b)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-307. - Notice to finance director.     It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the finance director in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the Sumter County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the finance director to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. (Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Secs. 14-308—14-330. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - CEMETERIES 
Sec. 18-1. - Sale of lots.     The selling of all lots in the cemeteries shall be done by the cemetery clerk, who shall make out and deliver to the purchaser, upon receipt of the purchase money, a certificate of ownership to the same, which shall be signed by the mayor and the city clerk in behalf of the city. The price of all lots shall be as prescribed by the city council. (Code 1962, § 6-1; Code 1986, § 6-1; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 18-2. - Perpetual care areas—Establishment, designation.     The cemetery clerk in charge of cemeteries, under the direction and control of the city council, shall be authorized to designate, by appropriate plat areas in such cemeteries, areas to be designated as perpetual care areas. (Code 1962, § 6-10; Code 1986, § 6-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Same—Platting; sale of spaces.     The spaces specified as those designated for burial rights shall be platted by adequate and proper plat and shall be sold to the general public at prices to be established by ordinance of the city council. (Code 1962, § 6-12; Code 1986, § 6-4) 
Sec. 18-4. - Same—Responsibility for maintenance; erection of markers.     Maintenance of the designated areas shall remain the responsibility of the city council. Markers that are erected on such burial spaces by the owners of interment rights shall be erected in accordance with rules and regulations as promulgated and adopted by the city council. (Code 1962, § 6-13; Code 1986, § 6-5) 
Sec. 18-5. - Same—Maintenance.     The cemetery clerk, in charge of cemeteries, is further charged with the responsibility of maintaining perpetual care in the designated areas. (Code 1962, § 6-14; Code 1986, § 6-6) 
Sec. 18-6. - Burials outside public cemeteries, permission required.     No person shall bury or cause to be buried, any dead person in any other place in the city than the public cemeteries, without permission of the city council. (Code 1962, § 6-5; Code 1986, § 6-7) 
Sec. 18-7. - Disinterment—Application.     Any person desiring to disinter a body which is buried in any cemetery located in the city shall make an application in writing to the city and county health authorities giving the name of the person buried in said grave, if known, and the reason that such applicant desires to disinter said body. This application shall be signed by the person, who desires to disinter, said body and the health authorities shall act on such application at their next meeting. The application shall contain the relationship of the applicant to the deceased person. (Code 1962, §§ 6-6, 6-7; Code 1986, § 6-8) 
Sec. 18-8. - Same—Permit discretionary.     The health authorities may issue a permit to remove said body from the cemetery if in their discretion it is desirable. (Code 1962, § 6-8; Code 1986, § 6-9) 
Sec. 18-9. - Defacing of tombstones, etc.     No person shall willfully mutilate, or in any manner damage or deface any monument, tombstone, gate, fence, railing, or other enclosure in or around the cemeteries, or structures, or break down, damage, destroy or pluck, without consent of the owner, any wild or cultivated flower, shrub, plant or tree therein. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. (Code 1962, § 6-4; Code 1986, § 6-10) State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 18-10. - Building materials, etc.; removal required.     All piles of earth, rubbish or building materials, of any kind, shall be removed by the person placing the same in the cemeteries, within 24 hours after the completion of the work for which they were used. (Code 1962, § 6-3; Code 1986, § 6-11) 
Sec. 18-11. - Motor vehicles, entering cemetery.     Motor vehicles may be allowed to enter any cemetery under the following restrictions: (1)  All motor vehicles so entering a cemetery shall be for business only. (2)  All motor vehicles so entering a cemetery shall not be driven at a rate of speed in excess of that permitted in section 86-76. (Code 1962, § 6-2; Code 1986, § 6-12) 